<doc id="534791" wikidata="Q1003080" url="?curid=534791" title="Constitution of Malaysia">
<text>The Federal Constitution of Malaysia (), which came into force in 1957 as the Constitution of the Federation of Malaya and was amended in 1963 to form the Constitution of Malaysia, is the supreme law of Malaysia and contains a total of 183 articles. It is a written legal document influenced by two previous documents, the Federation of Malaya Agreement 1948 and the Independence Constitution of 1957. The Federation was initially called the Federation of Malaya (Malay: &quot;Persekutuan Tanah Melayu&quot;) and it adopted its present name, Malaysia, when the states of Sabah, Sarawak and Singapore (now independent) became part of the Federation. The Constitution establishes the Federation as a constitutional monarchy, having the &quot;Yang di-Pertuan Agong&quot; as the Head of State with largely ceremonial roles. It provides for the establishment and organisation of three main branches of the government: the bicameral legislative branch called the Parliament, which consists of the House of Representatives (&quot;Dewan Rakyat&quot;) and the Senate (&quot;Dewan Negara&quot;); the executive branch led by the Prime Minister and his Cabinet Ministers and the judicial branch headed by the Federal Court.

== History ==
Constitutional Conference: A constitutional conference was held in London from 18 January to 6 February 1956 attended by a delegation from the Federation of Malaya, consisting of four representatives of the Rulers, the Chief Minister of the Federation (Tunku Abdul Rahman) and three other ministers, and also by the British High Commissioner in Malaya and his advisers.

Reid Commission: The conference proposed the appointment of a commission to devise a constitution for a fully self-governing and independent Federation of Malaya. This proposal was accepted by Queen Elizabeth II and the Malay Rulers. Accordingly, pursuant to such agreement, the Reid Commission, consisting of constitutional experts from fellow Commonwealth countries and headed by Lord (William) Reid, a distinguished Lord-of-Appeal-in-Ordinary, was appointed to make recommendations for a suitable constitution. The report of the commission was completed on 11 February 1957. The report was then examined by a working party appointed by the British Government, the Conference of Rulers and the Government of the Federation of Malaya and the Federal Constitution was enacted on the basis of its recommendations.

Constitution: The Constitution came into force on 27 August 1957 but formal independence was only achieved on 31 August. This constitution was amended in 1963 to admit Sabah, Sarawak and Singapore as additional member states of the Federation and to make the agreed changes to the constitution that were set out in the Malaysia Agreement, which included changing the name of the Federation to &quot;Malaysia&quot;. Thus, legally speaking, the establishment of Malaysia did not create a new nation as such but was simply the addition of new member states to the Federation created by the 1957 constitution, with a change of name.

== Structure ==
The Constitution, in its current form (1 November 2010), consists of 15 Parts containing 230 articles and 13 schedules (including 57 amendments).

=== Parts ===
* Part I – The States, Religion and Law of the Federation
* Part II – Fundamental Liberties
* Part III – Citizenship
* Part IV – The Federation
* Part V – The States Sarawak
* Part VI – Relations Between the Federation and the States
* Part VII – Financial Provisions
* Part VIII – Elections
* Part IX – The Judiciary
* Part X – Public Services
* Part XI – Special Powers Against Subversion, Organised Violence, and Acts and Crimes Prejudicial to the Public and Emergency Powers
* Part XII – General and Miscellaneous
* Part XIIA – Additional Protections for States of Sabah and Sarawak
* Part XIII – Temporary and Transitional Provisions
* Part XIV – Saving for Rulers&#x27; Sovereignty, etc.
* Part XV – Proceedings Against the Yang di-Pertuan Agong and the Rulers
=== Schedules ===
The following is a list of the schedules to the Constitution.
* First Schedule [Articles 18(1), 19(9)] – Oath of Applications for Registration or Naturalization
* Second Schedule [Article 39] – Citizenship by operation of law of persons born before, on or after Malaysia Day and supplementary provisions relating to citizenship
* Third Schedule [Articles 32 and 33] – Election of &quot;Yang di-Pertuan Agong&quot; and &quot;Timbalan Yang di-Pertuan Agong&quot;
* Fourth Schedule [Article 37] – Oaths of Office of &quot;Yang di-Pertuan Agong&quot; and &quot;Timbalan Yang di-Pertuan Agong&quot;
* Fifth Schedule [Article 38(1)] – The Conference of Rulers
* Sixth Schedule [Articles 43(6), 43B(4), 57(1A)(a), 59(1), 124, 142(6)] – Forms of Oaths and Affirmations
* Seventh Schedule [Article 45] – Election of Senators
* Eighth Schedule [Article 71] – Provisions to be inserted in State Constitutions
* Ninth Schedule [Articles 74, 77] – Legislative Lists
* Tenth Schedule [Articles 109, 112C, 161C(3)*] – Grants and Sources of Revenue assigned to States
* Eleventh Schedule [Article 160(1)] – Provisions of the Interpretation and General Clauses Ordinance 1948 (Malayan Union Ordinance No. 7 of 1948), Applied for Interpretation of the Constitution
* Twelfth Schedule – Provisions of the Federation of Malaya Agreement, 1948 as Applied to the Legislative Council after &quot;Merdeka&quot; Day (Repealed)
* Thirteenth Schedule [Articles 113, 116, 117] – Provisions relating to delimitation of Constituencies

*NOTE—This Article was repealed by Act A354, section 46, in force from 27-08-1976—see section 46 of Act A354.

== Fundamental Liberties ==
Fundamental liberties in Malaysia are set out in Articles 5 to 13 of the Constitution, under the following headings: liberty of the person, prohibition of slavery and forced labour, protection against retrospective criminal laws and repeated trials, equality, prohibition of banishment and freedom of movement, freedom of speech, assembly and association, freedom of religion, rights in respect of education and rights to property. Some of these liberties and rights are subject to limitations and exceptions and some are available to citizens only (for example, the freedom of speech, assembly and association).

=== Article 5 – Right to Life and Liberty ===
Article 5 enshrines a number of basic fundamental human rights:

# No person may be deprived of life or personal liberty except in accordance with law.
# A person who is unlawfully detained may be released by the High Court (right of &quot;habeas corpus&quot;).
# A person has the right to be informed of the reasons of his arrest and to be legally represented by a lawyer of his choice.
# A person may not be arrested for more than 24 hours without a magistrate&#x27;s permission.

=== Article 6 – No Slavery ===
Article 6 provides that no person may be held in slavery. All forms of forced labour are prohibited, but federal law, such as the National Service Act 1952, may provide for compulsory service for national purposes. It is expressly provided that work incidental to serving a sentence of imprisonment imposed by a court of law is not forced labour.

=== Article 7 – No Retrospective Criminal Laws or Increases in Punishment and no Repetition of Criminal Trials ===

In the area of criminal laws and procedure, this Article provides the following protections:

* No person shall be punished for an act or omission which was not punishable by law when it was done or made.
* No person shall suffer greater punishment for an offence than was prescribed by law at the time it was committed.
* A person who has been acquitted or convicted of an offence shall not be tried again for the same offence except where a retrial is ordered by a court.

=== Article 8 – Equality ===
Article 8 by clause (1) provides that all persons are equal before the law and entitled to its equal protection.

Clause 2 states: &quot;Except as expressly authorised by this Constitution, there shall be no discrimination against citizens on the ground only of religion, race, descent, gender or place of birth in any law or in the appointment to any office or employment under a public authority or in the administration of any law relating to the acquisition, holding or disposition of property or the establishing or carrying on of any trade, business, profession, vocation or employment&quot;.

The exceptions expressly allowed under the Constitution includes the affirmative actions taken to protect the special position for the Malays of Peninsular Malaysia and the indigenous people of Sabah and Sarawak under Article 153.

===Article 9 – Prohibition of Banishment and Freedom of Movement===

This Article protects Malaysian citizens against being banished from the country. It further provides that every citizen has the right to move freely throughout the Federation but Parliament is allowed to impose restrictions on the movement of citizens from Peninsular Malaysia to Sabah and Sarawak.

===Article 10 – Freedom of Speech, Assembly and Association===

Article 10(1) grants freedom of speech, the right to assemble peaceably and the right to form associations to every Malaysian citizen but such freedom and rights are not absolute: the Constitution itself, by Article 10 (2), (3) and (4), expressly permits Parliament by law to impose restrictions in the interest of the security of the Federation, friendly relations with other countries, public order, morality, to protect the privileges of Parliament, to provide against contempt of court, defamation, or incitement to any offence.

Article 10 is a key provision of Part II of the Constitution, and has been regarded as &quot;of paramount importance&quot; by the judicial community in Malaysia. However, it has been argued that the rights of Part II, in particular Article 10, &quot;have been so heavily qualified by other parts of the Constitution, for example, Part XI in relation to special and emergency powers, and the permanent state of emergency that has existed since 1969, that much of [the Constitution&#x27;s] high principles are lost.&quot;

Article 10 (4) states that Parliament may pass law prohibiting the questioning of any matter, right, status, position, privilege, sovereignty or prerogative established or protected by the provisions of Part III, Article 152, 153 or 181 of the Constitution.

Several acts of law regulate the freedoms granted by Article 10, such as the Official Secrets Act, which makes it a crime to disseminate information classified as an official secret.

==== Laws on freedom of assembly ====

Under the Public Order (Preservation) Act 1958, the relevant Minister may temporarily declare any area where public order is seriously disturbed or seriously threatened to be a &quot;proclaimed area&quot; for a period of up to one month. The Police has extensive powers under the Act to maintain public order in proclaimed areas. These include the power to close roads, erect barriers, impose curfews, and to prohibit or regulate processions, meetings or assemblies of five persons or more. General offences under the Act are punishable by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months; but for more serious offences the maximum prison sentence is higher (e.g. 10 years for using offensive weapons or explosives) and sentences may include whipping.

Another law which previously curtailed the freedoms of Article 10 is the Police Act 1967, which criminalised the gathering of three or more people in a public place without a licence. However the relevant sections of the Police Act dealing with such gatherings have been repealed by the &quot;Police (Amendment) Act 2012&quot;, which came into operation on 23 April 2012. The Peaceful Assembly Act 2012, which came into operation on the same day, replaced the Police Act as the principal legislation dealing with public gatherings.

&quot;Peaceful Assembly Act 2012&quot;

The Peaceful Assembly Act gives citizens the right to organise and participate in peaceful assemblies subject to the restrictions under the Act. Under the law, citizens are allowed to hold assemblies, which includes processions (see the definition of &quot;assembly&quot; and &quot;place of assembly&quot; in section 3 of the Act), upon giving 10 days notice to the police (section 9(1) of the Act). However, no notification is required for certain types of assemblies, such as wedding receptions, funeral processions, open houses during festivals, family gatherings, religious assemblies and assemblies at designated places of assembly (see section 9(2) and the Third Schedule of the Act). However, street protests, which consist of &quot;mass&quot; marches or rallies, are not permitted (See section 4(1)(c) of the Act).

The following are comments from the Malaysian Bar Council on the Peaceful Assembly Act:

PA2011 appears to allow the police to decide what is a &quot;street protest&quot; and what is a &quot;procession&quot;. If the police say that an assembly being organised by Group A to gather at one place and move to another is a &quot;street protest&quot;, it will be banned. If the police say that an assembly being organised by Group B to gather at one place and move to another is a &quot;procession&quot;, it will not be banned and the police will allow Group B to proceed. FAQs on Peaceful Assembly Bill 2011.　

Civil society and The Malaysian Bar &quot;opposes the Peaceful Assembly Bill 2011 (&quot;PA 2011&quot;) on the grounds that it imposes unreasonable and disproportionate fetters on the freedom of assembly that is guaranteed under the Federal Constitution.&quot;Open letter from Lim Chee Wee, President of Malaysian Bar

==== Laws on freedom of speech ====

The Printing Presses and Publications Act 1984 gives the Home Affairs Minister the discretion to grant, suspend and revoke newspaper publishing permits. Up until July 2012, the Minister could exercise &quot;absolute discretion&quot; on such matters but this absolute discretionary power was expressly removed by the Printing Presses and Publications (Amendment) Act 2012. The Act also makes it a criminal offence to possess a printing press without a licence.

The Sedition Act 1948 makes it an offence to engage in acts with a &quot;seditious tendency&quot;, including but not limited to the spoken word and publications. The meaning of &quot;seditious tendency&quot; is defined in section 3 of the Sedition Act 1948 and in substance it is similar to the English common law definition of sedition, with modifications to suit local circumstances. Conviction may result in a sentence of a fine up to RM5,000, three years in jail, or both.

The Sedition Act in particular has been widely commented upon by jurists for the bounds it places on freedom of speech. Justice Raja Azlan Shah (later the Yang di-Pertuan Agong) once said:

Suffian LP in the case of &quot;PP v Mark Koding&quot; [1983] 1 MLJ 111 said, in relation to the amendments to Sedition Act in 1970, after 13 May 1969 riots, which added citizenship, language, special position of bumiputras and sovereignty of rulers to the list of seditious matters:

==== Freedom of association ====

Article 10(c)(1) guarantees the freedom of association subject only to restrictions imposed through any federal law on the grounds of national security, public order or morality or through any law relating to labour or education (Article 10(2)(c) and (3)). In relation to the freedom of incumbent elected legislators to change their political parties, the Supreme Court of Malaysia in the Kelantan State Legislative Assembly v Nordin Salleh held that an &quot;anti party-hopping&quot; provision in the Kelantan State Constitution violates the right to freedom of association. That provision stipulated that a member of the Kelantan legislative assembly who is a member of any political party shall cease to be a member of the legislative assembly if he or she resigns or is expelled from such political party. The Supreme Court held that the Kelantan anti party-hopping provision was void because the &quot;direct and inevitable consequence&quot; of the provision is to restrict the right of members of the assembly from exercising their right to freedom of association. Furthermore, the Malaysian Federal Constitution sets out a complete list of the grounds on which a member of a State Legislative Assembly can be disqualified (e.g. being of unsound mind) and disqualification on the ground of resigning from one&#x27;s political party is not one of them.

=== Article 11 – Freedom of religion ===
Article 11 provides that every person has the right to profess and practice his own religion. Every person has the right to propagate his religion, but state law and, in respect of the Federal Territories, federal law may control or restrict the propagation of any religious doctrine or belief among Muslims. There is, however, freedom to carry on missionary work among non-Muslims.

=== Article 12 – Rights in respect to education ===
In respect to education, Article 12 provides that there shall be no discrimination against any citizen on the grounds of religion, race, descent or place of birth (i) in the administration of any educational institution maintained by a public authority, and, in particular, the admission of pupils or students or the payment of fees and (ii) in providing out of the funds of a public authority financial aid for the maintenance or education of pupils or students in any educational institution (whether or not maintained by a public authority and whether within or outside Malaysia). Note however that notwithstanding this Article, the Government is required, under Article 153, to implement affirmative action programs such as the reservation of places in tertiary educational institutions for the benefit of Malays and natives of Sabah and Sarawak.

In respect of religion, Article 12 provides that (i) every religious group has the right to establish and maintain institutions for the education of children in its own religion, and (ii) no person shall be required to receive instruction in or take part in any ceremony or act of worship of a religion other than his own and that for this purpose the religion of a person under the age of eighteen years shall be decided by his parent or guardian.

=== Article 13 – Rights to property ===
Article 13 provides that no person may be deprived of property save in accordance with law. No law may provide for the compulsory acquisition or use of property without adequate compensation.

== Federal and state relationship ==

=== Article 71 – State sovereignty and state constitutions ===
The Federation is required to guarantee the sovereignty of the Malay Sultans in their respective States. Each State, irrespective of whether it has a Sultan as its Ruler, has its own State constitution but for uniformity, all State constitutions must have a standard set of essential provisions (See Art. 71 and the 8th Schedule of the Federal Constitution.) These provide for:

* The establishment of a State Legislative Assembly, consisting of the ruler and democratically elected members, which sits for a maximum of five years.
* The appointment of an executive branch, called the Executive Council, by the Ruler from the members of the Assembly. The Ruler appoints as the head of the Executive Council (the &quot;Menteri Besar&quot; or Chief Minister) a person whom he believes is likely to command the confidence of the majority of the Assembly. The other members of the Executive Council are appointed by the Ruler on the advice of the Menteri Besar.
* The creation of a state level constitutional monarchy, as the ruler is a required to act on the advice of the Executive Council on almost all matters under the State constitution and law 
* The holding of a state general election upon the dissolution of the assembly.
* The requirements for amending state constitutions – two-thirds absolute majority of the members of the Assembly is required.

The Federal Parliament has the power to amend state constitutions if they do not contain the essential provisions or have provisions that are inconsistent with them. (Art. 71(4))

=== Articles 73 – 79 legislative powers ===
====Federal, state and concurrent legislative lists====

Parliament has the exclusive power to make laws over matters falling under the Federal List (such as citizenship, defence, internal security, civil and criminal law, finance, trade, commerce and industry, education, labour, and tourism) whereas each State, through its Legislative Assembly, has legislative power over matters under the State List (such as land, local government, Syariah law and Syariah courts, State holidays and State public works). Parliament and State legislatures share the power to make laws over matters under the Concurrent List (such as water supplies and housing) but Article 75 provides that in the event of conflict, Federal law will prevail over State law.

These lists are set out in Schedule 9 of the Constitution, where:
* The Federal List is set out in List I,
* The State List in List II, and
* The Concurrent List in List III.

There are supplements to the State List (List IIA) and the Concurrent List (List IIIA) that apply only to Sabah and Sarawak. These give the two states legislative powers over matters such as native law and customs, ports and harbours (other than those declared to be federal), hydro electricity and personal law relating to marriage, divorce, family law, gifts and intestacy.

Residual Power of States: The States have the residual power to make laws on any matter not listed in any of the three lists (Article 77).

Power of Parliament to make laws for States: Parliament is allowed to make laws on matters falling under the State List in certain limited cases, such as for the purposes of implementing an international treaty entered into by Malaysia or for the creation of uniform State laws. However, before any such law can be effective in a State, it must be ratified by law by its State Legislature. The only except is where the law passed by Parliament relates to land law (such as the registration of land titles and compulsory acquisition of land) and local government (Article 76).

====State Islamic laws and Syariah courts====
States have legislative power over Islamic matters listed in item 1 of the State List which amongst other things includes the power to:
* Make Islamic laws and personal and family law of Muslims.
* Create and punish offences against precepts of Islam (&quot;Islamic offences&quot;) which are committed by Muslims, except in regard to criminal law and other matters which fall under the Federal list.
* Create Syariah courts with jurisdiction over:
*# Muslims only,
*# Matters falling under Item 1 of the State List, and
*# Islamic offences only if authority has been given by Federal law – and under the Syariah Courts (Criminal Jurisdiction) Act 1963, which is a Federal law, Syariah Courts were given the jurisdiction to try Islamic offences, but not if the offence is punishable by: (a) imprisonment of more than 3 years, (b) A fine exceeding RM5,000 or (c) Whipping in excess of six lashes, or any combination thereof.

== Other articles ==

=== Article 3 – Islam ===
Article 3 declares that Islam is the religion of the Federation but it then goes on to say that this does not affect the other provisions of the Constitution (Article 4(3)). Therefore, the fact that Islam is the religion of Malaysia does not by itself import Islamic principles into the Constitution but it does contain a number of specific Islamic features:
# States may create their own laws to govern Muslims in respect of Islamic law and personal and family law matter.
# States may create Syariah courts to adjudicate over Muslims in respect of State Islamic laws.
# States may also create laws in relation to offences against precepts of Islam but this is subject to a number of limitations: (i) such laws may only apply to Muslim, (ii) such laws may not create criminal offences as only Parliament has the power to create criminal laws and (iii) the State Syariah Courts have no jurisdiction over Islamic offences unless allowed by federal law (see the above section).

===Article 32 – The Head of State===
Article 32 of the Constitution of Malaysia provides for a Supreme Head of the Federation or King of the Federation, to be called the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, who shall not be liable to any civil or criminal proceedings except in the Special Court. The Consort of the Yang di-Pertuan Agong is the Raja Permaisuri Agong.

The Yang di-Pertuan Agong is elected by the Conference of Rulers for a term of five years, but may at any time resign or be removed from office by the Conference of Rulers, and shall cease to hold office on ceasing to be a Ruler.

Article 33 provides for a Deputy Supreme Head of State or Deputy King, the Timbalan Yang di-Pertuan Agong, who acts as the Head of State when the Yang di-Pertuan Agong is expected to be unable to do so, owing to illness or absence from the country, for at least 15 days. The Timbalan Yang di-Pertuan Agong is also elected by the Conference of Rulers for a term of five-years or if elected during the reign of a Yang di-Pertuan Agong, until the end of his reign.

=== Articles 39 and 40 – The executive ===
Legally, executive power is vested in the Yang di-Pertuan Agong. Such power may be exercised by him personally only in accordance with Cabinet advice (except where the Constitution allows him to act in his own discretion)(Art. 40), the Cabinet, any minister authorised by the Cabinet, or any person authorised by federal law.

Article 40(2) allows the Yang di-Pertuan Agong to act in his own discretion in relation to the following functions:
(a) The appointment of the Prime Minister,
(b) The withholding of consent to a request to dissolve Parliament, and
(c) The requisition of a meeting of the Conference of Rulers concerned solely with the privileges, position, honours and dignities of the Rulers.

=== Article 43 – Appointment of the Prime Minister and the cabinet ===

The Yang di-Pertuan Agong is required to appoint a Cabinet to advise him in the exercise of his executive functions. He appoints the Cabinet in the following manner:

* Acting in his discretion (see Art. 40(2)(a)), he first appoints as Prime Minister a member of the Dewan Rakyat who in his judgment is likely to command the confidence of the majority of the Dewan. 
* On the advice of the Prime Minister, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong appoints other Ministers from among the members of either House of Parliament.

==== Article 43(4) – Cabinet and the loss of majority in the Dewan Rakyat ====

Article 43(4) stipulates that if the Prime Minister ceases to command the confidence of the majority of the members of the Dewan Rakyat, then unless at the PM&#x27;s request the Yang di-Pertuan Agong dissolves Parliament (and the Yang di-Pertuan Agong may act in his absolute discretion (Art. 40(2)(b)) 
the PM and his Cabinet must resign.

Under Article 71 and the 8th Schedule, all State Constitutions are required to have a provision similar to the above in relation to their respective Menteri Besar (Chief Minister) and Executive Council (Exco).

==== The Perak Menteri Besar case ====
In 2009, the Federal Court had occasion to consider the application of this provision in the Perak State Constitution when the ruling coalition of the state (Pakatan Rakyat) lost the majority of the Perak Legislative Assembly due to floor crossings by several of their members to the opposition coalition (Barisan Nasional). Controversy arose in that incident because the then incumbent Menteri Besar was replaced by the Sultan with a member from Barisan Nasional without there having been a vote of no-confidence on the floor of the State Assembly against the then incumbent Menteri Besar, after he had unsuccessfully sought for the dissolution of the State Assembly. As noted above, the Sultan has complete discretion to decide whether or not to consent to the request to dissolve the assembly.

The Court held that (i) as the Perak State Constitution does not stipulate that the loss of confidence in a Menteri Besar can only be established through a vote in the assembly, then following the Privy Council&#x27;s decision in &quot;Adegbenro v Akintola&quot; [1963] AC 614 and the High Court&#x27;s decision in &quot;Dato Amir Kahar v Tun Mohd Said Keruak&quot; [1995] 1 CLJ 184, evidence of loss of confidence may be gathered from other sources and (ii) it is mandatory for a Menteri Besar to resign once he loses the confidence of the majority and if he refuses to do so then, following the decision in Dato Amir Kahar, he is deemed to have resigned.

=== Article 121 – The judiciary ===


The judicial power of Malaysia vests in the High Court of Malaya and the High Court of Sabah and Sarawak, the Court of Appeal and the Federal Court.

The two High Courts have juridisction over civil and criminal matters but have no jurisdiction &quot;in respect of any matter within the jurisdiction of the Syariah courts.&quot; This exclusion of jurisdiction over Syariah matters is stipulated in Clause 1A of Article 121, which was added to the Constitution by Act A704, in force from 10 June 1988.

The Court of Appeal (Mahkamah Rayuan) has jurisdiction to hear appeals from decisions of the High Court and other matters as may be prescribed by law. (See Clause 1B of Article 121)

The highest court in Malaysia is the Federal Court (Mahkamah Persekutuan), which has jurisdiction to hear appeals from the Court of Appeal, the high courts, original or consultative jurisdictions under Articles 128 and 130 and such other jurisdiction as may be prescribed by law.

Separation of Powers

In July 2007, the Court of Appeal held that the doctrine of separation of powers was an integral part of the Constitution; under the Westminster System Malaysia inherited from the British, separation of powers was originally only loosely provided for. This decision was however overturned by the Federal Court, which held that the doctrine of separation of powers is a political doctrine, coined by the French political thinker Baron de Montesquieu, under which the legislative, executive and judicial branches of the government are kept entirely separate and distinct and that the Federal Constitution does have some features of this doctrine but not always (for example, Malaysian Ministers are both executives and legislators, which is inconsistent with the doctrine of separation of powers).

=== Article 149 – Special Laws against subversion and acts prejudicial to public order, such as terrorism ===
Article 149 gives power to the Parliament to pass special laws to stop or prevent any actual or threatened action by a large body of persons which Parliament believes to be prejudicial to public order, promoting hostility between races, causing disaffection against the State, causing citizens to fear organised violence against them or property, or prejudicial to the functioning of any public service or supply. Such laws do not have to be consistent with the fundamental liberties under Articles 5 (Right to Life and Personal Liberty), 9 (No Banishment from Malaysia and Freedom of movement within Malaysia), 10 (Freedom of Speech, Assembly and Association) or 13 (Rights to Property).

The laws passed under this article include the Internal Security Act 1960 (ISA) (which was repealed in 2012) and the Dangerous Drugs (Special Preventive Measures) Act 1985. Such Acts remain constitutional even if they provide for detention without trial. Some critics say that the repealed ISA had been used to detain people critical of the government. Its replacement the Security Offences (Special Measures) Act 2012 no longer allows for detention without trial but provides the police, in relation to security offences, with a number of special investigative and other powers such as the power to arrest suspects for an extended period of 28 days (section 4 of the Act), intercept communications (section 6), and monitor suspects using electronic monitoring devices (section 7).

Restrictions on preventive detention (Art. 151):
Persons detained under preventive detention legislation have the following rights:

&quot;Grounds of Detention and Representations:&quot; The relevant authorities are required, as soon as possible, to tell the detainee why he or she is being detained and the allegations of facts on which the detention was made, so long as the disclosure of such facts are not against national security. The detainee has the right to make representations against the detention.

&quot;Advisory Board:&quot; If a representation is made by the detainee (and the detainee is a citizen), it will be considered by an advisory board which will then make recommendations to the Yang di-Pertuan Agong. This process must usually be completed within 3 months of the representations being received, but may be extended. The advisory board is appointed by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong. Its chairman must be a person who is a current or former judge of the High Court, Court of Appeal or the Federal Court (or its predecessor) or is qualified to be such a judge.

===Article 150 – Emergency Powers===

This article permits the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, acting on Cabinet advice, to issue a Proclamation of Emergency and to govern by issuing ordinances that are not subject to judicial review if the Yang di-Pertuan Agong is satisfied that a grave emergency exists whereby the security, or the economic life, or public order in the Federation or any part thereof is threatened.

Emergency ordinances have the same force as an Act of Parliament and they remain effective until they are revoked by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong or annulled by Parliament (Art. 150(2C)) and (3)). Such ordinances and emergency related Acts of Parliament are valid even if they are inconsistent with the Constitution except those constitutional provisions which relate to matters of Islamic law or custom of the Malays, native law or customs of Sabah and Sarawak, citizenship, religion or language. (Article 150(6) and (6A)).

Since Merdeka, four emergencies have been proclaimed, in 1964 (a nationwide emergency due to the Indonesia-Malaysia confrontation), 1966 (Sarawak only, due to the Stephen Kalong Ningkan political crisis), 1969 (nationwide emergency due to the 13 May riots) and 1977 (Kelantan only, due to a state political crisis).

All four Emergencies have now been revoked: the 1964 nationwide emergency was in effect revoked by the Privy Council when it held that the 1969 nationwide emergency proclamation had by implication revoked the 1964 emergency (see Teh Cheng Poh v P.P.) and the other three were revoked under Art. 150(3) of the Constitution by resolutions of the Dewan Rakyat and the Dewan Negara, in 2011.

=== Article 152 – National Language and Other Languages ===
Article 152 states that the national language is the Malay language. In relation to other languages, the Constitution provides that:

(a) Everyone is free to teach, learn or use any other languages, except for official purposes. &quot;Official purposes&quot; here means any purpose of the Government, whether Federal or State, and includes any purpose of a public authority.

(b) The Federal and State Governments are free to preserve or sustain the use and study of the language of any other community.

Article 152(2) created a transition period for the continued use of English for legislative proceedings and all other official purposes. For the States in Peninsular Malaysia, the period was ten years from Merdeka Day and thereafter until Parliament provided otherwise. Parliament subsequently enacted the National Language Acts 1963/67 which provided that the Malay language shall be used for all official purposes. The Acts specifically provide that all court proceedings and parliamentary and state assembly proceedings are to be conducted in Malay, but exceptions may be granted by the judge of the court, or the Speaker or President of the legislative assembly.

The Acts also provide that the official script for the Malay language is the Latin alphabet or &quot;Rumi&quot;; however, use of Jawi is not prohibited.

=== Article 153 – Special Position of Bumiputras and Legitimate Interests of Other Communities ===


Article 153 stipulates that the &quot;Yang di-Pertuan Agong&quot;, acting on Cabinet advice, has the responsibility for safeguarding the special position of Malays and the indigenous peoples of Sabah and Sarawak, and the legitimate interests of all other communities.

Originally there was no reference made in the article to the indigenous peoples of Sabah and Sarawak, such as the Dusuns, Dayaks and Muruts, but with the union of Malaya with Singapore, Sabah and Sarawak in 1963, the Constitution was amended so as to provide similar privileges to them. The term Bumiputra is commonly used to refer collectively to Malays and the indigenous peoples of Sabah and Sarawak, but it is not defined in the constitution.

Article 153 in detail

Special position of bumiputras: In relation to the special position of bumiputras, Article 153 requires the King, acting on Cabinet advice, to exercise his functions under the Constitution and federal law:

(a) Generally, in such manner as may be necessary to safeguard the special position of the Bumiputras and

(b) Specifically, to reserve quotas for Bumiputras in the following areas:
# Positions in the federal civil service.
# Scholarships, exhibitions, and educational, training or special facilities.
# Permits or licenses for any trade or business which is regulated by federal law (and the law itself may provide for such quotas).
# Places in institutions of post secondary school learning such as universities, colleges and polytechnics.

Legitimate interests of other communities: Article 153 protects the legitimate interests of other communities in the following ways:

# Citizenship to the Federation of Malaysia – originally was opposed by the Bumiputras during the formation of the Malayan Union and finally agreed upon due to pressure by the British
# Civil servants must be treated impartially regardless of race – Clause 5 of Article 153 specifically reaffirms Article 136 of the Constitution which states: &quot;All persons of whatever race in the same grade in the service of the Federation shall, subject to the terms and conditions of their employment, be treated impartially.&quot;
# Parliament may not restrict any business or trade solely for Bumiputras.
# The exercise of the powers under Article 153 cannot deprive any person of any public office already held by him.
# The exercise of the powers under Article 153 cannot deprive any person of any scholarship, exhibition or other educational or training privileges or special facilities already enjoyed by him.
# While laws may reserve quotas for licences and permits for Bumiputras, they may not deprive any person of any right, privilege, permit or licence already enjoyed or held by him or authorise a refusal to renew such person&#x27;s license or permit.

Article 153 may not be amended without the consent of the Conference of Rulers (See clause 5 of Article 159 (Amendment of the Constitution)). State Constitutions may include an equivalent of Article 153 (See clause 10 of Article 153).

The Reid Commission suggested that these provisions would be temporary in nature and be revisited in 15 years, and that a report should be presented to the appropriate legislature (currently the Parliament of Malaysia) and that the &quot;legislature should then determine either to retain or to reduce any quota or to discontinue it entirely.&quot;

New Economic Policy (NEP): 
Under Article 153, and due to 13 May 1969 riots, the New Economic Policy was introduced. The NEP aimed to eradicate poverty irrespective of race by expanding the economic pie so that the Chinese share of the economy would not be reduced in absolute terms but only relatively. The aim was for the Malays to have a 30% equity share of the economy, as opposed to the 4% they held in 1970. Foreigners and Malaysians of Chinese descent held much of the rest.

The NEP appeared to be derived from Article 153 and could be viewed as being in line with its general wording. Although Article 153 would have been up for review in 1972, fifteen years after Malaysia&#x27;s independence in 1957, due to the May 13 Incident it remained unreviewed. A new expiration date of 1991 for the NEP was set, twenty years after its implementation. However, the NEP was said to have failed to have met its targets and was continued under a new policy called the National Development Policy.

=== Article 154 – Federal Capital ===

Article 154(1) dictates that, the municipality of Kuala Lumpur shall be the federal capital of Malaysia, unless the Parliament otherwise determines another place in Malaysia to be the federal capital.

Since independence, the Parliament has never invoked its power under Clause (1) and officially move the federal capital away from Kuala Lumpur, even though majority of government ministries and agencies have relocated its headquarters to Putrajaya around 2003 and Putrajaya has become the administrative center of the federal government.

Clause (2) of this Article also states that only the Parliament has exclusive power to make laws to change or alter the boundaries of the federal capital.

=== Article 160 – Constitutional definition of Malay ===


Article 160(2) of the Constitution of Malaysia defines various terms used in the Constitution, including &quot;Malay,&quot; which is used in Article 153. &quot;Malay&quot; means a person who satisfies two sets of criteria:

First, the person must be one who professes to be a Muslim, habitually speaks the Malay language, and adheres to Malay customs.

Second, the person must have been:

(i)(a) Domiciled in the Federation or Singapore on Merdeka Day, 
(b) Born in the Federation or Singapore before Merdeka Day, or (c) Born before Merdeka Day of parents one of whom was born in the Federation or Singapore, (collectively, the &quot;Merdeka Day population&quot;) or
(ii) Is a descendant of a member of the Merdeka Day population.

As being a Muslim is one of the components of the definition, Malay citizens who convert out of Islam are no longer considered Malay under the Constitution. Hence, the Bumiputra privileges afforded to Malays under Article 153 of the Constitution of Malaysia, the New Economic Policy (NEP), etc. are forfeit for such converts. Likewise, a non-Malay Malaysian who converts to Islam can lay claim to Bumiputra privileges, provided he meets the other conditions. A higher education textbook conforming to the government Malaysian studies syllabus states: &quot;This explains the fact that when a non-Malay embraces Islam, he is said to masuk Melayu (become a Malay). That person is automatically assumed to be fluent in the Malay language and to be living like a Malay as a result of his close association with the Malays.&quot;

Due to the requirement to have family roots in the Federation or Singapore, a person of Malay extract who has migrated to Malaysia after Merdeka day from another country (with the exception of Singapore), and their descendants, will not be regarded as a Malay under the Constitution as such a person and their descendants would not normally fall under or be descended from the Merdeka Day Population.

Sarawak: Malays from Sarawak are defined in the Constitution as part of the indigenous people of Sarawak (see the definition of the word &quot;native&quot; in clause 7 of Article 161A), separate from Malays of the Peninsular. 
Sabah: There is no equivalent definition for natives of Sabah which for the purposes of the Constitution are &quot;a race indigenous to Sabah&quot; (see clause 6 of Article 161A).

=== Article 181 – Sovereignty of the Malay Rulers ===
Article 181 guarantees the sovereignty, rights, powers and jurisdictions of each Malay Ruler within their respective states. They also cannot be charged in a court of law in their official capacities as a Ruler.

The Malay Rulers can be charged on any personal wrongdoing, outside of their role and duties as a Ruler. However, the charges cannot be carried out in a normal court of law, but in a Special Court established under Article 182.

Special Court for Proceedings against the Yang di-Pertuan Agong and the Rulers

The Special Court is the only place where both civil and criminal cases against the Yang di-Pertuan Agong and the Ruler of a State in his personal capacity may be heard. Such cases can only proceed with the consent of the Attorney General. The five members of the Special Court are (a) the Chief Justice of the Federal Court (who is the chairperson), (b) the two Chief Judges of the High Courts, and (c) two current or former judges to be appointed by the Conference of Rulers.

== Parliament ==

Malaysia&#x27;s Parliament is a bicameral legislature constituted by the House of Representatives (Dewan Rakyat), the Senate (Dewan Negara) and the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (Art. 44).

The Dewan Rakyat is made up of 222 elected members (Art. 46). Each appointment will last until Parliament is dissolved for general elections. There are no limits on the number of times a person can be elected to the Dewan Rakyat.

The Dewan Negara is made up of 70 appointed members. 44 are appointed by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, on Cabinet advice, and the remainder are appointed by State Legislatures, which are each allowed to appoint 2 senators. Each appointment is for a fixed 3-year term which is not affected by a dissolution of Parliament. A person cannot be appointed as a senator for more than two terms (whether consecutive or not) and cannot simultaneously be a member of the Dewan Rakyat (and vice versa) (Art. 45).

All citizens meeting the minimum age requirement (21 for Dewan Rakyat and 30 for Dewan Negara) are qualified to be MPs or Senators (art. 47), unless disqualified under Article 48 (more below).

=== Parliamentary Cycle and General Elections ===

A new Parliament is convened after each general election (Art. 55(4)). The newly convened Parliament continues for five years from the date of its first meeting, unless it is sooner dissolved (Art. 55(3)). The Yang di-Pertuan Agong has the power to dissolve Parliament before the end of its five-year term (Art. 55(2)).

Once a standing Parliament is dissolved, a general election must be held within 60 days, and the next Parliament must have its first sitting within 120 days, from the date of dissolution (Art. 55(3) and (4)).

The 12th Parliament held its first meeting on 28 April 2008 and will be dissolved five years later, in April 2013, if it is not sooner dissolved.

=== Legislative power of Parliament and Legislative Process ===

Parliament has the exclusive power to make federal laws over matters falling under the Federal List and the power, which is shared with the State Legislatures, to make laws on matters in the Concurrent List (see the 9th Schedule of the Constitution).

With some exceptions, a law is made when a bill is passed by both houses and has received royal assent from the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, which is deemed given if the bill is not assented to within 30 days of presentation. The Dewan Rakyat&#x27;s passage of a bill is not required if it is a money bill (which includes taxation bills). For all other bills passed by the Dewan Rakyat which are not Constitutional amendment bills, the Dewan Rakyat has the power to veto any amendments to bills made by the Dewan Negara and to override any defeat of such bills by the Dewan Negara.

The process requires that the Dewan Rakyat pass the bill a second time in the following Parliamentary session and, after it has been sent to Dewan Negara for a second time and failed to be passed by the Dewan Negara or passed with amendments that the Dewan Rakyat does not agree, the bill will nevertheless be sent for Royal assent (Art. 66–68), only with such amendments made by the Dewan Negara, if any, which the Dewan Rakyat agrees.

=== Qualifications for and Disqualification from Parliament ===
Article 47 states that every citizen who is 18 or older is qualified to be a member of the Dewan Rakyat and every citizen over 30 is qualified to be a senator in the Dewan Negara, unless in either case he or she is disqualified under one of the grounds set out in Article 48. These include unsoundness of mind, bankruptcy, acquisition of foreign citizenship or conviction for an offence and sentenced to imprisonment for a term of not less than one year or to a &quot;fine of not less than two thousand ringgit&quot;.

Before 11 September 2019, the minimum age requirement to be a member of Dewan Rakyat was 21 years old instead of the current 18 years old requirement. This was changed after the Parliament passed a constitutional amendment in 2019 to lower both the minimum voting age and the minimum age to be a member of Dewan Rakyat or State Legislative Assembly to 18 years old.

== Citizenship ==
Malaysian citizenship may be acquired in one of four ways: 
# By operation of law;
# By registration;
# By naturalisation;
# By incorporation of territory (See Articles 14 – 28A and the Second Schedule).

=== Citizenship by operation of law ===
Citizenship by operation of law generally means the acquisition of citizenship which are automatically recognized by law, usually at birth, without additional vetting or requirements like those who acquire citizenship by registration or naturalisation. Citizenship by operation of law is also sometimes called &quot;automatic citizenship&quot;.

The detailed qualifications for one to be citizen by operation of law are laid out in Part I and Part II of the Second Schedule. Part I of the Second Schedule applies to persons who were born before Malaysia Day (16 September 1963), while Part II applies to persons who were born after Malaysia Day.

==== Part I of the Second Schedule (Persons born before Malaysia Day) ====
Part I automatically recognised anyone who, immediately before Merdeka Day (31 August 1957), was a citizen of Malaya under the Federation of Malaya Agreement 1948, as a citizen by operation of law. Anyone who was born inside Malaya between 31 August 1957 and 30 September 1962 are also automatically recognised as citizen under this Part, regardless of his parents&#x27; citizenship status. However, starting from 1 October 1962, a person born inside Malaya will only be recognised as citizen by operation of law, if at least one of his parents is either a citizen or permanent resident at the time of birth of the said person, or the said person was not born a citizen of any other country.

For persons who were born overseas between Merdeka Day and Malaysia Day, his father must be a citizen at the time of the birth of the said person, and his father must also either be born within Malaya, or was in service with the government of Malaya at the time of birth of the said person. Other than that, person who were born overseas and whose his father is a citizen, must also within one year after the birth, register the birth with Malaysia&#x27;s diplomatic missions; or if he was born in Singapore, Sarawak, Brunei, or North Borneo, register with the Federal Government.

Section 2 of Part I also recognised those who are ordinarily resident in Sabah, Sarawak, or Brunei on Malaysia Day and before that day is a citizen of United Kingdom and Colonies, who either was born in Sabah or Sarawak, or became a UK citizen by way of registration or naturalisation in those 3 territories, as a Malaysian citizen by operation of law.

==== Part II of the Second Schedule (Persons born on and after Malaysia Day) ====
Under Part II, every person who is born within Malaysia and at least one of his parents is a citizen or permanent resident at the time of birth of the said person, are citizen by operation of law. This pathway is how majority of Malaysian citizens acquire their citizenship.

For persons who are born overseas, his father must be a citizen at the time of birth, and his father must either be born in Malaysia, or at the time of the birth of the said person, is in service of the government of Malaysia. Persons who are born overseas to a Malaysian father must also have their birth register with a Malaysian diplomatic mission within one year after the birth of the said person; or if the person is born in Brunei, register with the Federal Government, in order for him to be a citizen by operation of law.

However, for persons who are born in Singapore, at least one of his parents (not limited to father) must be a citizen at the time of birth in order for the person to be recognised a citizen by operation of law, and it does not require the birth to be register at a Malaysia diplomatic mission.

Paragraph (e), section 1 of this Part also recognises that anyone who born inside Malaysia and within one year after his birth is not born a citizen of any country otherwise than by virtue of this paragraph, is a citizen by operation of law.

==== Inapplication to children of foreign diplomats ====
For persons who are born inside Malaysia, either before or after Malaysia Day, if his father is a foreign diplomat, or enjoys dilpomatic immunity, then such persons are not entitled to citizenship by operation of law.

=== Citizenship by naturalisation ===
The requirements for citizenship by naturalisation, which are relevant to foreigners who wish to become Malaysian citizens, stipulate that an applicant must be at least 21 years old, intend to reside permanently in Malaysia, have good character, have an adequate knowledge of the Malay language, and meet a minimum period of residence in Malaysia: he or she must have been resident in Malaysia for at least 10 years out of the last 12 years, as well as the immediate 12 months, before the date of the citizenship application (Art. 19). The Malaysian Government retains the discretion to decide whether or not to approve any such applications.

Malaysia is one of 25 countries that did not give mothers and fathers equal rights under the country&#x27;s citizenship law. In September 2021, the Kuala Lumpur High Court ruled in favour of family support group Family Frontier&#x27;s petition that Malaysian mothers have the right to pass their citizenship to their children born overseas – a privilege previously only granted to fathers. The change helps ease access to residency, education and healthcare for families. It was hailed by activists as a giant step toward gender equality. On 17 February 2023, the Anwar Ibrahim Cabinet confirmed that it would amend the Constitution to enable children born overseas to Malaysian mothers, who are married to foreigners, to obtain Malaysian citizenship automatically. Legislation amending the constitution is expected to be introduced in 2023.

== Election Commission ==

The Constitution establishes an Election Commission (EC) which has the duty of preparing and revising the electoral rolls and conducting the Dewan Rakyat and State Legislative Council elections...

Appointment of EC Members

All 7 members of the EC are appointed by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (acting on the advice of the Cabinet), after consulting the Conference of Rulers.

Steps to enhance the EC&#x27;s Independence

To enhance the independence of the EC, the Constitution provides that:

Review of Constituencies

The EC is also required to review the division of Federal and State constituencies and recommend changes in order that the constituencies comply with the provisions of the 13th Schedule on the delimitation of constituencies (Art. 113(2)).

Timetable for review of Constituencies

The EC can itself determine when such reviews are to be conducted but there must be an interval of at least 8 years between reviews but there is no maximum period between reviews (see Art. 113(2)(ii), which states that &quot;There shall be an interval of not less than eight years between the date of completion of one review, and the date of commencement of the next review, under this Clause.&quot;)

==Constitutional Amendments==
The Constitution itself provides by Articles 159 and 161E how it may be amended (it may be amended by federal law), and in brief there are four ways by which it may be amended:

#Some provisions may be amended only by a two-thirds absolute majority in each House of Parliament but only if the Conference of Rulers consents. These include:
#* Amendments pertaining to the powers of sultans and their respective states
#* The status of Islam in the Federation
#* The special position of the Malays and the natives of Sabah and Sarawak
#* The status of the Malay language as the official language
#Some provisions of special interest to East Malaysia, may be amended by a two-thirds absolute majority in each House of Parliament but only if the Governor of the East Malaysian state concurs. These include:
#* Citizenship of persons born before Malaysia Day
#* The constitution and jurisdiction of the High Court of Borneo
#* The matters with respect to which the legislature of the state may or may not make laws, the executive authority of the state in those matters and financial arrangement between the Federal government and the state.
#* Special treatment of natives of the state
#Subject to the exception described in item four below, all other provisions may be amended by a two-thirds absolute majority in each House of Parliament, and these amendments do not require the consent of anybody outside Parliament.
#Certain types of consequential amendments and amendments to three schedules may be made by a simple majority in Parliament.

===Two-thirds absolute majority requirement===

Where a two-thirds absolute majority is required, this means that the relevant Constitutional amendment bill must be passed in each House of Parliament &quot;by the votes of not less than two-thirds of the total number of members of&quot; that House (Art. 159(3)). Thus, for the Dewan Rakyat, the minimum number of votes required is 148, being two-thirds of its 222 members.

Effect of MP suspensions on the two-thirds majority requirement

In December 2010, a number of MPs from the opposition were temporarily suspended from attending the proceedings of the Dewan Rakyat and this led to some discussions as to whether their suspension meant that the number of votes required for the two-thirds majority was reduced to the effect that the ruling party regained the majority to amend the Constitution. From a reading of the relevant Article (Art. 148), it would appear that the temporary suspension of some members of the Dewan Rakyat from attending its proceedings does not lower the number of votes required for amending the Constitution as the suspended members are still members of the Dewan Rakyat: as the total number of members of the Dewan Rakyat remains the same even if some of its members may be temporarily prohibited to attending its proceedings, the number of votes required to amend the Constitution should also remain the same – 148 out of 222. In short, the suspensions gave no such advantage to the ruling party.

===Frequency of Constitutional Amendments===
According to constitutional scholar Shad Saleem Faruqi, the Constitution has been amended 22 times over the 48 years since independence as of 2005. However, as several amendments were made each time, he estimates the true number of individual amendments is around 650. He has stated that &quot;there is no doubt&quot; that &quot;the spirit of the original document has been diluted&quot;. This sentiment has been echoed by other legal scholars, who argue that important parts of the original Constitution, such as &quot;jus soli&quot; (right of birth) citizenship, a limitation on the variation of the number of electors in constituencies, and Parliamentary control of emergency powers have been so modified or altered by amendments that &quot;the present Federal Constitution bears only a superficial resemblance to its original model&quot;. It has been estimated that between 1957 and 2003, &quot;almost thirty articles have been added and repealed&quot; as a consequence of the frequent amendments.

However another constitutional scholar, Prof. Abdul Aziz Bari, takes a different view. In his book &quot;The Malaysian Constitution: A Critical Introduction&quot; he said that &quot;Admittedly, whether the frequency of amendments is necessarily a bad thing is difficult to say&quot;, because &quot;Amendments are something that are difficult to avoid especially if a constitution is more of a working document than a brief statement of principles&quot;.

Technical versus Fundamental Amendments

Taking into account the contrasting views of the two Constitutional scholars, it is submitted that for an informed debate about whether the frequency and number of amendments represent a systematic legislative disregard of the spirit of the Constitution, one must distinguish between changes that are technical and those that are fundamental and be aware that the Malaysian Constitution is a much longer document than other constitutions that it is often benchmarked against for number of amendments made. For example, the US Constitution has less than five thousand words whereas the Malaysian Constitution with its many schedules contains more than 60,000 words, making it more than 12 times longer than the US constitution. This is so because the Malaysian Constitution lays downs very detailed provisions governing micro issues such as revenue from toddy shops, the number of High Court judges and the amount of federal grants to states. It is not surprising therefore that over the decades changes needed to be made to keep pace with the growth of the nation and changing circumstance, such as increasing the number of judges (due to growth in population and economic activity) and the amount of federal capitation grants to each State (due to inflation). For example, on capitation grants alone, the Constitution has been amended on three occasions, in 1977, 1993 and most recently in 2002, to increase federal capitation grants to the States.

Furthermore, a very substantial number of amendments were necessitated by territorial changes such as the admission of Singapore, Sabah and Sarawak, which required a total of 118 individual amendments (via the Malaysia Act 1963) and the creation of Federal Territories. All in all, the actual number of Constitutional amendments that touched on fundamental issues is only a small fraction of the total.

==See also==
* 1988 Malaysian constitutional crisis
* History of Malaysia
* Law of Malaysia
* Politics of Malaysia
* Federation of Malaya
* Malaysia Agreement
* Malaysia Bill (1963)
* Malaysian General Election
* Reid Commission
* Status of religious freedom in Malaysia

== Notes ==
Books
* Mahathir Mohammad, &quot;The Malay Dilemma&quot;, 1970.
* Mohamed Suffian Hashim, &quot;An Introduction to the Constitution of Malaysia&quot;, second edition, Kuala Lumpur: Government Printers, 1976.
* Rehman Rashid, &quot;A Malaysian Journey&quot;, Petaling Jaya, 1994
* Sheridan &amp; Groves, &quot;The Constitution of Malaysia&quot;, 5th Edition, by KC Vohrah, Philip TN Koh and Peter SW Ling, LexisNexis, 2004
* Andrew Harding and H.P. Lee, editors, &quot;Constitutional Landmarks in Malaysia – The First 50 Years 1957 – 2007&quot;, LexisNexis, 2007
* Shad Saleem Faruqi, &quot;Document of Destiny – The Constitution of the Federation of Malaysia&quot;, Shah Alam, Star Publications, 2008
* JC Fong,&quot;Constitutional Federalism in Malaysia&quot;,Sweet &amp; Maxwell Asia, 2008
* Abdul Aziz Bari and Farid Sufian Shuaib, &quot;Constitution of Malaysia – Text and Commentary&quot;, Pearson Malaysia, 2009
* Kevin YL Tan &amp; Thio Li-ann, &quot;Constitutional Law in Malaysia and Singapore&quot;, Third Edition, LexisNexis, 2010
* Andrew Harding, &quot;The Constitution of Malaysia – A Contextual Analysis&quot;, Hart Publishing, 2012

Historical Documents
* Report of the Federation of Malaya Constitutional Conference held in London in 1956
* Report of the Federation of Malaya Constitutional Commission 1957 (The Reid Commission Report)
* Agreement relating to Malaysia signed on 9 July 1963 between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Federation of Malaya, North Borneo, Sarawak and Singapore (Malaysia Agreement)

Websites
* An Introduction to the Malaysian Constitution

Constitution
* Federal Constitution of Malaysia (Reprint – As at 15 October 2020) 
* Federal Constitution of Malaysia (Full text – incorporating all amendments up to P.U.(A) 164/2009)
* Reprint of the Federal Constitution of Malaysia (as at 1 November 2010), with notes setting out the chronology of the major amendments to the Federal Constitution

Legislation
* Syariah Courts (Criminal Jurisdiction) Act 1963
* Peaceful Assembly Act 2012 
* Security Offences (Special Measures) Act 2012 

== References ==
== External links ==
* Text of the Federation of Malaya Independence Act 1957, passed by the British Parliament</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1003080" start="4" end="36" title="Constitution of Malaysia" label="Federal Constitution of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="203" end="211" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="442" end="462" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Federation of Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="571" end="576" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="578" end="585" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420038" start="590" end="599" title="Singapore in Malaysia" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="698" end="721" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174156" start="740" end="761" title="Yang di-Pertuan Agong" label="Yang di-Pertuan Agong"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="775" end="788" title="Head of State" label="Head of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589240" start="901" end="911" title="Government of Malaysia" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986392" start="957" end="967" title="Parliament of Malaysia" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207092" start="991" end="1015" title="Dewan Rakyat" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207095" start="1051" end="1057" title="Dewan Negara" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q862559" start="1118" end="1132" title="Prime Minister of Malaysia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q846488" start="1141" end="1158" title="Cabinet of Malaysia" label="Cabinet Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440171" start="1197" end="1210" title="Federal Court of Malaysia" label="Federal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1294" end="1300" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="1370" end="1390" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Federation of Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q296317" start="1480" end="1498" title="Tunku Abdul Rahman" label="Tunku Abdul Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573127" start="1543" end="1578" title="British High Commissioner in Malaya" label="British High Commissioner in Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="1739" end="1759" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Federation of Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="1797" end="1809" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159925" start="1818" end="1830" title="Conference of Rulers" label="Malay Rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309946" start="1877" end="1892" title="Reid Commission" label="Reid Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1943" end="1955" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q610320" start="2017" end="2043" title="Lords of Appeal in Ordinary" label="Lord-of-Appeal-in-Ordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="2488" end="2500" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741681" start="2731" end="2749" title="Malaysia Agreement" label="Malaysia Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266" start="2902" end="2908" title="nation" label="nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742066" start="3324" end="3335" title="Malaysian nationality law" label="Citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354750" start="3501" end="3510" title="Elections in Malaysia" label="Elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124577" start="3548" end="3563" title="Civil Service in Malaysia" label="Public Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="5804" end="5811" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="5816" end="5829" title="forced labour" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q328293" start="5850" end="5877" title="Ex post facto law" label="retrospective criminal laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253920" start="5882" end="5897" title="Double jeopardy" label="repeated trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q188863" start="5924" end="5934" title="Exile" label="banishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344824" start="5939" end="5958" title="freedom of movement" label="freedom of movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="5960" end="5977" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q162254" start="5979" end="5987" title="Freedom of assembly" label="assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q688503" start="5992" end="6003" title="Freedom of association" label="association"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="6005" end="6024" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917765" start="6061" end="6079" title="Right to property" label="rights to property"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="6549" end="6562" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124647" start="6996" end="7014" title="Civil conscription" label="compulsory service"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="8526" end="8532" title="Malay people" label="Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="8585" end="8590" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="8595" end="8602" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800873" start="8609" end="8620" title="Article 153 of the Constitution of Malaysia" label="Article 153"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079566" start="10448" end="10468" title="Official Secrets Act (Malaysia)" label="Official Secrets Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664804" start="10836" end="10842" title="Royal Malaysian Police" label="Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245316" start="13711" end="13748" title="Printing Presses and Publications Act" label="Printing Presses and Publications Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="14133" end="14147" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445340" start="14172" end="14184" title="Sedition Act (Malaysia)" label="Sedition Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="14241" end="14250" title="sedition" label="seditious"/>
<link wikidata="Q163712" start="14606" end="14608" title="Ringgit" label="RM"/>
<link wikidata="Q561319" start="14779" end="14789" title="Azlan Shah" label="Azlan Shah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23872" end="23889" title="precepts of Islam" label="precepts of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136316" start="24548" end="24569" title="Raja Permaisuri Agong" label="Raja Permaisuri Agong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159925" start="24616" end="24636" title="Conference of Rulers" label="Conference of Rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="29811" end="29831" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="29884" end="29902" title="Westminster System" label="Westminster System"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="34965" end="34979" title="Malay language" label="Malay language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="36140" end="36154" title="Malay language" label="Malay language"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="36162" end="36176" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83942" start="36214" end="36218" title="Jawi script" label="Jawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="36497" end="36503" title="Malay people" label="Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="36512" end="36530" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="36772" end="36778" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="36795" end="36800" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="36805" end="36812" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309946" start="39361" end="39376" title="Reid Commission" label="Reid Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986392" start="39552" end="39574" title="Parliament of Malaysia" label="Parliament of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q138211" start="39788" end="39807" title="Malaysian New Economic Policy" label="New Economic Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25077" start="40430" end="40445" title="May 13 Incident" label="May 13 Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259697" start="40673" end="40700" title="National Development Policy" label="National Development Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="40792" end="40804" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="40826" end="40833" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986392" start="40858" end="40868" title="Parliament of Malaysia" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="41074" end="41086" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q182378" start="41182" end="41191" title="Putrajaya" label="Putrajaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q182378" start="41208" end="41217" title="Putrajaya" label="Putrajaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986392" start="41336" end="41346" title="Parliament of Malaysia" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="41774" end="41780" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="41804" end="41818" title="Malay language" label="Malay language"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="42326" end="42331" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004875" start="42398" end="42407" title="Bumiputra" label="Bumiputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800873" start="42444" end="42487" title="Article 153 of the Constitution of Malaysia" label="Article 153 of the Constitution of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q138211" start="42493" end="42512" title="Malaysian New Economic Policy" label="New Economic Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="42604" end="42609" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004875" start="42627" end="42636" title="Bumiputra" label="Bumiputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="43479" end="43486" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="44971" end="44992" title="bicameral legislature" label="bicameral legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115032" start="49865" end="49877" title="Malaysia Day" label="Malaysia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115032" start="49952" end="49964" title="Malaysia Day" label="Malaysia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173278" start="50105" end="50116" title="Independence Day (Malaysia)" label="Merdeka Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="50152" end="50158" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="50267" end="50273" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q689095" start="50610" end="50628" title="Permanent residency" label="permanent resident"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589240" start="50964" end="50984" title="Government of Malaysia" label="government of Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566917" start="51175" end="51210" title="List of diplomatic missions of Malaysia" label="Malaysia&amp;#x27;s diplomatic missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="51233" end="51242" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="51244" end="51251" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="51253" end="51259" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147441" start="51264" end="51276" title="North Borneo" label="North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589240" start="51296" end="51314" title="Government of Malaysia" label="Federal Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="51390" end="51395" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="51397" end="51404" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="51409" end="51415" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="51468" end="51495" title="Crown colony" label="United Kingdom and Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="51520" end="51525" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="51529" end="51536" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q689095" start="51857" end="51875" title="Permanent residency" label="permanent resident"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589240" start="52232" end="52254" title="government of Malaysia" label="government of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566917" start="52351" end="52379" title="List of diplomatic missions of Malaysia" label="Malaysian diplomatic mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="52460" end="52466" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589240" start="52486" end="52504" title="Government of Malaysia" label="Federal Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="52598" end="52607" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566917" start="52826" end="52853" title="List of diplomatic missions of Malaysia" label="Malaysia diplomatic mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q115301073" start="54621" end="54642" title="Anwar Ibrahim Cabinet" label="Anwar Ibrahim Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354512" start="54959" end="54978" title="Election Commission of Malaysia" label="Election Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986392" start="56415" end="56434" title="Parliament of Malaysia" label="House of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159925" start="56451" end="56471" title="Conference of Rulers" label="Conference of Rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="56592" end="56597" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="56647" end="56653" title="Ethnic Malays" label="Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="56673" end="56678" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="56683" end="56690" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="56712" end="56726" title="Malay language" label="Malay language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460216" start="59261" end="59279" title="Shad Saleem Faruqi" label="Shad Saleem Faruqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q604971" start="59745" end="59753" title="jus soli" label="jus soli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584527" start="62594" end="62630" title="1988 Malaysian constitutional crisis" label="1988 Malaysian constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064598" start="62633" end="62652" title="History of Malaysia" label="History of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503409" start="62655" end="62670" title="Law of Malaysia" label="Law of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155202" start="62673" end="62693" title="Politics of Malaysia" label="Politics of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="62696" end="62716" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Federation of Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741681" start="62719" end="62737" title="Malaysia Agreement" label="Malaysia Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741677" start="62740" end="62760" title="Malaysia Bill (1963)" label="Malaysia Bill (1963)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354750" start="62763" end="62789" title="Malaysian General Election" label="Malaysian General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309946" start="62792" end="62807" title="Reid Commission" label="Reid Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502576" start="62810" end="62849" title="Status of religious freedom in Malaysia" label="Status of religious freedom in Malaysia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534792" wikidata="Q935945" url="?curid=534792" title="Child's Play (1988 film)">
<text>Child&#x27;s Play is a 1988 American slasher film directed by Tom Holland, from a screenplay he co-wrote with Don Mancini and John Lafia based on a story by Mancini. The film stars Catherine Hicks and Chris Sarandon with Brad Dourif as Chucky. Its plot follows a widowed mother who gives a new doll to her son, unaware that it is possessed by the soul of a serial killer.

&quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot; was released in the United States on November 9, 1988, by MGM/UA Communications Co. It received generally positive reviews from critics and grossed more than $44 million against a production budget of $9 million. Along with the film gaining a 1980s cult following, the box office success also spawned a media franchise that includes a series of six sequels, a television series, merchandise, comic books, and a reboot. The original &quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot; film was distributed by United Artists, although the rights to the series were sold to Universal Pictures in 1990. MGM (via United Artists) retained the rights to the original film and Orion Pictures (through United Artists Releasing) also distributed the reboot in 2019.

== Plot ==
Detective Mike Norris chases fugitive serial killer Charles Lee Ray through the streets of Chicago and into a toy store. Meanwhile, Ray&#x27;s accomplice, Eddie Caputo, flees the scene. Shot by Norris and dying, Ray performs a voodoo chant to transfer his soul into a nearby &quot;Good Guy&quot;-brand talking doll. The store is struck by lightning, causing an explosion. Shortly thereafter, Norris finds Ray&#x27;s lifeless body next to the doll.

Widow Karen Barclay&#x27;s six-year-old son Andy wants a &quot;Good Guy&quot; doll for his birthday, but she was not able to save up enough to afford one. While at work, her best friend Maggie informs her that a homeless peddler outside has gotten his hands on a &quot;Good Guy&quot;. Karen excitedly buys the doll and gives it to Andy. He is immediately captivated by the doll, who introduces itself as &quot;Chucky&quot;.

That night, Maggie babysits Andy while Karen goes to work to cover a shift. Chucky comes to life and attacks Maggie, striking her with a hammer and causing her to fall out of a window to her death. Karen returns home to the crime scene where Norris is serving as lead detective. Norris believes Andy may have been involved in Maggie&#x27;s death, while Andy claims that Chucky may have been involved. Andy tells his mother that Chucky told him his real name was &quot;Charles Lee Ray&quot;.

The next day, Chucky convinces Andy to skip school and take a train ride to a bad neighborhood. Chucky sneaks into an abandoned home where Caputo is hiding out and kills him in a gas explosion in revenge for abandoning him. Andy is discovered by police and again considered a suspect, and Karen is informed that he will be admitted to a psychiatric hospital for observation. Karen returns home with Chucky and discovers that the doll has been moving and speaking without batteries. After Karen threatens to throw him into the fire, Chucky violently comes alive and attacks her, then escapes. Karen goes to Norris, but he does not believe her story.

Karen finds the peddler and asks for more information, but he attempts to rape her; Norris saves her and forces the peddler to admit that he stole the doll from the destroyed toy store where Norris killed Ray. Norris, still skeptical, is later attacked by Chucky. He shoots the doll, whose wound inexplicably bleeds and causes pain. Chucky escapes to his former voodoo instructor John, demanding answers; John informs him that the longer his soul remains in the doll, the more &quot;human&quot; the doll will become. He refuses to help and is tortured by Chucky with a voodoo doll, forcing him to reveal that in order to escape the doll&#x27;s body, he must transfer his soul to the first human he revealed his true identity to: Andy. Chucky leaves for Andy as Karen and Norris arrive and find John bleeding to death. Before dying, John tells them that in order to kill Chucky, they must destroy his heart.

Chucky arrives at the psychiatric hospital and kills Andy&#x27;s doctor with an electroshock therapy device. Andy flees home, where Chucky knocks him out. As Chucky prepares to possess Andy, Karen and Norris arrive. Chucky wounds Norris, but Karen and Andy gain the upper hand, setting him on fire. A burned Chucky attacks again, but Karen shoots his head and several of his limbs off, appearing to kill him. Norris&#x27; partner Jack arrives, refusing to believe the trio until Chucky&#x27;s body bursts through a heat vent and attacks. Norris shoots Chucky&#x27;s body through the heart, finally killing him. The group leaves to get Norris to the hospital as a traumatized Andy looks back at Chucky&#x27;s remains.

== Cast ==
Additionally, Alan Wilder appears as Walter Criswell and Edan Gross portrays a young boy in a commercial promoting the dolls.

== Production ==
=== Development ===
According to an interview with &quot;Mental Floss&quot;, screenwriter Don Mancini first conceived of the concept while studying as a literature major at UCLA in 1985. He wrote the first draft of the screenplay while studying film at Columbia University in 1986. Mancini was inspired by the consumerism of the 1980s and the effect of marketing on children based on his experiences with his father, an advertising executive and the Cabbage Patch riots of 1983. Mancini&#x27;s troubled relationship with his own father and his experiences of alienation as a gay man caused him to center the script around a child with a single mother and no father figure. He was also influenced by the Cabbage Patch Kids, &quot;Trilogy of Terror&quot;, &quot;Magic&quot;, &quot;Poltergeist&quot;, the character of Freddy Krueger from &quot;A Nightmare on Elm Street&quot; and &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; episode &quot;Living Doll&quot;. The director Tom Holland has also affirmed that the My Buddy dolls played a role in Chucky&#x27;s design, with the writers even having to change the doll&#x27;s name from Buddy to Chucky to avoid a lawsuit from Hasbro.

Charles Band expressed interest in filming the script at Empire Pictures and later produced both Don Mancini&#x27;s first film &quot;Cellar Dweller&quot; (1988) and the &quot;Puppet Master&quot; franchise. However, he did not purchase the rights to Mancini&#x27;s script because it would have been too expensive for his studio to make. Initially no other studios were interested. However David Kirschner, who would produce all seven films and the television series in the &quot;Chucky&quot; series, agreed to fund it. Kirschner wanted to make a film about a killer doll after reading &quot;The Dollhouse Murders&quot; and to branch out from children&#x27;s entertainment after producing &quot;An American Tail&quot; (1985). Kirschner sent Mancini&#x27;s second draft and his drawings of the doll to major studios, and attracted more interest due to the success of &quot;An American Tail&quot; and his links with Steven Spielberg. United Artists won a bidding war to produce the film after studio president Tony Thomopoulous, who would serve as uncredited executive producer of the film, and MGM/UA Communications Chairman Lee Rich realized that it could begin a long-running franchise.

=== Writing ===
Mancini&#x27;s original script was titled &quot;Batteries Not Included,&quot; with the title later changed to &quot;Blood Buddy&quot; after it was discovered that a different film with the same name was being made. It would have featured a doll filled with fake blood that would allow it to bleed if played with roughly, and it would have started coming alive while Andy was asleep after he mixed his own blood with the doll&#x27;s. The doll would have represented Andy&#x27;s subconscious rage caused by his parents&#x27; divorce and his single mother&#x27;s frequent absence from home, and would have targeted his enemies. The third act would have had the doll trying to kill Andy and his mother so that it would not have to go to sleep while Andy was awake. Mancini&#x27;s original script would have been a whodunit story which dealt with the effect of advertising and television on children. Mancini&#x27;s original script was also written to toy with the audience a bit longer, making it ambiguous whether Andy or Chucky was the killer.

Although Kirschner enjoyed Mancini&#x27;s script, he demanded extensive rewrites because he feared that having the doll be a manifestation of Andy&#x27;s subconscious anger would make the protagonist too unsympathetic to audiences. He also believed that parents would not be willing to buy their children a doll that bled. MGM/UA was not confident enough in Mancini to allow him to do the rewrites. Kirschner hired Tom Holland to rewrite and direct the film based upon Steven Spielberg&#x27;s recommendation from his work on &quot;Amazing Stories&quot;. Holland came up with the idea that the doll would be possessed by a serial killer. Kirschner named the new character Charles Lee Ray based on Charles Manson, Lee Harvey Oswald, and James Earl Ray. Ray and his accomplice Eddie Caputo would be based on the &quot;Hillside Stranglers&quot; Angelo Buono Jr. and Kenneth Bianchi.

However, Holland had trouble coming up with a new plot for the film and how Ray&#x27;s soul would possess the doll in the story. Holland ultimately quit the project in order to direct &quot;Fatal Beauty&quot; (1987), and MGM/UA nearly cancelled the film. However, Kirschner and Laura Moskowitz hired John Lafia to complete the new script after he responded to their request to the William Morris Agency. In Lafia&#x27;s rewritten script Charles Lee Ray&#x27;s soul would have been transferred to the Buddy doll after being executed by electric chair as the doll was being manufactured on an assembly line. The script featured the doll factory where Buddy was produced, which would be recycled for the second film.

Lafia wanted to direct the film himself but was turned down because he had never directed a feature-length motion picture, and the studio sought an experienced director for the production. William Friedkin, Irvin Kershner, Robert Wise, Joseph Ruben, and Howard Franklin were all approached to direct. Ruben and Franklin were both nearly hired, with Franklin even doing rewrites on the script. It is unknown if any of his contributions made it into the film, although he is not credited. Rocky Morton and Annabel Jankel were attached to co-direct together and started penning rewrites themselves but were dismissed after Jankel became pregnant.

Holland was finally rehired as writer-director after the completion of &quot;Fatal Beauty&quot; and performed a final extensive rewrite on the script. Holland&#x27;s screenplay moved the setting from a middle-class suburban home to a working-class urban apartment in either Chicago or New York City, changed Karen Barclay from an advertising executive to a department store clerk, and identified that Charles Lee Ray had transferred his soul to the doll via Voodoo magic with help from Damballa. Although Kirschner and Mancini both disliked the Voodoo subplot, this would be the screenplay used for the film. Holland argued that his final rewrite was so extensive that it was completely original from earlier drafts of the film and attempted to claim sole credit. Lafia and Mancini disputed this, and a Writers&#x27; Guild of America arbitration panel ruled that the three should share credit with Mancini receiving a special &quot;Story by&quot; credit. Lafia later accused Holland of rewriting the film merely to claim sole writing credit and claimed that previous versions of the screenplay had been better. He, Holland, and Mancini also disputed which of the three was most responsible for creating the character of Chucky for the rest of their lives.

=== Casting ===
Auditions for roles in the film began in November 1987 at the Hollywood United Methodist Church. Holland immediately cast Chris Sarandon as Detective Norris after working with him in his first film &quot;Fright Night&quot; (1985). Catherine Hicks was hired as Karen Barclay on the recommendation of Leonard Nimoy, who worked with her in &quot;Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home&quot; (1986). Holland considered hundreds of children from across the United States for the role of Andy Barclay. Despite his lack of acting experience compared with the other two finalists, Alex Vincent was cast as Andy Barclay in his second audition after he convincingly pretended to forget his lines in order to avoid cursing in front of his mother.

John Lithgow was considered to play Charles Lee Ray before Brad Dourif was hired after Holland worked with him in &quot;Fatal Beauty&quot;. Ed Gale was hired to play the body of Chucky, although ultimately he only appeared a few times to supplement animatronics. Initially the voice of Chucky&#x27;s doll form was intended to be a simple electronic overlay similar to ordinary toys with sound chips. When this was deemed infeasible, John Franklin was hired to record the dialogue when Dourif was initially unavailable to record Chucky&#x27;s voice because of his involvement in &quot;Mississippi Burning&quot;. After negative test screenings, Lafia and Holland decided to recast the role only to find Dourif was still unavailable due to his involvement in &quot;Spontaneous Combustion&quot;. They cast Jessica Walter to voice Chucky on the basis that Mercedes McCambridge had voiced Pazuzu in &quot;The Exorcist&quot;. Later, Walter&#x27;s recordings were discarded when Dourif returned to the film. Unlike Walter, part of Franklin&#x27;s performance remains in the film through a scene in which he appears as a human television presenter dressed as a Good Guy, a scene which was shot after his replacement.

=== Filming ===
Principal photography began on January 7, 1988, and wrapped on March 5, 1988, with a budget of $9–13 million. Mancini and Lafia never entered the set and were minimally involved in the production. Although Mancini claimed this was due to the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike, it was more likely because they feared they would not be welcome since the strike did not begin until several days after principal photography ended. &quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot; was filmed on location in Chicago. MGM/UA executives attempted to convince Kirschner to move the film&#x27;s setting to California to cut costs, but he declined after becoming dissatisfied with scouting trips to Oakland and San Francisco.

The Brewster Apartments, a Chicago landmark located at Diversey Parkway and Pine Grove Avenue, served as the location of the apartment where Andy and Karen lived and is pictured on the film&#x27;s poster. In-studio filming took place at Culver Studios in Culver City, California. The Playland Toys shop was filmed on 418 South Wabash Avenue, while Eddie&#x27;s home was filmed in a North Chicago house that the city had condemned to be demolished. The department store Karen worked at was filmed at the Carson, Pirie, Scott and Company Building. The on-location filming was conducted in the winter with a wind chill reaching as low as , forcing the production to rent entire rooms and park running station wagons near shooting locations as warming centers. The mental hospital which Andy is detained at later in the film was shot at the abandoned Municipal Contagious Disease Hospital in South Lawndale and the Illinois Eastern Hospital for the Insane in Kankakee, Illinois. For that scene, Holland got Vincent to cry by telling him that his parents were getting divorced because of him. Although Holland claimed Vincent knew he was lying and Vincent also defended Holland as an adult, Kirschner criticized Holland&#x27;s treatment of Vincent and claimed that it at times &quot;bordered on cruelty to children.&quot; 

Maggie&#x27;s death was originally going to be by electrocution while taking a bath. The idea was abandoned, and was later used for Tiffany&#x27;s death in &quot;Bride of Chucky.&quot;

Chucky was controlled by a team of nine different puppeteers, led by Brock Winkless, who moved Chucky&#x27;s mouth via radio control, wearing a rig that captured his mouth movement. The others were in charge of operating the doll&#x27;s head, face, and limbs. By &quot;Curse of Chucky&quot;, Chucky&#x27;s mouth, now performed by lead puppeteer Tony Gardner of Alterian, Inc., was now operated via a radio-control unit without the need for a rig, and the doll himself now required fewer people to bring him to life. For scenes where Chucky had to move around in wide shots, a little-person actor in a life-sized costume, Ed Gale, would portray Chucky in scenes where the character is walking, the props on the set enlarged to fit the size of the actor.

=== Visual effects ===
The film used various ways to portray Chucky, including radio-controlled animatronics operated by up to nine puppeteers, extras of short stature, and child actors. Kirschner initially hired Chris Walas to handle the puppetry for the film after his work on &quot;Gremlins&quot; (1984), but he quit in order to direct &quot;The Fly II&quot; (1989). After Rick Baker declined to act as Walas&#x27;s replacement, Kirschner put Kevin Yagher in charge of the puppetry for the film. Various animatronics and cosmetics were used for every scene. Throughout the film, Chucky transitions from appearing as a normal toy to appearing more human, with his hairline receding throughout the film. The film created multiple Chucky animatronics such as a flailing tantrum Chucky, a walking Chucky, and a stationary Chucky. Gale claims that the filmmakers were not sure how well the animatronics would work and shot most scenes with both him and the puppets. The animatronic doll&#x27;s face was controlled via remote control through a rig capturing facial movement on puppeteer Brock Winkless. For some scenes Holland used short-statured actors and children such as Ed Gale and Alex Vincent&#x27;s sister Ashley with forced perspective sets.

=== Test screening ===
The film initially received negative reviews after a two-hour rough cut was shown to audiences at a test screening. Kirschner and Mancini subsequently cut 25 minutes of the film to reduce the amount of time Chucky was on screen, something Kirschner had advocated for during production to build suspense in a similar fashion to &quot;Jaws&quot; or &quot;Alien&quot;. Holland, who had repeatedly clashed with Kirschner over Chucky&#x27;s amount of time on screen and the film&#x27;s tone during shooting, objected to the cuts and left the production. Mancini and Lafia were invited back to help re-edit the film.

The three have also suggested that the test screening flopped due to their use of Franklin as the doll&#x27;s voice. Although Holland and Lafia enjoyed Franklin&#x27;s performance, test audiences felt it was excessively humorous and did not fit the serious tone of the film. Although they and Mancini found Walter&#x27;s voice more suitably menacing, they decided she was unable to convey the humor intended for the character, and all of her lines were redubbed with Dourif&#x27;s voice. The cut footage, shown only in production stills and the film&#x27;s script, would have featured Charles Lee Ray stalking a drunk woman as a human only to discover it to be Mike Norris on an undercover sting operation, Andy showing Chucky around his room and finding a photograph of his deceased father, John healing an infant through a voodoo ritual, and Chucky unsuccessfully trying to break into Andy&#x27;s room at the mental hospital and tricking a mentally-ill girl named Mona into carrying him into the ward.

The script also featured an alternate ending in which Chucky is stabbed by Andy with a knife mounted on a radio-controlled car and has his face and legs melted with a squirt gun filled with Drano in addition to being lit on fire and shot repeatedly by Mike and Karen. Chucky would have been seemingly killed by being overpowered by Jack and several police officers. While storing Chucky&#x27;s remains in an evidence room, another cop would have disbelieved Jack&#x27;s assertion that the doll was alive, and after they left, Chucky&#x27;s disembodied arm would have come to life to swat a fly.

=== Music ===
The score was composed by Joseph Renzetti which featured a collection of electronic and orchestral elements. Although UA and Holland had planned for the film to have a fully orchestral score, Renzetti wanted an electronic soundtrack. Renzetti and his colleague Craig Harris ultimately composed most of the music on a synthesizer and then converted the MIDI output to musical notes for the orchestra to play. Portions of the soundtrack were released on vinyl in 1989 and was later followed up by another vinyl pressing by Waxwork Records that featured the complete score from the original master tapes. According to music supervisor David Chackler, Renzetti composed the score in just three weeks.

== Release ==
Although Kirk Kerkorian terminated MGM/UA&#x27;s production agreement with Kirschner during his acquisition of the studio, it agreed to release &quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot; after the recut of the film received positive test screenings in Southern California&quot;.&quot; MGM/UA made a controversial decision not to release the film during Halloween, in order to avoid competition with competing horror films such as &quot;Halloween 4: The Return of Michael Myers&quot;. It instead moved the release date closer to Veterans Day weekend.

The film was heavily promoted for three weeks before release through television spots emphasizing audience reactions directed towards 12-to-20-year-olds and intended to &quot;position Chucky as the new terror icon&quot;. The film was released on November 9, 1988, in 1,377 theaters, opening at #1, out of the other 12 films that were showing that week, with $6,583,963. The film went on to gross $33,244,684 at the US box office and an additional $10,952,000 overseas for a worldwide total of $44,196,684. It became United Artists&#x27; second highest-grossing film of 1988 following &quot;Rain Man&quot;.

=== Home media ===
&quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot; was originally released on VHS in North America by MGM/UA Home Video on April 25, 1989.

The film was first released on DVD by MGM Home Entertainment on September 28, 1999, which was available exclusively through Warner Home Video worldwide. The film was presented in an open-matte full screen presentation and included a theatrical trailer and a &quot;Making Of&quot; booklet. The Australian DVD release by MGM Home Entertainment featured the film in non-anamorphic widescreen transfer. The DVD was re-released in 2007 with a lenticular cover.

A 20th Anniversary DVD was released by MGM Home Entertainment and 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on September 9, 2008. The film is presented in its original 1.85:1 Widescreen format (for the first time in the U.S. in 20 years) enhanced for 16x9 monitors and includes an English 5.1 surround track and English, French, and Spanish 2.0 stereo tracks. Special features include two audio commentaries with Alex Vincent, Catherine Hicks, Kevin Yagher, producer David Kirschner and screenwriter Don Mancini, a &quot;Selected Scene Chucky Commentary&quot;, &quot;Evil Comes in Small Packages&quot; featurettes, a vintage featurette from 1988 titled &quot;Introducing Chucky: The Making of &quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot;&quot;, and &quot;Chucky: Building a Nightmare&quot; featurette, theatrical trailer and a photo gallery. The film received a Blu-ray Disc release on September 15, 2009. The DVD does not feature any contributions from director Tom Holland, who claims he was not asked to contribute to it. In response, the website Icons of Fright contacted Holland and asked if he would be willing to record a commentary track that would be free for download on their website. He agreed, and the track is downloadable from here.

On October 8, 2013, the film was re-released again on DVD and Blu-ray in a boxset for the respective formats, containing all six &quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot; films.

On October 18, 2016, Scream Factory and MGM Home Entertainment re-released the film in a brand new Collector&#x27;s Edition Blu-ray.

On October 3, 2017, Universal Pictures Home Entertainment re-released the film once again on DVD and Blu-ray in a boxset for the respective formats, containing all seven &quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot; films.

On August 16, 2022, the film was released in Ultra HD Blu-ray for the first time by Scream Factory, featuring newly-restored scans from the original camera negatives made for the first three &quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot; films in addition to Blu-rays containing new and legacy extras as well as the previously released remastered of the film from the 2016 Collector&#x27;s Edition Blu-ray.

== Reception ==

Critics, who had previously been dismissive of the genre, lauded the film for its distinctive villain, unsettling puppetry work, concise storytelling and death scenes. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 74% of 54 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review; the average rating is 6.5/10. The site&#x27;s critics consensus reads, &quot;&quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot; occasionally stumbles across its tonal tightrope of comedy and horror, but its genuinely creepy monster and some deft direction by Tom Holland makes this chiller stand out on the shelf.&quot; On Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating to reviews, the film has a weighted average score of 58 out of 100 based on 18 critics, indicating &quot;mixed or average reviews&quot;. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of &quot;B&quot; on an A+ to F scale.

Roger Ebert gave the film 3 out of 4 stars, calling it a &quot;cheerfully energetic horror film.&quot; Caryn James of &quot;The New York Times&quot; praised it as &quot;a clever, playful thriller,&quot; adding, &quot;It&#x27;s the deft wit and swift editing that keeps us off guard, no matter how predictable the plot.&quot; &quot;Variety&quot; called the film a &quot;near-miss&quot;, commending Tom Holland&#x27;s &quot;impressive technical skill&quot; and the actors for keeping &quot;straight faces during these outlandish proceedings,&quot; but finding that &quot;the novelty is not buttressed by an interesting story to go along with the gimmick.&quot;

Kevin Thomas of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; wrote, &quot;Scary, yet darkly funny, this thriller of the supernatural from the director of the terrific &#x27;Fright Night&#x27; moves with the speed of a bullet train and with style to burn.&quot; Dave Kehr of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; gave the film 1 out of 4 stars and wrote that it &quot;would probably be sickening if it weren&#x27;t so relentlessly stupid.&quot; Richard Harrington of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; wrote that Holland &quot;keeps things moving without rushing them. Unfortunately, &#x27;Child&#x27;s Play&#x27; gets a little ugly at the end, not only because the finale seems a rehash of virtually every shock movie of the last 10 years, but because it involves the very realistic terrorizing of a 6-year-old.&quot;

Philip Strick of &quot;The Monthly Film Bulletin&quot; found the plot contrived with &quot;ludicrous supernatural gobbledygook&quot; but thought that Holland handled the action sequences well. Author and film critic Leonard Maltin gave the film three out of a possible four stars, calling it &quot;[a] scary and clever horror thriller&quot;, also praising the film&#x27;s special effects.

=== Awards ===

== Controversies ==
During the initial release, a large crowd of protesters formed at the main entrance of MGM calling for a ban on the film because, they claimed, it would incite violence in children. Local news reporters from two TV stations were broadcasting live from the scene. The producer, David Kirschner, was watching the demonstration on TV and was disturbed. Jeffrey Hilton, who had been working in Kirschner&#x27;s office at MGM, indicated that he could quell the disturbance in ten minutes. While Kirschner was watching from the safety of his office, Hilton spoke to the group&#x27;s leader and shook his hand. The group instantly dispersed, much to the chagrin of the newscasters. Hilton did not reveal to Kirschner whether it had been a threat or simple diplomacy that saved the day. Tom Holland further recalled in 2023:

Another controversy took place in March 1989, when the film was due to be released on VHS for the first time and a 30-second television advertisement was made to promote it. In the commercial, Chucky &quot;comes to life and begins killing, pursuing an off-screen victim, committing aggressive acts and speaking in a threatening manner&quot;. ABC and CBS pulled the commercial from prime time because viewers (especially parents) began complaining about it being too frightening, thus it only aired at late hours. The ad also continued airing on NBC and MTM, according to Herb Fischer, the then senior vice president of domestic sales and marketing for MGM/UA.

Hilton&#x27;s diplomacy notwithstanding, the film series was plagued with accusations of inciting violence in children. &quot;Child&#x27;s Play 3&quot; was cited as the &quot;inspiration&quot; for two murders, which took place in the United Kingdom in December 1992 and February 1993 respectively: the murder of Suzanne Capper and the murder of James Bulger. In the Suzanne Capper case, the 16-year-old was forced to listen to recordings of the gangleader repeating the catchphrase &quot;I&#x27;m Chucky, wanna play?&quot; Holland, in response to both murders, defended the film, stating that viewers of horror movies could only be influenced by their content if they were &quot;unbalanced to begin with.&quot;

== Franchise ==

The film was followed by several sequels including &quot;Child&#x27;s Play 2&quot; (1990), &quot;Child&#x27;s Play 3&quot; (1991), &quot;Bride of Chucky&quot; (1998), &quot;Seed of Chucky&quot; (2004), &quot;Curse of Chucky&quot; (2013), &quot;Cult of Chucky&quot; (2017), and a television series titled &quot;Chucky&quot; (2021–2024).

=== Reboot ===

A reboot of the franchise was announced by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer to be in development beginning in July 2018. Lars Klevberg served as director, from a script by Tyler Burton Smith. The film was co-produced by Seth Grahame-Smith, David Katzenberg and Aaron Schmidt. The adaptation featured a group of kids who come into contact with a modern-day hi-tech version of the Good Guys doll. The film starred Gabriel Bateman as Andy Barclay and Aubrey Plaza as his mother Karen while Mark Hamill provided the voice for Chucky. The film was released on June 21, 2019.

== See also ==

* List of American films of 1988
* &quot;Living Doll&quot;, a 1963 episode of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; about a murderous talking doll
* &quot;Dolls&quot;, a 1987 horror film about killer dolls
* &quot;Trilogy of Terror&quot;, a 1975 anthology film featuring a story about a living Zuni fetish doll
* &quot;Zapatlela&quot;, a 1993 Marathi language unofficial remake of &quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot; directed and written by Mahesh Kothare.

== References ==
=== Bibliography ===
== External links ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q853630" start="37" end="49" title="slasher film" label="slasher film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340923" start="62" end="73" title="Tom Holland (filmmaker)" label="Tom Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239298" start="110" end="121" title="Don Mancini" label="Don Mancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q402551" start="126" end="136" title="John Lafia" label="John Lafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230789" start="181" end="196" title="Catherine Hicks" label="Catherine Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q363684" start="201" end="215" title="Chris Sarandon" label="Chris Sarandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q329734" start="221" end="232" title="Brad Dourif" label="Brad Dourif"/>
<link wikidata="Q25097" start="236" end="242" title="Chucky (character)" label="Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="461" end="486" title="MGM/UA Communications Co." label="MGM/UA Communications Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="652" end="666" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265493" start="704" end="721" title="Child&amp;#x27;s Play (franchise)" label="a media franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q106824359" start="761" end="780" title="Chucky (TV series)" label="a television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q56697304" start="812" end="820" title="Child&amp;#x27;s Play (2019 film)" label="a reboot"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="889" end="903" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="952" end="970" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="980" end="983" title="MGM" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q891732" start="1050" end="1064" title="Orion Pictures" label="Orion Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q119348733" start="1074" end="1098" title="United Artists Releasing" label="United Artists Releasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q25097" start="1201" end="1216" title="Chucky (character)" label="Charles Lee Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q302729" start="1376" end="1388" title="Haitian Vodou" label="voodoo chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q778331" start="1642" end="1646" title="Andy Barclay" label="Andy"/>
<link wikidata="Q638172" start="1819" end="1826" title="peddler" label="peddler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535038" start="2593" end="2609" title="Skid row" label="bad neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362483" start="2694" end="2707" title="gas explosion" label="gas explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17622292" start="3734" end="3745" title="voodoo doll" label="voodoo doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q131543" start="4153" end="4173" title="Electroconvulsive therapy" label="electroshock therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708051" start="4816" end="4827" title="Alan Wilder (actor)" label="Alan Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817459" start="5003" end="5015" title="Mental Floss" label="Mental Floss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239298" start="5036" end="5047" title="Don Mancini" label="Don Mancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="5119" end="5123" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="5199" end="5218" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006663" start="5396" end="5415" title="Cabbage Patch riots" label="Cabbage Patch riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="5521" end="5524" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394642" start="5649" end="5667" title="Cabbage Patch Kids" label="Cabbage Patch Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998814" start="5675" end="5692" title="Trilogy of Terror" label="Trilogy of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q910887" start="5706" end="5711" title="Magic (1978 film)" label="Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q497622" start="5725" end="5736" title="Poltergeist (1982 film)" label="Poltergeist"/>
<link wikidata="Q329466" start="5761" end="5775" title="Freddy Krueger" label="Freddy Krueger"/>
<link wikidata="Q329434" start="5787" end="5812" title="A Nightmare on Elm Street" label="A Nightmare on Elm Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="5829" end="5846" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264438" start="5867" end="5878" title="Living Doll (The Twilight Zone)" label="Living Doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340923" start="5899" end="5910" title="Tom Holland (filmmaker)" label="Tom Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945133" start="5938" end="5952" title="My Buddy (doll)" label="My Buddy dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q501476" start="6097" end="6103" title="Hasbro" label="Hasbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q738410" start="6106" end="6118" title="Charles Band" label="Charles Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374088" start="6163" end="6178" title="Empire Pictures" label="Empire Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492907" start="6239" end="6253" title="Cellar Dweller" label="Cellar Dweller"/>
<link wikidata="Q181228" start="6275" end="6310" title="Puppet Master (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Puppet Master&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018205" start="6494" end="6509" title="David Kirschner" label="David Kirschner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265493" start="6578" end="6603" title="Child&amp;#x27;s Play (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Chucky&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407573" start="6664" end="6675" title="Killer toy" label="killer doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730576" start="6696" end="6717" title="The Dollhouse Murders" label="The Dollhouse Murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134678" start="6799" end="6815" title="An American Tail" label="An American Tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="7018" end="7034" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="7036" end="7050" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="7197" end="7218" title="MGM/UA Communications Co." label="MGM/UA Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811951" start="7228" end="7236" title="Lee Rich" label="Lee Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170818" start="7474" end="7507" title="Batteries Not Included" label="different film with the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q446213" start="7566" end="7576" title="Theatrical blood" label="fake blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q848369" start="7786" end="7798" title="subconscious" label="subconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494434" start="8119" end="8127" title="whodunit" label="whodunit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340923" start="8767" end="8778" title="Tom Holland (filmmaker)" label="Tom Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="8821" end="8837" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q940102" start="8883" end="8898" title="Amazing Stories (1985 TV series)" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q485508" start="9048" end="9062" title="Charles Manson" label="Charles Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48745" start="9064" end="9081" title="Lee Harvey Oswald" label="Lee Harvey Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q310062" start="9087" end="9101" title="James Earl Ray" label="James Earl Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618825" start="9167" end="9185" title="Hillside Strangler" label="Hillside Strangler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121910" start="9193" end="9209" title="Angelo Buono Jr." label="Angelo Buono Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2745288" start="9214" end="9229" title="Kenneth Bianchi" label="Kenneth Bianchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370216" start="9422" end="9434" title="Fatal Beauty" label="Fatal Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q402551" start="9532" end="9542" title="John Lafia" label="John Lafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091483" start="9613" end="9634" title="William Morris Agency" label="William Morris Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q185639" start="9767" end="9781" title="electric chair" label="electric chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q51582" start="10136" end="10152" title="William Friedkin" label="William Friedkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q119348" start="10154" end="10168" title="Irvin Kershner" label="Irvin Kershner"/>
<link wikidata="Q59821" start="10170" end="10181" title="Robert Wise" label="Robert Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q332315" start="10183" end="10195" title="Joseph Ruben" label="Joseph Ruben"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141551" start="10201" end="10216" title="Howard Franklin" label="Howard Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438025" start="10434" end="10446" title="Rocky Morton" label="Rocky Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767678" start="10451" end="10465" title="Annabel Jankel" label="Annabel Jankel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="10877" end="10890" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158297" start="11078" end="11086" title="Damballa" label="Damballa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180240" start="11395" end="11425" title="Writers Guild of America" label="Writers&amp;#x27; Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883007" start="11927" end="11960" title="Hollywood United Methodist Church" label="Hollywood United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q371456" start="12069" end="12081" title="Fright Night" label="Fright Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q16345" start="12164" end="12177" title="Leonard Nimoy" label="Leonard Nimoy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12208" end="12237" title="Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home" label="Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q311271" start="12593" end="12605" title="John Lithgow" label="John Lithgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370216" start="12713" end="12725" title="Fatal Beauty" label="Fatal Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q768685" start="12733" end="12740" title="Ed Gale" label="Ed Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418253" start="12980" end="12990" title="sound chip" label="sound chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q918367" start="13177" end="13196" title="Mississippi Burning" label="Mississippi Burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418807" start="13355" end="13377" title="Spontaneous Combustion (film)" label="Spontaneous Combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q259468" start="13395" end="13409" title="Jessica Walter" label="Jessica Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q140017" start="13444" end="13464" title="Mercedes McCambridge" label="Mercedes McCambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515125" start="13476" end="13482" title="Pazuzu (The Exorcist)" label="Pazuzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q274167" start="13492" end="13504" title="The Exorcist (film)" label="The Exorcist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="13818" end="13839" title="Principal photography" label="Principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952378" start="14060" end="14096" title="1988 Writers Guild of America strike" label="1988 Writers Guild of America strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="14398" end="14408" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="14490" end="14497" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="14502" end="14515" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962738" start="14522" end="14541" title="Brewster Apartments" label="Brewster Apartments"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283923" start="14573" end="14589" title="Diversey Parkway (Chicago)" label="Diversey Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699365" start="14755" end="14769" title="Culver Studios" label="Culver Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q493378" start="14773" end="14796" title="Culver City, California" label="Culver City, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q338720" start="14900" end="14913" title="North Chicago, Illinois" label="North Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324863" start="15021" end="15062" title="Carson, Pirie, Scott and Company Building" label="Carson, Pirie, Scott and Company Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044340" start="15123" end="15133" title="wind chill" label="wind chill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492258" start="15406" end="15420" title="South Lawndale, Chicago" label="South Lawndale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6363591" start="15429" end="15469" title="Illinois Eastern Hospital for the Insane" label="Illinois Eastern Hospital for the Insane"/>
<link wikidata="Q578351" start="15473" end="15491" title="Kankakee, Illinois" label="Kankakee, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076943" start="15969" end="15976" title="Tiffany Valentine" label="Tiffany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089303" start="15999" end="16014" title="Bride of Chucky" label="Bride of Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q20872877" start="16092" end="16106" title="Brock Winkless" label="Brock Winkless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822415" start="16368" end="16380" title="Tony Gardner (designer)" label="Tony Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822415" start="16384" end="16398" title="Alterian, Inc." label="Alterian, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q768685" start="16644" end="16651" title="Ed Gale" label="Ed Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q494002" start="16873" end="16885" title="animatronics" label="animatronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q355995" start="16990" end="17001" title="Chris Walas" label="Chris Walas"/>
<link wikidata="Q241958" start="17062" end="17070" title="Gremlins" label="Gremlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q468703" start="17122" end="17132" title="The Fly II" label="The Fly II"/>
<link wikidata="Q495321" start="17153" end="17163" title="Rick Baker" label="Rick Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11333" start="17223" end="17235" title="Kevin Yagher" label="Kevin Yagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q20872877" start="17861" end="17875" title="Brock Winkless" label="Brock Winkless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264442" start="18000" end="18018" title="forced perspective" label="forced perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q445745" start="18111" end="18120" title="rough cut" label="rough cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q189505" start="18382" end="18386" title="Jaws (film)" label="Jaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q103569" start="18402" end="18407" title="Alien (film)" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305817" start="19856" end="19861" title="Drano" label="Drano"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="20593" end="20604" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="20628" end="20632" title="MIDI" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q114223261" start="20797" end="20812" title="Waxwork Records" label="Waxwork Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q20985301" start="20908" end="20922" title="David Chackler" label="David Chackler"/>
<link wikidata="Q356068" start="20997" end="21011" title="Kirk Kerkorian" label="Kirk Kerkorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="21227" end="21246" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="21328" end="21337" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21411" end="21451" title="Halloween 4: The Return of Michael Myers" label="Halloween 4: The Return of Michael Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q755999" start="21503" end="21515" title="Veterans Day" label="Veterans Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q854995" start="21595" end="21611" title="Television advertisement" label="television spots"/>
<link wikidata="Q188845" start="22116" end="22124" title="Rain Man" label="Rain Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="22209" end="22212" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981249" start="22233" end="22250" title="MGM Home Entertainment" label="MGM/UA Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="22302" end="22305" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="22395" end="22412" title="Warner Home Video" label="Warner Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084961" start="22794" end="22829" title="20th Century Fox Home Entertainment" label="20th Century Fox Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22973" end="22977" title="16:9 aspect ratio" label="16x9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="23003" end="23010" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q238612" start="23011" end="23023" title="5.1 surround sound" label="5.1 surround"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="23043" end="23049" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="23055" end="23062" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="23063" end="23073" title="Stereophonic sound" label="2.0 stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="23569" end="23581" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="24144" end="24158" title="Scream Factory" label="Scream Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005797" start="24277" end="24314" title="Universal Pictures Home Entertainment" label="Universal Pictures Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953724" start="24510" end="24526" title="Ultra HD Blu-ray" label="Ultra HD Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="25059" end="25074" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="25450" end="25460" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="25653" end="25664" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="25735" end="25746" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046243" start="25838" end="25849" title="Caryn James" label="Caryn James"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="25859" end="25877" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="26066" end="26073" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q16104561" start="26395" end="26407" title="Kevin Thomas (film critic)" label="Kevin Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="26421" end="26438" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q371456" start="26557" end="26569" title="Fright Night" label="Fright Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q4219471" start="26645" end="26654" title="Dave Kehr" label="Dave Kehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="26668" end="26683" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="26850" end="26869" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107374" start="27217" end="27242" title="The Monthly Film Bulletin" label="The Monthly Film Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q731195" start="27410" end="27424" title="Leonard Maltin" label="Leonard Maltin"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="27707" end="27710" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018205" start="27897" end="27912" title="David Kirschner" label="David Kirschner"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="28780" end="28783" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="28788" end="28791" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="28983" end="28986" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981249" start="29090" end="29096" title="MGM Home Entertainment" label="MGM/UA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089283" start="29225" end="29244" title="Child&amp;#x27;s Play 3" label="Child&amp;#x27;s Play 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="29333" end="29347" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6938071" start="29401" end="29425" title="murder of Suzanne Capper" label="murder of Suzanne Capper"/>
<link wikidata="Q460887" start="29434" end="29456" title="murder of James Bulger" label="murder of James Bulger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089281" start="29885" end="29904" title="Child&amp;#x27;s Play 2" label="Child&amp;#x27;s Play 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089283" start="29925" end="29944" title="Child&amp;#x27;s Play 3" label="Child&amp;#x27;s Play 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089303" start="29965" end="29980" title="Bride of Chucky" label="Bride of Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q925421" start="30001" end="30015" title="Seed of Chucky" label="Seed of Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q12161666" start="30036" end="30051" title="Curse of Chucky" label="Curse of Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130946" start="30072" end="30086" title="Cult of Chucky" label="Cult of Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q106824359" start="30138" end="30144" title="Chucky (TV series)" label="Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="30224" end="30243" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q311591" start="30388" end="30406" title="Seth Grahame-Smith" label="Seth Grahame-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q20740875" start="30580" end="30595" title="Gabriel Bateman" label="Gabriel Bateman"/>
<link wikidata="Q778331" start="30599" end="30611" title="Andy Barclay" label="Andy Barclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q210547" start="30616" end="30628" title="Aubrey Plaza" label="Aubrey Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q210447" start="30655" end="30666" title="Mark Hamill" label="Mark Hamill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561551" start="30757" end="30787" title="List of American films of 1988" label="List of American films of 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264438" start="30790" end="30813" title="Living Doll (The Twilight Zone)" label="&amp;quot;Living Doll&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="30839" end="30856" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150602" start="30902" end="30907" title="Dolls (1987 film)" label="Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998814" start="30961" end="30978" title="Trilogy of Terror" label="Trilogy of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146378" start="31066" end="31075" title="Zapatlela" label="Zapatlela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571" start="31090" end="31097" title="Marathi language" label="Marathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13119819" start="31182" end="31196" title="Mahesh Kothare" label="Mahesh Kothare"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534793" wikidata="Q263269" url="?curid=534793" title="Glass Hammer">
<text>Glass Hammer is an American progressive rock band from Chattanooga, Tennessee, created and led by Steve Babb and Fred Schendel.

Babb and Schendel, who founded the band in 1992, are the only constant members in the lineup, having surrounded themselves by various guest performers. The different lineups included several lead vocalists, including Michelle Young and Jon Davison. Originally a studio project only, the band occasionally performs live, especially since the early 2010s, but never does large-scale tours.

== History ==
=== Origins and early years (1992-1997) ===
Schendel and Babb (then credited as &quot;Stephen DeArqe&quot;) first met in 1986, and formed Glass Hammer in 1992 when they began to write and record &quot;Journey of the Dunadan&quot;, a concept album based on the story of Aragorn from J.R.R. Tolkien&#x27;s &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; on which they performed most vocals and instruments. To their surprise, the album, released the following year, sold several thousand units via the Internet, TV home shopping, and phone orders, convincing them that Glass Hammer was a project worth continuing.

Embarking on a small tour in the south-east of the US, the band was joined by singer Michelle Young (who had been featured as a guest on a single track of &quot;Journey of the Dunadan&quot;), and drummer Walter Moore. With this line-up, they released their second album &quot;Perelandra&quot; in 1995, with Moore performing guitars instead of drums (which were handled by Schendel), and all four members performing lead vocals. It is another concept album, this time inspired by C. S. Lewis&#x27; &quot;The Chronicles of Narnia&quot; and &quot;Space Trilogy&quot; book series.

After a small tour to support the album, Young left the band in 1997 to pursue a solo career. The same year, the band released &quot;Live and Revived&quot;, a live/compilation album consisting of recorded live rehearsals from the previous tour and unreleased material written shortly after the release of &quot;Journey of the Dunadan&quot;. The album was originally limited to 1000 copies, but was later re-released. In parallel to Glass Hammer, Babb and Schendel created a techno/dance project, titled TMA-2, releasing two unsuccessful albums, &quot;Artifact One&quot; (1996) and &quot;Tick Tock Lilies&quot; (1998), before dropping the project.

=== Moore / Bogdanowicz years (1998-2009) ===

In 1998, Glass Hammer released their third studio album, &quot;On to Evermore&quot;, which saw Moore acting as main lead vocalist. It was followed two years later by &quot;Chronometree&quot;, another concept album following a young man who becomes convinced that aliens are trying to communicate with him through his albums. Guest Brad Marler provided lead vocals for the album.

Susie Bogdanowicz, who had provided backing vocals on &quot;Chronometree&quot;, joined the band as a full-time member, while Moore stopped acting as drummer, acting solely as singer on studio works, and also as guitarist in concerts; this would go on to become Glass Hammer&#x27;s longest and steadiest line-up, which would be featured on the next four albums, the first being &quot;The Middle-Earth Album&quot; in 2001, their second album based on &quot;Lord of the Rings&quot; after &quot;Journey of the Dunadan&quot;. Jokingly marketed as a live album recorded during a performance at &quot;The Prancing Pony&quot;, an inn in &quot;Lord of the Rings&quot;, the album&#x27;s first half emulated the sound of a band actually performing at the inn, while the second half was recorded like a traditional studio album. &quot;The Middle-Earth Album&quot; was followed by &quot;Lex Rex&quot; the following year.

The band&#x27;s seventh studio album &quot;Shadowlands&quot; was released in 2004. The following year, &quot;The Inconsolable Secret&quot; would mark the last album with the line-up effective since &quot;The Middle-Earth Album&quot;, as Moore would leave his role as full-time member following the release of the album. In parallel to these studio albums, this line-up had also recorded and released the live album &quot;Live at Nearfest&quot; and the live DVD &quot;Lex Live&quot;, both recorded in 2003 and released in 2004.

After the departure of Moore, Glass Hammer recruited Carl Groves as their new male lead vocalists, recording and releasing the live DVD &quot;Live at Belmont&quot; in 2006. After a compilation album of rare/previously unreleased tracks titled &quot;The Compilations&quot;, the band released their first studio album with Groves, &quot;Culture of Ascent&quot;, in 2007. In 2009, the band took a completely different musical direction for their tenth studio album, &quot;Three Cheers for the Broken-Hearted&quot;, a pop rock album without Groves with focus on Bogdanowicz&#x27;s vocals. The album was received negatively by fans due to departing from the band&#x27;s usual progressive sound; although Schendel and Babb defended the quality of the album, they later admitted that they should not have released it under the Glass Hammer name.

=== Davison years (2009-2014) ===

Later in 2009, both Bogdanowicz and Groves left Glass Hammer, and Schendel and Babb recruited new singer Jon Davison and new guitarist Kamran Alan Shikoh. Together, this new line-up released three studio albums: &quot;If&quot; in 2010, &quot;Cor Cordium&quot; in 2011, and &quot;Perilous&quot; in 2012. The albums saw a return to progressive rock, with a shift towards a symphonic rock-oriented sound compared to previous albums. All three albums were very positively received, and resulted in a notable gain in popularity for the band.

In 2013, the band re-released&quot;The Inconsolable Secret&quot;, with several tracks re-recorded with Davison and Shikoh and included in a third disc.

Meanwhile, Davison was selected by Yes as their new lead singer, which resulted in him having a reduced role in Glass Hammer.

In 2013, Bogdanowicz and Groves re-joined Glass Hammer, while Aaron Raulston joined as full-time drummer on January 17. With this seven-members line-up, the band released &quot;Ode to Echo&quot; in 2014, featuring all current and former full-time lead vocalists in the band&#x27;s history, with current members Babb, Schendel, Bogdanowicz, Groves and Davison, and contributions by former vocalists Walter Moore and Michelle Young. After the release, Davison would quit working with the band due to his work with Yes, although he would only be officially removed from the line-up years later.

=== Recent years and live performances (2015-present) ===

With the line-up now consisting of Schendel, Babb, Bogdanowicz, Groves, Shikoh, and Raulston, the band released their fifteenth studio album &quot;The Breaking of the World&quot; in 2015.

In 2016, Carl Groves left the band once again, with the band choosing to focus on Bogdanowicz as vocalist. With this line-up, they released &quot;Valkyrie&quot;, a concept album following &quot;a soldier’s struggle to return home from the horrors of war, to the girl who loves him and must ultimately find her way to him&quot;; the album&#x27;s vocals were focused on Bogdanowicz, although Schendel and Babb also performed secondary lead vocals for the first time in years. In a shift from their usual recording methods, the band rehearsed the album for several weeks, in order to record the album as if it were an actual live performance.

In 2017, the band released &quot;Untold Tales&quot;, a compilation album of unreleased or hard to find Glass Hammer recordings originating from the early 90s to 2017, and as such featured both current and former members of Glass Hammer. On the 2018 Cruise to the Edge festival, on which he was also performing with Yes, Davison performed with Glass Hammer as a guest, marking the first time he performed live with the band. On April 18, 2018, Glass Hammer announced their upcoming live album &quot;Mostly Live&quot;, which does not feature Kamran Alan Shikoh; they also removed Shikoh from the band&#x27;s lineup on their official Facebook, stating in a post &quot;And then there were four.&quot;

On August 13, 2018, after several weeks of teasing via videos featuring the character of Tom from their fourth album &quot;Chronometree&quot; released in 2000, the band announced their seventeenth studio album, &quot;Chronomonaut&quot; for an October 12, 2018 release. A a sequel to &quot;Chronometree&quot;, the album follows Tom &quot;in the modern day though his mid-life crisis&quot;, as &quot;the voices have returned and have been urging Tom to time-travel back to the glory days of the early prog scene.&quot; The release coincided with a remastered re-release of &quot;Chronometree&quot; with a bonus track.

On December 8, 2019, the band published two videos about their next album, &quot;Dreaming City&quot;, stating that &quot;all the basic tracks are down. All the songs have their shapes and their arrangements.&quot; They stated that their inspirations included 1970s&#x27; Rush, Hawkwind, and Michael Moorcock&#x27;s Elric of Melniboné novels (the first novel in the series being 1961&#x27;s &quot;The Dreaming City&quot;); it would be a concept album themed around sword and sorcery, but in a &quot;more Tongue-in-cheek [way than] people manage to understand sometimes.&quot; The album would be set in the same universe as &quot;The Inconsolable Secret&quot;.

== Music ==

While many musicians have appeared on Glass Hammer albums over the years, Babb and Schendel have remained the core of the band. Both men play a variety of instruments, but Babb mainly concentrates on bass guitar and keyboards while Schendel also plays keyboards as well as various guitars and drums (until the addition of live drummer Matt Mendians to the studio recording band in 2004). They also sing, although a number of other vocalists (most notably Michelle Young, Walter Moore, Susie Bogdanowicz, Carl Groves, and Jon Davison) have also handled lead vocal duties.

Lyrically, Glass Hammer is inspired mostly by their love of fantasy literature (most notably Tolkien and C. S. Lewis) and by their Christian faith. Although by their own admission they have tried to avoid becoming an overtly Christian band, their 2002 release &quot;Lex Rex&quot; was a concept album based on a Roman soldier&#x27;s encounter with Jesus.

Musically, their most apparent influences are Yes, Kansas, Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer, and to a less noticeable extent, Genesis. While Glass Hammer has, for the most part, combined those influences into a characteristic style of their own, they made much more direct references to the aforementioned bands on their 2000 album &quot;Chronometree&quot;, which told the story of a drug-addled progressive rock fan who becomes convinced aliens are speaking to him through the music he listens to.

==Personnel==

=== Members ===

 Current members
* Fred Schendel – keyboards, guitars, lead and backing vocals , drums 
* Steve Babb – bass, keyboards, lead and backing backing vocals , percussion 
* Aaron Raulston - drums 
* Hannah Pryor – lead vocals 

Former members
* Michelle Young – lead vocals , keyboards 
* Walter Moore – drums , lead vocals, guitar 
* Susie Bogdanowicz - lead vocals 
* Carl Groves – lead vocals 
* Jon Davison – lead vocals 
* Kamran Alan Shikoh – guitars, electric sitar 
Former session/guest musicians
* David Carter – guitars 
* Brad Marler – lead vocals 
* Terry Clouse – guitars 
* Sarah Snyder – vocals 
* Bethany Warren (Susie Bogdanowicz&#x27;s younger sister) – vocals 
* Flo Paris – vocals 
* Matt Mendians – drums 
* The Adonia String Trio – string trio 
** Rebecca James – violin
** Susan Whitacre – viola
** Rachel Beckmann/Hackenberger – cello
* David Wallimann – guitars 
* Randall Williams – drums 
===Timeline===
==Discography==
Studio albums
* &quot;Journey of the Dunadan&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Perelandra&quot; (1995)
* &quot;On to Evermore&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Chronometree&quot; (2000)
* &quot;The Middle-Earth Album&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Lex Rex&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Shadowlands&quot; (2004)
* &quot;The Inconsolable Secret&quot; (2005, re-recorded in 2013)
* &quot;Culture of Ascent&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Three Cheers for the Broken-Hearted&quot; (2009)
* &quot;If&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Cor Cordium&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Perilous&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Ode to Echo&quot; (2014)
* &quot;The Breaking of the World&quot; (2015)
* &quot;Valkyrie&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Chronomonaut&quot; (2018)
* &quot;Dreaming City&quot; (2020)
* &quot;Skallagrim - Into the Breach&quot; (2021)
* &quot;At the Gate&quot; (2022)
* &quot;ARISE&quot; (2023)
Live albums
* &quot;Live and Revived&quot; (1997; also a compilation of previously unreleased tracks)
* &quot;Live at Nearfest&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Double Live&quot; (2015)
* &quot;Mostly Live&quot; (2018)

Live DVDs
* &quot;Lex Live&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Live at Belmont&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Live at the Tivoli&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Double Live&quot; (2015)

Others
* &quot;Love Changes&quot; (1995) – collaborative album by Tracy Cloud featuring Glass Hammer
* &quot;Harbour of Joy&quot; (1996) – collaborative Camel tribute album by various artists; provided the song &quot;Air Born&quot;
* &quot;The Compilations&quot; (2006) – compilation of rare/previously unreleased material from 1996-2004
* &quot;One&quot; (2010) – old recordings by Babb and Schendel from 1991-1992
* &quot;The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft&quot; (2012) – collaborative album by various artists; provided the song &quot;Cool Air&quot;
* &quot;Untold Tales&quot; (2017) – compilation of rare/previously unreleased material from 1993-2017
* &quot;A Matter of Time – Volume 1&quot; (2020) – reworked tracks from previous albums

Related
* &quot;Artifact One&quot; (1996) – album by TMA-2, a techno/dance project by Babb and Schendel
* &quot;Tick Tock Lilies&quot; (1998) – second and last TMA-2 album
* &quot;David &amp; Goliath - the Musical&quot; (2002) – Babb and Schendel 
* &quot;Do Not See Me Rabbit&quot; (2011) – Schendel solo album, released under the name Trurl
==References==
==External links==
* Allmusic band description entry
* Glass Hammer Discography on Amazon.com

===Interviews===
* Feature article and interview in Pathways to Excellence&#x27;s Winter 2005 and Spring 2006 issues</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q263269" start="0" end="12" title="Glass Hammer" label="Glass Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="28" end="44" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="55" end="77" title="Chattanooga, Tennessee" label="Chattanooga, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837302" start="346" end="360" title="Michelle Young (musician)" label="Michelle Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400860" start="365" end="376" title="Jon Davison" label="Jon Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q263488" start="733" end="755" title="Journey of the Dunadan" label="Journey of the Dunadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="765" end="778" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q180322" start="801" end="808" title="Aragorn" label="Aragorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="814" end="828" title="J.R.R. Tolkien" label="J.R.R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="842" end="863" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="1018" end="1026" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837302" start="1216" end="1230" title="Michelle Young (musician)" label="Michelle Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122892" start="1407" end="1417" title="Perelandra (album)" label="Perelandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="1610" end="1621" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q483412" start="1634" end="1658" title="The Chronicles of Narnia" label="The Chronicles of Narnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070438" start="1675" end="1688" title="The Space Trilogy" label="Space Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="1868" end="1872" title="live album" label="live"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="1873" end="1890" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="2183" end="2189" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="2190" end="2195" title="Dance music" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091632" start="2467" end="2481" title="On to Evermore" label="On to Evermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114236" start="2576" end="2588" title="Chronometree" label="Chronometree"/>
<link wikidata="Q14479752" start="3167" end="3189" title="The Middle-Earth Album" label="The Middle-Earth Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q17508969" start="3736" end="3747" title="Shadowlands (Glass Hammer album)" label="Shadowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509232" start="3802" end="3825" title="The Inconsolable Secret" label="The Inconsolable Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992187" start="4556" end="4573" title="Culture of Ascent" label="Culture of Ascent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536696" start="4690" end="4725" title="Three Cheers for the Broken-Hearted" label="Three Cheers for the Broken-Hearted"/>
<link wikidata="Q484641" start="4735" end="4743" title="pop rock" label="pop rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400860" start="5201" end="5212" title="Jon Davison" label="Jon Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878196" start="5314" end="5316" title="If (Glass Hammer album)" label="If"/>
<link wikidata="Q869030" start="5338" end="5349" title="Cor Cordium" label="Cor Cordium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168522" start="5375" end="5383" title="Perilous" label="Perilous"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="5467" end="5481" title="symphonic rock" label="symphonic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="5822" end="5825" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059482" start="6091" end="6102" title="Ode to Echo" label="Ode to Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19801764" start="6713" end="6738" title="The Breaking of the World" label="The Breaking of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451279" start="6901" end="6909" title="Valkyrie (album)" label="Valkyrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="6919" end="6932" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q42529966" start="7429" end="7441" title="Untold Tales" label="Untold Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="8027" end="8035" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114236" start="8217" end="8229" title="Chronometree" label="Chronometree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971087" start="8640" end="8648" title="remaster" label="remaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="8982" end="8986" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q285966" start="8988" end="8996" title="Hawkwind" label="Hawkwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q316138" start="9002" end="9018" title="Michael Moorcock" label="Michael Moorcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333353" start="9026" end="9044" title="Elric of Melniboné" label="Elric of Melniboné"/>
<link wikidata="Q21934300" start="9107" end="9124" title="The Dreaming City" label="The Dreaming City"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="9147" end="9160" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999690" start="9175" end="9192" title="sword and sorcery" label="sword and sorcery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993049" start="9214" end="9229" title="Tongue-in-cheek" label="Tongue-in-cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509232" start="9339" end="9362" title="The Inconsolable Secret" label="The Inconsolable Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837302" start="9839" end="9853" title="Michelle Young (musician)" label="Michelle Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400860" start="9905" end="9916" title="Jon Davison" label="Jon Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="10061" end="10072" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="10242" end="10255" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="10267" end="10272" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="10303" end="10308" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="10357" end="10360" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q204328" start="10362" end="10368" title="Kansas (band)" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q273171" start="10370" end="10396" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q151012" start="10431" end="10438" title="Genesis (band)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114236" start="10643" end="10655" title="Chronometree" label="Chronometree"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="10872" end="10881" title="Keyboard instrument" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="10883" end="10889" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045845" start="10892" end="10896" title="Lead vocalist" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q798487" start="10901" end="10915" title="Backing vocalist" label="backing vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="10918" end="10923" title="Drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="10940" end="10944" title="Bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="10991" end="11001" title="Percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837302" start="11077" end="11091" title="Michelle Young (musician)" label="Michelle Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400860" start="11231" end="11242" title="Jon Davison" label="Jon Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11877740" start="11290" end="11304" title="electric sitar" label="electric sitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q923298" start="11586" end="11597" title="string trio" label="string trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="11618" end="11624" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80284" start="11645" end="11650" title="viola" label="viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="11685" end="11690" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q263488" start="11801" end="11823" title="Journey of the Dunadan" label="Journey of the Dunadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122892" start="11845" end="11855" title="Perelandra (album)" label="Perelandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091632" start="11877" end="11891" title="On to Evermore" label="On to Evermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114236" start="11913" end="11925" title="Chronometree" label="Chronometree"/>
<link wikidata="Q14479752" start="11947" end="11969" title="The Middle-Earth Album" label="The Middle-Earth Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394117" start="11991" end="11998" title="Lex Rex (album)" label="Lex Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q17508969" start="12020" end="12031" title="Shadowlands (Glass Hammer album)" label="Shadowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509232" start="12053" end="12076" title="The Inconsolable Secret" label="The Inconsolable Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992187" start="12119" end="12136" title="Culture of Ascent" label="Culture of Ascent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536696" start="12158" end="12193" title="Three Cheers for the Broken-Hearted" label="Three Cheers for the Broken-Hearted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878196" start="12215" end="12217" title="If (Glass Hammer album)" label="If"/>
<link wikidata="Q869030" start="12239" end="12250" title="Cor Cordium" label="Cor Cordium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168522" start="12272" end="12280" title="Perilous" label="Perilous"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059482" start="12302" end="12313" title="Ode to Echo" label="Ode to Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19801764" start="12335" end="12360" title="The Breaking of the World" label="The Breaking of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451279" start="12382" end="12390" title="Valkyrie (album)" label="Valkyrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q60745888" start="12412" end="12424" title="Chronomonaut" label="Chronomonaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="12640" end="12651" title="compilation album" label="compilation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12984" end="13003" title="Collaboration#Music" label="collaborative album"/>
<link wikidata="Q612471" start="13094" end="13099" title="Camel (band)" label="Camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="13100" end="13113" title="tribute album" label="tribute album"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297" start="13158" end="13166" title="Moonmadness" label="Air Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q42529966" start="13497" end="13509" title="Untold Tales" label="Untold Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="13742" end="13748" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="13749" end="13754" title="Dance music" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="14121" end="14131" title="Amazon.com" label="Amazon.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534794" wikidata="Q2739680" url="?curid=534794" title="Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence">
<text>The Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) is an international scientific society devoted to promote research in, and responsible use of, artificial intelligence. AAAI also aims to increase public understanding of artificial intelligence (AI), improve the teaching and training of AI practitioners, and provide guidance for research planners and funders concerning the importance and potential of current AI developments and future directions.

==History==
The organization was founded in 1979 under the name &quot;American Association for Artificial Intelligence&quot; and changed its name in 2007 to &quot;Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence&quot;. It has in excess of 4,000 members worldwide. In its early history, the organization was presided over by notable figures in computer science such as Allen Newell, Edward Feigenbaum, Marvin Minsky and John McCarthy. Since July 2022, Francesca Rossi has been serving as president. She will serve as president until July 2024 when president-elect Stephen Smith will begin his term.

==Conferences and publications==
The AAAI provides many services to the Artificial Intelligence community. The AAAI sponsors many conferences and symposia each year as well as providing support to 14 journals in the field of artificial intelligence. AAAI produces a quarterly publication, AI Magazine, which seeks to publish significant new research and literature across the entire field of artificial intelligence and to help members to keep abreast of research outside their immediate specialties. The magazine has been published continuously since 1980.

AAAI organises the &quot;AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence&quot;, which is considered to be one of the top conferences in the field of artificial intelligence.

==Awards==
In addition to AAAI Fellowship, the AAAI grants several other awards:

===ACM-AAAI Allen Newell Award===
The ACM-AAAI Allen Newell Award is presented to an individual selected for career contributions that have breadth within computer science, or that bridge computer science and other disciplines. This endowed award is accompanied by a prize of $10,000, and is supported by the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and by individual contributions.

Past recipients:
* Fred Brooks (1994)
* Joshua Lederberg (1995)
* Carver Mead (1997)
* Saul Amarel (1998)
* Nancy Leveson (1999)
* Lotfi A. Zadeh (2000)
* Ruzena Bajcsy (2001)
* Peter Chen (2002)
* David Haussler and Judea Pearl (2003)
* Richard P. Gabriel (2004)
* Jack Minker (2005)
* Karen Spärck Jones (2006)
* Leonidas Guibas (2007)
* Barbara J. Grosz and Joseph Halpern (2008)
* Michael I. Jordan (2009)
* Takeo Kanade (2010)
* Stephanie Forrest (2011)
* Moshe Tennenholtz and Yoav Shoham (2012)
* Jon Kleinberg (2014)
* Eric Horvitz (2015)
* Jitendra Malik (2016)
* Margaret A. Boden (2017)
* Henry Kautz (2018)
* Lydia Kavraki and Daphne Koller (2019)
* Moshe Y. Vardi and Hector J. Levesque (2020)
* Carla Gomes (2021)
* Stuart Russell and Bernhard Schölkopf (2022)

===AAAI/EAAI Outstanding Educator Award===
The annual AAAI/EAAI Outstanding Educator Award was created in 2016 to honor a person (or group of people) who has made major contributions to AI education that provide long-lasting benefits to the AI community.

Past recipients:
* Peter Norvig and Stuart Russell (2016)
* Sebastian Thrun (2017)
* Todd W. Neller (2018)
* Ashok Goel (2019)
* Marie desJardins (2020)
* Michael Wooldridge (2021)
* AI4K12.org team: David S. Touretzky, Christina Gardner-McCune, Fred G. Martin, and Deborah Seehorn (2022)
* Ayanna Howard (2023)

===AAAI Squirrel AI Award for Artificial Intelligence for the Benefit of Humanity===

The AAAI Squirrel AI Award for Artificial Intelligence for the Benefit of Humanity is a $1 million award that recognizes the positive impacts of AI to meaningfully improve, protect, and enhance human life.

==Membership Grades==
===AAAI Senior Members===
Senior Member status is designed to recognize AAAI members who have achieved significant accomplishments within the field of artificial intelligence. To be eligible for nomination for Senior Member, candidates must be consecutive members of AAAI for at least five years and have been active in the professional arena for at least ten years. Applications should include information that details the candidate&#x27;s scholarship, leadership, and/or professional service.

==See also==

* List of computer science awards

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2739680" start="4" end="62" title="Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence" label="Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739680" start="64" end="68" title="Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence" label="AAAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q955824" start="90" end="108" title="Learned society" label="scientific society"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="165" end="188" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="825" end="841" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q439245" start="850" end="862" title="Allen Newell" label="Allen Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q92823" start="864" end="881" title="Edward Feigenbaum" label="Edward Feigenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q204815" start="883" end="896" title="Marvin Minsky" label="Marvin Minsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q92739" start="901" end="914" title="John McCarthy (computer scientist)" label="John McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24004971" start="933" end="948" title="Francesca Rossi" label="Francesca Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18748042" start="1836" end="1847" title="AAAI Fellow" label="AAAI Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="2268" end="2303" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="Association for Computing Machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q92609" start="2364" end="2375" title="Fred Brooks" label="Fred Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q218823" start="2385" end="2401" title="Joshua Lederberg" label="Joshua Lederberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q62910" start="2411" end="2422" title="Carver Mead" label="Carver Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427272" start="2432" end="2443" title="Saul Amarel" label="Saul Amarel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11773" start="2453" end="2466" title="Nancy Leveson" label="Nancy Leveson"/>
<link wikidata="Q92767" start="2476" end="2490" title="Lotfi A. Zadeh" label="Lotfi A. Zadeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10959" start="2500" end="2513" title="Ruzena Bajcsy" label="Ruzena Bajcsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q92831" start="2523" end="2533" title="Peter Chen" label="Peter Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q92714" start="2543" end="2557" title="David Haussler" label="David Haussler"/>
<link wikidata="Q92824" start="2562" end="2573" title="Judea Pearl" label="Judea Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328227" start="2583" end="2601" title="Richard P. Gabriel" label="Richard P. Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114143" start="2611" end="2622" title="Jack Minker" label="Jack Minker"/>
<link wikidata="Q14254" start="2632" end="2650" title="Karen Spärck Jones" label="Karen Spärck Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229792" start="2660" end="2675" title="Leonidas Guibas" label="Leonidas Guibas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995108" start="2685" end="2701" title="Barbara J. Grosz" label="Barbara J. Grosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283747" start="2706" end="2720" title="Joseph Halpern" label="Joseph Halpern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308285" start="2730" end="2747" title="Michael I. Jordan" label="Michael I. Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q92675" start="2757" end="2769" title="Takeo Kanade" label="Takeo Kanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429043" start="2779" end="2796" title="Stephanie Forrest" label="Stephanie Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q29351163" start="2806" end="2823" title="Moshe Tennenholtz" label="Moshe Tennenholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054210" start="2828" end="2839" title="Yoav Shoham" label="Yoav Shoham"/>
<link wikidata="Q92978" start="2849" end="2862" title="Jon Kleinberg" label="Jon Kleinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386755" start="2872" end="2884" title="Eric Horvitz" label="Eric Horvitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6203258" start="2894" end="2908" title="Jitendra Malik" label="Jitendra Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759197" start="2918" end="2935" title="Margaret A. Boden" label="Margaret A. Boden"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879460" start="2945" end="2956" title="Henry Kautz" label="Henry Kautz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11749" start="2966" end="2979" title="Lydia Kavraki" label="Lydia Kavraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755" start="2984" end="2997" title="Daphne Koller" label="Daphne Koller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585964" start="3007" end="3021" title="Moshe Vardi" label="Moshe Y. Vardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5696759" start="3026" end="3044" title="Hector Levesque" label="Hector J. Levesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q41803891" start="3054" end="3065" title="Carla Gomes" label="Carla Gomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656334" start="3075" end="3089" title="Stuart J. Russell" label="Stuart Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894234" start="3094" end="3112" title="Bernhard Schölkopf" label="Bernhard Schölkopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q92832" start="3396" end="3408" title="Peter Norvig" label="Peter Norvig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656334" start="3413" end="3427" title="Stuart J. Russell" label="Stuart Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q62901" start="3437" end="3452" title="Sebastian Thrun" label="Sebastian Thrun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3462" end="3476" title="Todd W. Neller" label="Todd W. Neller"/>
<link wikidata="Q35488430" start="3486" end="3496" title="Ashok Goel" label="Ashok Goel"/>
<link wikidata="Q55956070" start="3506" end="3522" title="Marie desJardins" label="Marie desJardins"/>
<link wikidata="Q33125489" start="3532" end="3550" title="Michael Wooldridge (computer scientist)" label="Michael Wooldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176469" start="3577" end="3595" title="David S. Touretzky" label="David S. Touretzky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3597" end="3621" title="Christina Gardner-McCune" label="Christina Gardner-McCune"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3623" end="3637" title="Fred G. Martin" label="Fred G. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502477" start="3643" end="3658" title="Deborah Seehorn" label="Deborah Seehorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11644" start="3668" end="3681" title="Ayanna Howard" label="Ayanna Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q85802786" start="3785" end="3796" title="Squirrel AI" label="Squirrel AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779407" start="4517" end="4548" title="List of computer science awards" label="List of computer science awards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534795" wikidata="Q3009812" url="?curid=534795" title="Quercus wislizeni">
<text>Quercus wislizeni, known by the common name interior live oak, is an evergreen oak, highly variable and often shrubby, found in western North America.

==Description==

It is a large shrub or tree growing to tall, although where it is common in the low-elevation Sierra Nevada foothills it seldom exceeds . The dark-green leaves—appearing grayish from a distance—are usually small, long, thick, and often spiny-toothed at higher elevations, particularly on young trees. The male flowers are on catkins, the female flowers in groups of 2–4 in leaf axils. The acorns are long, and mature the second season (about 18 months) after flowering.

Specimens can live for up to 200 years.

==Taxonomy==
Although originally published by Alphonse Pyramus de Candolle as &quot;wislizeni&quot;, some sources mistakenly spelled the specific epithet &quot;wislizenii&quot;. Correct spelling is with one &quot;I&quot;, per ICN article 60C.2. Friedrich Adolph Wislizenus&#x27;s specimen was thought by de Candolle to have been collected in Chihuahua, Mexico. German-born American botanist Georg Engelmann later corrected the location to the American fork of the Sacramento River near Auburn, California.

California physician and botanist (and one of the founding fathers of the California Academy of Sciences) Albert Kellogg described an oak in an 1855 publication as &quot;Quercus arcoglandis&quot; (spur acorn oak), apparently the same species as &quot;Q. wislizeni&quot;. This clearly predates French-Swiss botanist de Candolle&#x27;s 1864 name, and if confirmed to be this same taxon would have priority.

Currently there are two recognized varieties of interior live oak:
* &quot;Q. wislizeni&quot; A. DC. var. &quot;wislizeni&quot; (1864)
* &quot;Q. wislizeni&quot; A. DC. var. &quot;frutescens&quot; Engelm (1878). This is an invalid taxon. Engelmann&#x27;s &quot;Q. wislizeni&quot; var. &quot;frutescens&quot; description is virtually identical to de Candolle&#x27;s &quot;Q. wislizeni,&quot; while Engelmann&#x27;s &quot;Q. wislizeni&quot; description most closely matches Kellogg&#x27;s &quot;Q. morehus&quot;.

=== Etymology ===
It was named for its collector, Friedrich Adolph Wislizenus (1810–1889).

==Distribution and habitat==
&quot;Q. wislizeni&quot; is found in many areas of California in the United States continuing south into northern Baja California in Mexico. It generally occurs in foothills, being most abundant in the lower elevations of the Sierra Nevada, but also widespread in the Pacific Coast Ranges—where since 1980 it has been known as a separate species &quot;Quercus parvula&quot;—and the San Gabriel Mountains. 

==Ecology==
The interior live oak is a red oak (section &quot;Lobatae&quot;) in the California Floristic Province (series &quot;Agrifoliae&quot;). &quot;Q. wislizeni&quot; hybridizes with California black oak &quot;(Q. kelloggii)&quot; (= &quot;Quercus&quot; × &quot;morehus&quot;, Abram&#x27;s oak). All California red oaks show evidence of introgression and/or hybridization with one another.

A common alliant tree is gray pine (&quot;Pinus sabiniana&quot;).

Deer browse the tree&#x27;s foliage.

==Uses==
Humans use the wood as a fuel source. The acorns are edible.

==References==
===Bibliography===
* 

==External links==

* C. Michael Hogan (2008) &quot;California Buckeye: Aesculus californica&quot;, GlobalTwitcher.com, N. Stromberg ed.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3009812" start="44" end="61" title="Quercus wislizeni" label="interior live oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="79" end="82" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="183" end="188" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="192" end="196" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="263" end="276" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="322" end="328" title="leaves" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="479" end="485" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q217753" start="494" end="500" title="catkin" label="catkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914781" start="558" end="563" title="acorn" label="acorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q189774" start="579" end="603" title="Biennial plant" label="mature the second season"/>
<link wikidata="Q281801" start="818" end="834" title="Botanical name" label="specific epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458035" start="926" end="953" title="Friedrich Adolph Wislizenus" label="Friedrich Adolph Wislizenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q655" start="1023" end="1032" title="Chihuahua (state)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q214946" start="1072" end="1087" title="Georg Engelmann" label="Georg Engelmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q758542" start="1167" end="1185" title="Auburn, California" label="Auburn, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368910" start="1294" end="1308" title="Albert Kellogg" label="Albert Kellogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q58731" start="2341" end="2356" title="Baja California" label="Baja California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354045" start="2391" end="2400" title="foothills" label="foothills"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="2453" end="2466" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q660304" start="2495" end="2515" title="Pacific Coast Ranges" label="Pacific Coast Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q15339462" start="2579" end="2594" title="Quercus parvula" label="Quercus parvula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419854" start="2609" end="2630" title="San Gabriel Mountains" label="San Gabriel Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163388" start="2673" end="2680" title="red oak" label="red oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q693392" start="2822" end="2842" title="California black oak" label="California black oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q15339202" start="2873" end="2914" title="Quercus × morehus" label="&amp;quot;Quercus&amp;quot; × &amp;quot;morehus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094405" start="2976" end="2989" title="introgression" label="introgression"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="2997" end="3010" title="hybrid (biology)" label="hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473331" start="3055" end="3064" title="gray pine" label="gray pine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534797" wikidata="Q690776" url="?curid=534797" title="Belau, Schleswig-Holstein">
<text>Belau is a municipality in the district of Plön, in Schleswig-Holstein, Germany.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q690776" start="0" end="5" title="Belau, Schleswig-Holstein" label="Belau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2970" start="31" end="47" title="Plön (district)" label="district of Plön"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="52" end="70" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="72" end="79" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534806" wikidata="Q522526" url="?curid=534806" title="Ochsenhausen">
<text>Ochsenhausen () is a city in the district of Biberach, Baden-Württemberg, Germany. It is located between the city of Biberach and Memmingen. it has a population of 9,261. The mayor of the town is Philipp Bürkle.

==History==
For many centuries, Ochsenhausen Abbey (&quot;Reichskloster Ochsenhausen&quot;), first mentioned in 1093, was a self -governing prince-abbey within the Holy Roman Empire ruled by a prince-abbot.

In 1803, in the course of the German mediatisation, the abbey was secularized and erected into a secular principality that was then granted to Prince (until then Count) Franz Georg Karl von Metternich (father of Prince Klemens von Metternich and father-in-law of Duke Ferdinand Frederick Augustus of Württemberg) in compensation for the loss of his immediate fiefs on the left bank of the Rhine after the whole area was annexed by revolutionary France. In 1806, the short-lived principality was annexed to the Kingdom of Württemberg, which in 1871 became part of the German Empire.

The abbey still dominates the town from a hill. Ochsenhausen is called a &quot;Baroque Kingdom of Heaven&quot; (&quot;Himmelreich des Barock&quot;) because of the monastic architecture.

==Attractions==
Every year the &quot;Öchsle-Fest&quot; takes place. It is named after a historical narrow-gauge railway called &quot;Öchsle&quot; which ran from Ochsenhausen to Warthausen.

===Buildings===
* Basilica &quot;Kirche St. Georg&quot;
* Stream &quot;Krummbach&quot;
* &quot;Rathaus&quot;, 1606
* &quot;Gasthof zur Post&quot;, 1650
* &quot;Klosterapotheke&quot;, 1736
* Chapel &quot;Gottesackerkapelle St. Veit&quot;, 1679
* Music and cabaret stage &quot;Scharfrichterhaus&quot;
* Gym &quot;Dr.-Hans-Liebherr-Sporthalle&quot;, 2010

==Notable people==
* Pius Bonifacius Gams (1816–1892), a Benedictine ecclesiastical historian.
* Joseph Ersing, (DE Wiki) (1882–1956), politician (CDU), Member of Reichstag, Member of Landtag (Württemberg-Baden)
* Josef Hecht, (DE Wiki) (1882-1956), teacher and conservationist
* Hans-Karl Riedel, (DE Wiki) (1893–1967), entrepreneur and local politician
* Karl Norbert Schmid (1926–1995), organist and composer
* Hanns-Friedrich Kunz (born 1945), singer and choir conductor 
* Gerhard Baur, (DE Wiki) (born 1947), mountaineer and camera man
* Hans Jürgen Briegel (born 1962), theoretical physician

=== Sport ===
* Matthias Dolderer (born 1970), race pilot
* Sandro Cortese (born 1990), motorcycle racer
* Nicole Rolser (born 1992), footballer, played 150 games and 2 for Germany women

==References==
==External links==
* www.ochsenhausen.de </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q522526" start="0" end="12" title="Ochsenhausen" label="Ochsenhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8223" start="45" end="53" title="Biberach (district)" label="Biberach"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="55" end="72" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="74" end="81" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16069" start="117" end="125" title="Biberach an der Riß" label="Biberach"/>
<link wikidata="Q14825" start="130" end="139" title="Memmingen" label="Memmingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q561312" start="245" end="263" title="Ochsenhausen Abbey" label="Ochsenhausen Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="377" end="394" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q314739" start="451" end="471" title="German mediatisation" label="German mediatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q573437" start="607" end="621" title="House of Metternich" label="von Metternich"/>
<link wikidata="Q45662" start="640" end="662" title="Klemens von Metternich" label="Klemens von Metternich"/>
<link wikidata="Q102166" start="684" end="732" title="Duke Ferdinand Frederick Augustus of Württemberg" label="Duke Ferdinand Frederick Augustus of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341156" start="770" end="779" title="Imperial immediacy" label="immediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q159631" start="931" end="953" title="Kingdom of Württemberg" label="Kingdom of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="988" end="1001" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="1290" end="1310" title="narrow-gauge railway" label="narrow-gauge railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970" start="1399" end="1407" title="Church (building)" label="Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q47521" start="1439" end="1445" title="Stream" label="Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790159" start="1452" end="1461" title="Krummbach (Steinhauser Rottum)" label="Krummbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="1476" end="1483" title="Rathaus" label="Rathaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q108325" start="1571" end="1577" title="Chapel" label="Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14092" start="1682" end="1685" title="Gym" label="Gym"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247313" start="1755" end="1775" title="Pius Bonifacius Gams" label="Pius Bonifacius Gams"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1831" end="1855" title=":de:Joseph Ersing" label="Joseph Ersing, (DE Wiki)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="1881" end="1884" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="CDU"/>
<link wikidata="Q251660" start="1927" end="1944" title="Württemberg-Baden" label="Württemberg-Baden"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1948" end="1970" title=":de:Josef Hecht" label="Josef Hecht, (DE Wiki)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2014" end="2041" title=":de:Hans-Karl Riedel" label="Hans-Karl Riedel, (DE Wiki)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24265603" start="2091" end="2110" title="Karl Norbert Schmid" label="Karl Norbert Schmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576344" start="2148" end="2168" title="Hanns-Friedrich Kunz" label="Hanns-Friedrich Kunz"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2212" end="2235" title=":de:Gerhard Baur" label="Gerhard Baur, (DE Wiki)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580431" start="2278" end="2297" title="Hans Jürgen Briegel" label="Hans Jürgen Briegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q96560" start="2350" end="2367" title="Matthias Dolderer" label="Matthias Dolderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q62571" start="2394" end="2408" title="Sandro Cortese" label="Sandro Cortese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987081" start="2441" end="2454" title="Nicole Rolser" label="Nicole Rolser"/>
<link wikidata="Q154408" start="2507" end="2520" title="Germany women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Germany women"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534811" wikidata="Q1594388" url="?curid=534811" title="Jack Hayward">
<text>Sir Jack Arnold Hayward (14 June 1923 – 13 January 2015) was an English businessman, property developer, philanthropist, and president of English football club Wolverhampton Wanderers.

==Biography==

===Early life===

The only son of Charles William Hayward, an industrialist, and his wife, Hayward was born in the Whitmore Reans area of Wolverhampton. He was educated at Northaw Preparatory School and later Stowe School in Buckinghamshire.

At the outbreak of the Second World War, he cycled to Oxford to volunteer to fight, eventually joining the Royal Air Force (RAF). He received flight training in Yorkshire and Clewiston, Florida, in the United States. 

He served first as a pilot officer in 671 Squadron operating under South East Asia Command (SEAC) in India, flying Dakota transporter aircraft for the supply of the 14th Army in Burma. In 1946 he was demobilised as a flight lieutenant.

===Career===
After demobilisation he began work in Rotary Hoes, part of the Firth Cleveland group of companies formed by his father, Sir Charles Hayward, as an agricultural equipment salesman in South Africa. In 1951 he founded the American arm of the group in New York, where he was based for five years before relocating to the Bahamas as it was a sterling area. His father began the family involvement with the Bahamas during the 1950s, after relocating his business from the United States. Jack arrived in Grand Bahama in 1956 and became a vice-president of the Grand Bahama Port Authority, which helped promote the development of Freeport. Jack took over his father&#x27;s interests in the Bahamas and continued to play an active role in Freeport.

In addition to his home in Freeport, in England he owned a farm in Sussex and in Scotland was Laird of Dunmaglass, a 14,000-acre estate near Inverness. The Sunday Times Rich List placed him as 125th richest in Britain with an estimated £160 million fortune in 2009.

===Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C.===
Hayward became a supporter of Wolverhampton Wanderers as a young child in the late 1920s. He first had a serious opportunity to purchase the club in 1982, when Wolves were £2.5million in debt and relegated from the First Division. He was reportedly offered 400 shares for around £40,000 but declined to buy them. When Wolves went into receivership later that year, Hayward was reportedly behind one of the offers being tabled to save the club, but it was ultimately bought by the Bhatti brothers in an unsuccessful rescue attempt fronted by former Wolves player Derek Dougan.

Hayward became the owner and chairman of Wolves, then in the Second Division following back-to-back promotions, after buying the club in May 1990 for £2.11 million. It is estimated that he spent well in excess of £70m of his personal finance on redeveloping their Molineux Stadium, writing off annual debts, and purchasing players for the club during the 17 years in which he was the owner. His reign saw seven different managers employ his resources in attempts to make the club a top-flight side. In the event, they only managed one season at the highest level (2003–04), despite his riches having enabled Wolves to invest in many players who would normally have been beyond the financial reach of non-Premier League clubs. In May 2007 it was announced that he had sold control of the club to businessman Steve Morgan for a nominal £10 fee, in exchange for a conditional £30m of investment in the club. Hayward had originally offered the club for sale in September 2003, but had struggled to find suitable takers. Morgan&#x27;s takeover was formally completed on 9 August 2007. Hayward remained the life president of Wolverhampton Wanderers and was later inducted into the club&#x27;s Hall of Fame.

By the time he retired as chairman at Molineux, Hayward was recognised as one of a select group of football benefactors who had spent huge fortunes of time and money on rescuing their hometown boyhood club from obscurity. Other such benefactors include Jack Walker (Blackburn Rovers), Lionel Pickering (Derby County), Steve Gibson (Middlesbrough) and Dave Whelan (Wigan Athletic).

===Charity===
Hayward was knighted in 1986 – adding to his 1968 OBE award – for his charitable actions, having donated money in 1969 to buy Lundy Island for the National Trust, to buy the SS &quot;Great Britain&quot; and, in 2011, £500,000 to the Vulcan to the Sky fund. He also put funds into repairing the King Edward VII Memorial Hospital on the Falkland Islands after the Falklands War and was named as the mystery benefactor of £1 million to the South Atlantic Fund to aid families of British serviceman killed or injured in that war.

He funded three international racing yachts, &quot;Great Britain I&quot;, &quot;II&quot; and &quot;III&quot;, spent £100,000 on saving the sloop &quot;Gannet&quot; (the Royal Navy&#x27;s only survivor of the transition from sail to steam) and contributed another £100,000 to help raise the &quot;Mary Rose&quot;. After befriending fellow Wulfrunian and cricketer Rachael Heyhoe Flint, he financed tours of the West Indies by the England women&#x27;s cricket team in 1969–70 and 1970–71, and in 1973 sponsored the first-ever Women&#x27;s Cricket World Cup, two years before the first World Cup in the men&#x27;s game.

Hayward appeared in the 1970 BBC &quot;Chronicle&quot; programme; &quot;The Great Iron Ship&quot; which documented the recovery and subsequent voyage of the SS &quot;Great Britain&quot; from the Falklands to Bristol.

===Political views===
Hayward was a donor to the Liberal Party in the 1970s, having met its leader Jeremy Thorpe (one of the West Country MPs who campaigned to get Lundy Island purchased for the nation) in 1969. He backed the party in the October 1974 general election, enabling Thorpe to travel around the coast by hovercraft on speaking tours and the party to field a record number of parliamentary candidates, although only 13 were returned as MPs. Thorpe and his wife Marion were guests at Hayward&#x27;s home in the Bahamas, and Thorpe offered unsuccessfully to find a buyer for Freeport in return for payment when Hayward and his colleagues were considering selling.

Hayward was awarded £50,000 in libel damages against the &quot;Sunday Telegraph&quot; after an article published in 1978 accused him of being the paymaster in the alleged conspiracy to murder Norman Scott in the Thorpe affair, of which Thorpe was cleared. In 1979, he gave evidence for the Crown in court when Thorpe was implicated in the affair, letters from Thorpe that Hayward had kept being among the exhibits.

In a 2003 interview with Sathnam Sanghera, Hayward said of his political views, &quot;If I had my way, I&#x27;d form my own party far more right-wing than Margaret Thatcher. I&#x27;d bring back National Service, the Scaffold, the cat o&#x27; nine tails, the Empireplaces like Sierra Leone and Nigeria were so much better off under British rule than they are now.&quot; When Sanghera asked him why he had thus supported the Liberal Party, he replied, &quot;Well, I used to say, &#x27;I don&#x27;t want anything to do with Europe.&#x27; And Jeremy [Thorpe] used to say, &#x27;My dear fella, if we joined Europe, with our expertise on how to run an empire, we&#x27;ll be in charge of Europe! We will be the master race!&#x27; And I would say, &#x27;How much do you want?&#x27; Also, I felt sorry for them.&quot;

===Style===
Hayward was nicknamed &quot;Union Jack&quot; in the Bahamas media for his British patriotism. He imported 10 red London buses to Freeport and was permitted by the General Post Office to install British-style red telephone and pillar boxes. Visiting seamen from the Royal Navy were always given dinner at a local restaurant “with the compliments of Sir Jack”. Back in Britain, Hayward drove a Range Rover bearing the bumper sticker: “Buy abroad — sack a Brit”. In &quot;Who&#x27;s Who&quot;, he declared his recreations as, mainly, &quot;promoting British endeavours, mainly in sport...protecting the British landscape, keeping all things bright, beautiful and British&quot;.

With his crumpled clothes and pockets stuffed with bits of paper, it was observed of Hayward that he looked “more like an absent-minded retired geography teacher than one of the richest men in the world”. He relaxed by watching cricket — he was a life member of Surrey County Cricket Club — and taking part in amateur dramatics — he built a modern theatre at Freeport for the local Players’ Guild, of which he was a leading actor. He banned non-British vehicles from his estate in Sussex and refused to drink French wine or mineral water.

===Family===
Hayward married Jean Mary Forder in 1948 and had two sons, Rick and Jonathan, and a daughter Susan. Both his sons have also been involved with Wolverhampton Wanderers. Jonathan joined the board upon his father&#x27;s takeover in 1990 and later served as chairman, before resigning in 1997. In 1999 his father controversially sued him for £237,000, claiming he was responsible for financial irregularities. The matter was settled out of court in favour of the elder Hayward. His elder son Rick later became chairman of the club in 2003 during the Premier League, taking over from his father, but stepped down in 2006. His grandson Rupert joined the board in the reshuffle following Steve Morgan&#x27;s takeover but resigned a year later.

Hayward was awarded the freedom of the City of Wolverhampton on 9 July 2003.

In January 2011 Hayward was in a court battle for over £100 million of his own personal fortune, after being sued by his daughter Susan Heath, then aged 62, elder son Rick, 59, and six of his grandchildren after they had been removed as beneficiaries from trusts set up by him. The fallout between Hayward and his family started over the £10 sale of Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. to Steve Morgan. 

Hayward died on 13 January 2015 in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, aged 91.

==Legacy==

The Sir Jack Hayward High School in Freeport, Bahamas, was named after him in 1998. Wolverhampton Wanderers&#x27; training complex at Compton is also named after him, as is Jack Hayward Way, a street beside the Molineux ground, previously Molineux Way, that was renamed in commemoration of his 80th birthday in 2003.

The Grand Bahama Highway Bridge is to be renamed the Sir Jack Hayward Bridge. Hayward had campaigned for its building for 10 years before it was launched with a contract signing ceremony in May 2014 at which he was present. The bridge was commissioned in March 2016.

The South Bank of Molineux, known as the Jack Harris Stand at the time, was renamed the Sir Jack Hayward Stand after his death.

==See also==
*List of residents of Wolverhampton
*Dunmaglass Shooting Estate

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1594388" start="0" end="23" title="Jack Hayward" label="Sir Jack Arnold Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="160" end="183" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083560" start="235" end="258" title="Charles William Hayward" label="Charles William Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996642" start="316" end="330" title="Whitmore Reans" label="Whitmore Reans"/>
<link wikidata="Q126269" start="339" end="352" title="Wolverhampton" label="Wolverhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620697" start="410" end="422" title="Stowe School" label="Stowe School"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="426" end="441" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="467" end="483" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="551" end="566" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q986644" start="619" end="637" title="Clewiston, Florida" label="Clewiston, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194476" start="684" end="697" title="pilot officer" label="pilot officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043744" start="701" end="713" title="No. 671 Squadron RAF" label="671 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431442" start="730" end="753" title="South East Asia Command" label="South East Asia Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="778" end="784" title="Douglas C-47 Skytrain" label="Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918766" start="828" end="837" title="Fourteenth Army (United Kingdom)" label="14th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="841" end="846" title="Burma Campaign" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013228" start="880" end="897" title="flight lieutenant" label="flight lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083560" start="976" end="991" title="Firth Cleveland" label="Firth Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083560" start="1033" end="1052" title="Charles William Hayward" label="Sir Charles Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1095" end="1107" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1161" end="1169" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="1230" end="1237" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q866345" start="1410" end="1422" title="Grand Bahama" label="Grand Bahama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594286" start="1466" end="1493" title="Grand Bahama Port Authority" label="Grand Bahama Port Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q867573" start="1535" end="1543" title="Freeport, Bahamas" label="Freeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="1721" end="1727" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315483" start="1757" end="1767" title="Dunmaglass, Scotland" label="Dunmaglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q160493" start="1795" end="1804" title="Inverness" label="Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q612780" start="1810" end="1832" title="Sunday Times Rich List" label="Sunday Times Rich List"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="1986" end="2009" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200026" start="2518" end="2530" title="Derek Dougan" label="Derek Dougan"/>
<link wikidata="Q380823" start="2797" end="2813" title="Molineux Stadium" label="Molineux Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3097" end="3104" title="2003-04 in English football#FA Premier League" label="2003–04"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="3237" end="3251" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576662" start="3340" end="3352" title="Steve Morgan (businessman)" label="Steve Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q380823" start="3773" end="3781" title="Molineux Stadium" label="Molineux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115640" start="3988" end="3999" title="Jack Walker" label="Jack Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="4001" end="4017" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555747" start="4020" end="4036" title="Lionel Pickering" label="Lionel Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q19470" start="4038" end="4050" title="Derby County F.C." label="Derby County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434511" start="4053" end="4065" title="Steve Gibson (chairman)" label="Steve Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="4067" end="4080" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4469987" start="4086" end="4097" title="Dave Whelan" label="Dave Whelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750" start="4099" end="4113" title="Wigan Athletic F.C." label="Wigan Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="4143" end="4149" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="4181" end="4184" title="Officer of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire" label="OBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q324812" start="4257" end="4269" title="Lundy" label="Lundy Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="4278" end="4292" title="National Trust" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q744086" start="4305" end="4333" title="SS Great Britain" label="SS &amp;quot;Great Britain&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q218931" start="4364" end="4381" title="Avro Vulcan" label="Vulcan to the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q18286040" start="4425" end="4458" title="King Edward VII Memorial Hospital" label="King Edward VII Memorial Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="4466" end="4482" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="4493" end="4506" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4568" end="4587" title="South Atlantic Fund" label="South Atlantic Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598819" start="4732" end="4746" title="Great Britain II" label="&amp;quot;II&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632542" start="4803" end="4821" title="HMS Gannet (1878)" label="&amp;quot;Gannet&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q544894" start="4954" end="4963" title="Mary Rose" label="Mary Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q336274" start="5021" end="5041" title="Rachael Heyhoe Flint" label="Rachael Heyhoe Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378062" start="5087" end="5120" title="England national women&amp;#x27;s cricket team" label="England women&amp;#x27;s cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580299" start="5182" end="5212" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Cricket World Cup" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114018" start="5309" end="5330" title="Chronicle (UK TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Chronicle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="5543" end="5556" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q334102" start="5593" end="5606" title="Jeremy Thorpe" label="Jeremy Thorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344070" start="5619" end="5631" title="West Country" label="West Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q918508" start="5733" end="5762" title="October 1974 United Kingdom general election" label="October 1974 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q185757" start="5810" end="5820" title="hovercraft" label="hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010206" start="5966" end="5972" title="Marion Stein" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12741725" start="6231" end="6247" title="Sunday Telegraph" label="Sunday Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102144" start="6380" end="6393" title="Thorpe affair" label="Thorpe affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640069" start="6441" end="6463" title="Crown witness" label="evidence for the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426160" start="6609" end="6625" title="Sathnam Sanghera" label="Sathnam Sanghera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="6739" end="6756" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162774" start="6778" end="6794" title="Conscription in the United Kingdom" label="National Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q462943" start="6796" end="6808" title="the Scaffold" label="the Scaffold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048914" start="6814" end="6836" title="cat o&amp;#x27; nine tails" label="cat o&amp;#x27; nine tails"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="6842" end="6848" title="British Empire" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="6860" end="6872" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="6877" end="6884" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="7671" end="7681" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134042" start="7798" end="7809" title="Range Rover" label="Range Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567271" start="7869" end="7895" title="Who&amp;#x27;s Who (UK)" label="&amp;quot;Who&amp;#x27;s Who&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="8310" end="8317" title="cricket (sport)" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725632" start="8344" end="8370" title="Surrey County Cricket Club" label="Surrey County Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="8778" end="8801" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers" label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576662" start="9316" end="9328" title="Steve Morgan (businessman)" label="Steve Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q126269" start="9420" end="9433" title="Wolverhampton" label="Wolverhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="9801" end="9829" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5157136" start="10066" end="10073" title="Compton, Wolverhampton" label="Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q380823" start="10536" end="10544" title="Molineux Stadium" label="Molineux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636509" start="10661" end="10695" title="List of residents of Wolverhampton" label="List of residents of Wolverhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315483" start="10697" end="10723" title="Dunmaglass, Scotland" label="Dunmaglass Shooting Estate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534812" wikidata="Q1089281" url="?curid=534812" title="Child's Play 2">
<text>Child&#x27;s Play 2 is a 1990 American supernatural slasher film and the direct sequel to &quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot;, written by Don Mancini and directed by John Lafia, one of the co-writers of the first film. It is the second installment in the &quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot; franchise and set two years after the first film; the plot follows Charles Lee Ray (better known as Chucky) continuing his pursuit for Andy Barclay, who was placed in foster care, and transferring his soul into him after being resurrected. Alex Vincent and Brad Dourif reprised their roles while Christine Elise, Jenny Agutter, Gerrit Graham and Grace Zabriskie joined the cast.

&quot;Child&#x27;s Play 2&quot; was released on November 9, 1990, exactly two years after the first film was released, and grossed over $35 million on a budget of $13 million. It was followed by a sequel, &quot;Child&#x27;s Play 3&quot;, 9 months later.

==Plot==
Two years after the death of Chucky, the Play Pals Corporation, manufacturer of the &quot;Good Guy&quot; doll line, is attempting to recover from the negative publicity surrounding the event. To reassure its stockholders that there was nothing actually wrong with the doll, they acquire Chucky&#x27;s remains and reassemble him. During the process, a power surge fatally electrocutes one of the assembly line workers and Chucky is reanimated. Mr. Sullivan, the CEO of the company, orders his assistant Mattson to dispose of the doll.

Meanwhile, Andy Barclay, now eight years old, has been in foster care ever since his mother, Karen Barclay was institutionalized for backing up his claims that his doll was alive. Andy is brought in by foster parents Phil and Joanne Simpson, though Phil is apprehensive about Andy&#x27;s needs. Andy later meets Kyle, a cynical, street-smart teenage girl the Simpsons are also fostering. Chucky discovers Andy&#x27;s whereabouts by using Mattson&#x27;s car phone to call Grace Poole, the manager of Andy&#x27;s foster center, before suffocating Mattson with a plastic bag.

Chucky infiltrates the Simpson&#x27;s home and takes the place of another &quot;Good Guy&quot; doll, &quot;Tommy,&quot; which he buries in the backyard. Andy begins to bond with Kyle after the two are punished for an heirloom Chucky destroyed. That night Chucky reveals himself to Andy, but Kyle enters the room before he can complete the voodoo chant to possess him. Kyle doesn&#x27;t believe Andy&#x27;s claim that Chucky is alive. Phil and Joanne barge into the room and blame Kyle for the chaos; Phil throws Chucky into the basement in frustration. Chucky realizes that his body is becoming human again after suffering a nosebleed.

The next day, Chucky secretly follows Andy to school and defaces his homework, resulting in Andy being assigned detention. Chucky kills Andy&#x27;s teacher Miss Kettlewell by stabbing her with an air pump and then beating her with a yardstick, but Andy manages to escape. Andy tries to warn his foster parents about Chucky, but Phil refuses to believe him and considers returning him to the foster center.

That night, Andy sneaks into the basement to confront Chucky, but the doll overpowers him. When Phil arrives to investigate, Chucky trips him, causing him to fall from the stairs and break his neck. Joanne blames Andy for Phil&#x27;s death and sends him back to the foster center. Kyle discovers &quot;Tommy&quot; buried outside and realizes Andy was telling the truth. She rushes to warn Joanne, only to discover that Chucky has already killed her by slitting her throat. Chucky ambushes Kyle and forces her to drive him to the foster center.

Chucky stabs Grace to death and captures Andy. Kyle pursues them through the streets and to the nearby Play Pals factory, but is unable to find them before Chucky knocks Andy unconscious and completes the ritual. However, the spell fails as he has spent too much time in his doll body and is now permanently trapped. Enraged, Chucky chases Andy and Kyle through the factory. After Chucky murders a factory technician, Kyle and Andy manage to mutilate his body with assembly-line equipment. Chucky escapes and attacks again, knocking out Kyle. Andy is able to open an emergency release valve, showering Chucky with molten plastic and seemingly killing him.

After saving the unconscious Kyle from being killed on a conveyor belt, the two approach the half-melted Chucky, who suddenly springs back to life. Kyle shoves a high-pressure air hose into his mouth, inflating his head until it explodes, finally killing him. Andy and Kyle exit the factory, unsure of where to go.

==Cast==

* Alex Vincent as Andy Barclay
* Brad Dourif as the voice of Chucky
** Ed Gale (in-suit performer)
* Christine Elise as Kyle
* Jenny Agutter as Joanne Simpson
* Gerrit Graham as Phil Simpson
* Grace Zabriskie as Grace Poole
* Peter Haskell as Haskell Sullivan
* Beth Grant as Elizabeth Kettlewell
* Greg Germann as Mattson
* Edan Gross as Tommy Doll
* Charles Meshack as Van Driver
==Production==
United Artists purchased the script to the original &quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot; partially because UA President Tony Thomopoulis and MGM/UA Communications Chairman Lee Rich believed that it had the potential for multiple sequels. Producer David Kirschner asked Tom Holland to return as director, but Holland declined due to his conflicts with producer David Kirschner and UA during the first film. John Lafia, who had been turned down as director because he had no experience, was hired by Kirschner after directing &quot;The Blue Iguana&quot;. Mancini also agreed to return. Mancini and Lafia decided to set the film at a foster home due to Lafia&#x27;s experience living in a large family. MGM/UA also commissioned a screenplay from Mark Patrick Carducci in case it was dissatisfied with Mancini&#x27;s script, but it was not used. Carducci&#x27;s script would have involved Andy in a mental institution after the murders in the first film.

The sequel was in pre-production and was set to begin filming on October 15, 1989, when UA President Richard Berger told producer David Kirschner that the film was put on hold as the studio was about to be acquired by the Australian group Qintex, whose director Christopher Skase intended to ban the studio from producing horror films.

Paramount Pictures, Warner Bros., Columbia Pictures, 20th Century Fox, The Price Company, Carolco, New Line Cinema, The Walt Disney Company, and Universal Pictures expressed interest in picking up the film rights to the series and sequel. Disney, which was working with Kirschner to develop &quot;Hocus Pocus&quot; (1993), was especially interested in purchasing the series under its Touchstone Pictures label because it wanted to create a horror-themed attraction at its Disney-MGM Studios theme park. However, Universal won the rights bid after Steven Spielberg and Kathleen Kennedy assisted Universal&#x27;s Sid Sheinberg in convincing Kirschner to accept a negative pickup deal with the studio.

Originally the film was intended to open with a courtroom scene of a jury sentencing Karen Barclay to a mental institution for insisting that Chucky was alive, and both Catherine Hicks and Chris Sarandon were intended to reprise their roles as Karen and Detective Mike Norris from the first film. Sarandon recalled to &quot;People&quot; in 2023 that he declined to return when asked because Holland would not be involved. However, their scenes were cut from the scripts because of budgetary constraints, and as a result of their omission the film is much shorter than the other installments in the series. The courtroom scene would be recycled as the ending of &quot;Curse of Chucky&quot; in 2013. It also would have contained a scene where Chucky&#x27;s remains were held in a police evidence locker alongside Jason Voorhees and Michael Myers&#x27;s masks, an idea which came to be reused in &quot;Bride of Chucky&quot; in 1998.

Jenny Agutter would be cast as Joanne Simpson after Veronica Cartwright was considered. Gerrit Graham would beat Jeffrey Jones, Tim Matheson, and Charles Grodin for the role of Phil Simpson. Shannen Doherty, Kristy Swanson, Holly Marie Combs, and Christine Elise all auditioned for the role of Kyle. Although Elise nearly missed her follow-up audition to film an episode of &quot;Baywatch&quot;, she got the role.

Principal photography began on November 6, 1989 with a $12 million budget. Since Kirschner was busy after getting hired to run Hanna-Barbera, the production was supervised by Robert Latham Brown. Unlike the first film which was mostly shot on-location in Chicago, most of the second film was shot on Universal Studios Lot in Universal City, California. The Play Pals factory sequence was shot in an abandoned warehouse in Valencia, California. Brad Dourif recorded all of his dialogue as Chucky in advance, which allowed his words to match up with his facial movements better than in the first film. Kevin Yagher returned to do the special effects and puppetry, directing several scenes of the film himself. Ed Gale was rehired to play the body of Chucky, but unlike in the first film very few of his scenes were used. The International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees picketed the shoot to demand that the production company stop using non-union employees, with the crew voting to sign a union contract in January 1990 shortly before filming wrapped. Graeme Revell, whose only scoring experience was the 1989 Australian psychological horror film &quot;Dead Calm&quot;, was hired to compose the music after lying to the studio that he had composed an orchestral composition before. Kevin Carlson, Van Snowden, and N. Brock Winkless IV were credited as part of the puppeteers of Chucky.

==Music==
The score of the film was composed by Graeme Revell, and conducted, as well as orchestrated, by Shirley Walker. Unlike the first film that has electronic music, the music for the sequel is completely orchestral.

==Novelization==
A tie-in novelization to the film was later written by Matthew J. Costello. The author added in some of his own plot scenes exclusive to the novel, such as going deeper into Andy Barclay and Chucky&#x27;s past. Chucky is characterized to have an absent father and his abusive mother being a dwarf. Chucky got teased a lot because of this and later strangled his mother to death. Also, Chucky was put in special classes when he was younger. During the scene at the factory, Chucky sees a bunch of Good Guy dolls and wishes that he could bring them to life to do his bidding. This was partially used as the plot of the film &quot;Cult of Chucky&quot;.

==Reception==
===Box office===
The film opened at number one in the US with an opening weekend gross of $10,718,520 from 1,996 screens in the US. The film grossed a total of $28,501,605 in the US and an additional $7.3 million internationally for a worldwide gross of $35.8 million.

===Critical response===
 Evan Dickson of Bloody Disgusting, in describing how it surpasses the original film, wrote, &quot;&quot;Child&#x27;s Play 2&quot; manages to strip away all artifice and still manage to be an effective slasher.&quot;

&quot;Variety&quot; wrote, &quot;&quot;Child&#x27;s Play 2&quot; is another case of rehashing the few novel elements of an original to the point of utter numbness.&quot; Gene Siskel gave the film zero stars out of four, calling it &quot;A vicious, ugly little thriller.&quot; On Siskel and Ebert&#x27;s Worst of 1990 show, Siskel further criticised the film, accusing director John Lafia of &quot;prostituting himself&quot; and rhetorically asking the audience &quot;who was this trash made for and would you want to sit next to them in a theater?&quot;

Kevin Thomas of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; thought the original was &quot;a terrific one-of-a-kind thriller,&quot; but &quot;Not so the sequel. It&#x27;s an all-out horror film—handsomely produced but morbid and not in the least amusing to watch.&quot; Richard Harrington of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; called it &quot;an inevitable sequel that&#x27;s not as good as its progenitor, but better than most movies with the numbers 2 through 8 in their titles.&quot;

===Home media===
&quot;Child&#x27;s Play 2&quot; was first released on VHS by MCA/Universal Home Video in North America on April 11, 1991. The film was later released on DVD in 1999 and bundled with the fourth film &quot;Bride of Chucky&quot;. This released on DVD by Universal Pictures Home Entertainment on October 22, 2002. It was released in multiple collections, such as:
* The Chucky Collection (alongside &quot;Child&#x27;s Play 3&quot; and &quot;Bride of Chucky&quot;), released on October 7, 2003.
* Chucky – The Killer DVD Collection (alongside &quot;Child&#x27;s Play 3&quot;, &quot;Bride&quot; and &quot;Seed of Chucky&quot;), released on September 19, 2006.
* Chucky: The Complete Collection (alongside &quot;Child&#x27;s Play &quot; and &quot;3&quot;, &quot;Bride&quot;, &quot;Seed&quot; and &quot;Curse of Chucky&quot;), released on October 8, 2013.
* Chucky: Complete 7-Movie Collection (alongside &quot;Child&#x27;s Play &quot; and &quot;3&quot;, &quot;Bride&quot;, &quot;Seed&quot;, &quot;Curse&quot; and &quot;Cult of Chucky&quot;), released on October 3, 2017.
&quot;Child&#x27;s Play 2&quot; was released on 4K Ultra HD by Scream! Factory on August 16, 2022. This release included a new 4K scan from the original camera negative, a new Dolby Atmos track and several interviews recorded in 2022 with creator Don Mancini, actor Alex Vincent, producer David Kirschner, actress Christine Elise, actress Beth Grant, and executive producer Robert Latham Brown.

==Sequels==
The film was followed by &quot;Child&#x27;s Play 3&quot; in 1991, &quot;Bride of Chucky&quot; in 1998, &quot;Seed of Chucky&quot; in 2004, &quot;Curse of Chucky&quot; in 2013, &quot;Cult of Chucky&quot; in 2017, and the TV series &quot;Chucky&quot; in 2021.

==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43911809" start="39" end="51" title="Supernatural horror film" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q853630" start="52" end="64" title="slasher film" label="slasher film"/>
<link wikidata="Q935945" start="96" end="113" title="Child&amp;#x27;s Play (1988 film)" label="Child&amp;#x27;s Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239298" start="132" end="143" title="Don Mancini" label="Don Mancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q402551" start="160" end="170" title="John Lafia" label="John Lafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265493" start="249" end="288" title="Child&amp;#x27;s Play (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Child&amp;#x27;s Play&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q25097" start="346" end="361" title="Chucky (character)" label="Charles Lee Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q778331" start="414" end="426" title="Andy Barclay" label="Andy Barclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735504" start="519" end="531" title="Alex Vincent (actor)" label="Alex Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q329734" start="536" end="547" title="Brad Dourif" label="Brad Dourif"/>
<link wikidata="Q272261" start="575" end="590" title="Christine Elise" label="Christine Elise"/>
<link wikidata="Q234883" start="592" end="605" title="Jenny Agutter" label="Jenny Agutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354875" start="607" end="620" title="Gerrit Graham" label="Gerrit Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q242552" start="625" end="640" title="Grace Zabriskie" label="Grace Zabriskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089283" start="870" end="889" title="Child&amp;#x27;s Play 3" label="Child&amp;#x27;s Play 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q25097" start="952" end="958" title="Chucky (character)" label="Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q778331" start="1469" end="1481" title="Andy Barclay" label="Andy Barclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430789" start="1516" end="1527" title="foster care" label="foster care"/>
<link wikidata="Q28137057" start="1770" end="1774" title="Kyle (Child&amp;#x27;s Play)" label="Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q302729" start="2371" end="2377" title="Haitian Vodou" label="voodoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q636009" start="2865" end="2873" title="air pump" label="air pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="4242" end="4249" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q770135" start="4335" end="4348" title="conveyor belt" label="conveyor belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735504" start="4606" end="4618" title="Alex Vincent (actor)" label="Alex Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q778331" start="4622" end="4634" title="Andy Barclay" label="Andy Barclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q329734" start="4637" end="4648" title="Brad Dourif" label="Brad Dourif"/>
<link wikidata="Q25097" start="4665" end="4671" title="Chucky (character)" label="Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q768685" start="4675" end="4682" title="Ed Gale" label="Ed Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q272261" start="4705" end="4720" title="Christine Elise" label="Christine Elise"/>
<link wikidata="Q28137057" start="4724" end="4728" title="Kyle (Child&amp;#x27;s Play)" label="Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q234883" start="4731" end="4744" title="Jenny Agutter" label="Jenny Agutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354875" start="4765" end="4778" title="Gerrit Graham" label="Gerrit Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q242552" start="4797" end="4812" title="Grace Zabriskie" label="Grace Zabriskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174572" start="4830" end="4843" title="Peter Haskell" label="Peter Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q271635" start="4866" end="4876" title="Beth Grant" label="Beth Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q740511" start="4903" end="4915" title="Greg Germann" label="Greg Germann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335683" start="4929" end="4939" title="Edan Gross" label="Edan Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="5001" end="5015" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q935945" start="5059" end="5076" title="Child&amp;#x27;s Play (1988 film)" label="Child&amp;#x27;s Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="5135" end="5156" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="MGM/UA Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811951" start="5166" end="5174" title="Lee Rich" label="Lee Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340923" start="5263" end="5274" title="Tom Holland (filmmaker)" label="Tom Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718780" start="5524" end="5539" title="The Blue Iguana" label="The Blue Iguana"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="5889" end="5907" title="mental institution" label="mental institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018205" start="6076" end="6091" title="David Kirschner" label="David Kirschner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412485" start="6185" end="6191" title="Qintex" label="Qintex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113243" start="6208" end="6225" title="Christopher Skase" label="Christopher Skase"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="6283" end="6301" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="6303" end="6315" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="6317" end="6334" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="6336" end="6352" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044291" start="6373" end="6380" title="Carolco" label="Carolco"/>
<link wikidata="Q79202" start="6382" end="6397" title="New Line Cinema" label="New Line Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="6399" end="6422" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="6428" end="6446" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709045" start="6484" end="6495" title="film rights" label="film rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q431140" start="6580" end="6591" title="Hocus Pocus (1993 film)" label="Hocus Pocus"/>
<link wikidata="Q497155" start="6667" end="6686" title="Touchstone Pictures" label="Touchstone Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345090" start="6755" end="6773" title="Disney-MGM Studios" label="Disney-MGM Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="6830" end="6846" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q237207" start="6851" end="6867" title="Kathleen Kennedy (producer)" label="Kathleen Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246861" start="6894" end="6907" title="Sidney Sheinberg" label="Sid Sheinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q837675" start="7052" end="7056" title="jury" label="jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="7087" end="7105" title="Psychiatric hospital" label="mental institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q230789" start="7152" end="7167" title="Catherine Hicks" label="Catherine Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q363684" start="7172" end="7186" title="Chris Sarandon" label="Chris Sarandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="7307" end="7313" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q12161666" start="7650" end="7665" title="Curse of Chucky" label="Curse of Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q366957" start="7794" end="7808" title="Jason Voorhees" label="Jason Voorhees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426891" start="7813" end="7826" title="Michael Myers (Halloween)" label="Michael Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089303" start="7882" end="7897" title="Bride of Chucky" label="Bride of Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q283872" start="7966" end="7985" title="Veronica Cartwright" label="Veronica Cartwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q377662" start="8027" end="8040" title="Jeffrey Jones" label="Jeffrey Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q712457" start="8042" end="8054" title="Tim Matheson" label="Tim Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q467570" start="8060" end="8074" title="Charles Grodin" label="Charles Grodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207598" start="8105" end="8120" title="Shannen Doherty" label="Shannen Doherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q238394" start="8122" end="8136" title="Kristy Swanson" label="Kristy Swanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q162578" start="8138" end="8155" title="Holly Marie Combs" label="Holly Marie Combs"/>
<link wikidata="Q223320" start="8294" end="8302" title="Baywatch" label="Baywatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q736464" start="8456" end="8469" title="Hanna-Barbera" label="Hanna-Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346721" start="8504" end="8523" title="Robert Latham Brown" label="Robert Latham Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632606" start="8629" end="8650" title="Universal Studios Lot" label="Universal Studios Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376480" start="8654" end="8680" title="Universal City, California" label="Universal City, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018101" start="8751" end="8771" title="Valencia, California" label="Valencia, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q11333" start="8929" end="8941" title="Kevin Yagher" label="Kevin Yagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q768685" start="9037" end="9044" title="Ed Gale" label="Ed Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838183" start="9152" end="9204" title="International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees" label="International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees"/>
<link wikidata="Q920963" start="9388" end="9401" title="Graeme Revell" label="Graeme Revell"/>
<link wikidata="Q845077" start="9489" end="9498" title="Dead Calm (film)" label="Dead Calm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395981" start="9618" end="9631" title="Kevin Carlson" label="Kevin Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913667" start="9633" end="9644" title="Van Snowden" label="Van Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q20872877" start="9650" end="9670" title="Brock Winkless" label="N. Brock Winkless IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q268427" start="9829" end="9843" title="Shirley Walker" label="Shirley Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421000" start="9972" end="9984" title="novelization" label="novelization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909537" start="10018" end="10037" title="Matthew Costello" label="Matthew J. Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130946" start="10591" end="10605" title="Cult of Chucky" label="Cult of Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641076" start="10939" end="10956" title="Bloody Disgusting" label="Bloody Disgusting"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="11146" end="11153" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q969105" start="11310" end="11321" title="Gene Siskel" label="Gene Siskel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16104561" start="11695" end="11707" title="Kevin Thomas (film critic)" label="Kevin Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="11721" end="11738" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="11983" end="12002" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="12241" end="12244" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005797" start="12248" end="12272" title="Universal Pictures Home Entertainment" label="MCA/Universal Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="12340" end="12343" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089303" start="12391" end="12406" title="Bride of Chucky" label="Bride of Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="12431" end="12434" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005797" start="12438" end="12475" title="Universal Pictures Home Entertainment" label="Universal Pictures Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="13314" end="13329" title="Shout! Factory" label="Scream! Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239298" start="13498" end="13509" title="Don Mancini" label="Don Mancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735504" start="13517" end="13529" title="Alex Vincent (actor)" label="Alex Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018205" start="13540" end="13555" title="David Kirschner" label="David Kirschner"/>
<link wikidata="Q272261" start="13565" end="13580" title="Christine Elise" label="Christine Elise"/>
<link wikidata="Q271635" start="13590" end="13600" title="Beth Grant" label="Beth Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346721" start="13625" end="13644" title="Robert Latham Brown" label="Robert Latham Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089283" start="13690" end="13709" title="Child&amp;#x27;s Play 3" label="Child&amp;#x27;s Play 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089303" start="13731" end="13746" title="Bride of Chucky" label="Bride of Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q925421" start="13768" end="13782" title="Seed of Chucky" label="Seed of Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q12161666" start="13804" end="13819" title="Curse of Chucky" label="Curse of Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130946" start="13841" end="13855" title="Cult of Chucky" label="Cult of Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q106824359" start="13895" end="13901" title="Chucky (TV series)" label="Chucky"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534818" wikidata="Q629995" url="?curid=534818" title="No Need to Argue">
<text>No Need to Argue is the second studio album by Irish alternative rock band the Cranberries, released on 3 October 1994, through Island Records. It is the band&#x27;s best-selling album, and has sold over 17 million copies worldwide as of 2014. It contains one of the band&#x27;s most well-known songs, &quot;Zombie&quot;. The album&#x27;s mood is considered to be darker and harsher than that on the band&#x27;s debut album &quot;Everybody Else Is Doing It, So Why Can&#x27;t We?&quot;, released a year prior.

==Composition==
In some of the songs, the band decided to take on a rockier and heavier side, using distortion and increasing the volume. Drummer Fergal Lawler said the musical change happened because after two years of touring to promote their debut album, &quot;we had been used to hearing ourselves loud on stage and everything, so maybe that&#x27;s a natural thing that happened then.&quot; During a week off in New York City, the band decided to record demos for the upcoming album, and after calling producer Stephen Street and having him fly in from London, recorded early versions of six songs at the Magic Shop recording studios.

The song &quot;Yeats&#x27; Grave&quot; is about William Butler Yeats, and quotes one of his poems, &quot;No Second Troy&quot;. 

The O&#x27;Riordan written track &quot;Zombie&quot; is, according to her, about the Warrington IRA bombings in 1993 that resulted in the death of two children. &quot;The Icicle Melts&quot; a track written by O&#x27;Riordan, she states in a 1994 issue of Vox magazine as well as a 1994 Hot Press article that the song was written about the case of James Bulger and her reaction. O&#x27;Riordan also states in the 1994 Hot press article that the original title of the song was &quot;The Liverpool child&quot; a reference to where James Bulger was murdered.

==Cover art==
For the sleeve design, art director Cally re-enlisted photographer Andy Earl and hired the same sofa that featured on the debut album. The sofa was transported by hand to many locations in and around Dublin including Dalkey Island, coming to rest in a photo studio in Dublin where the white room had been constructed for the cover shot. The band, somewhat influenced by a recent Blur photo, decided to dress up and wear suits. The hand lettering was by Charlotte Villiers, video coordinator at Island Records and distant relative of the Villiers engine manufacturing family.

Each single sleeve featured the band on the sofa in a different location. These images also appeared in the album&#x27;s booklet. The disc itself featured a photo of just the sofa in the same room. The sofa later appeared in the video for &quot;Alright&quot; by the British band Supergrass in 1995.

==Critical reception==

Dylan Yadav of Immortal Reviews wrote: &quot;&quot;No Need To Argue&quot;, their 1994 record that cemented their importance in Irish music&quot;. Yadav described that the &quot;rustic upbringing&quot; of O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s childhood—reflected on &quot;Ode to My Family&quot;, &quot;gives credence to the rest of the album and it&#x27;s personal, grassroots presence&quot;. &quot;Yeats&#x27; Grave&quot;, in &quot;similar fashion&quot; of &quot;Zombie&quot;, &quot;is dark and describes those struggles&quot;, Yadav opined. He finished the retrospective review by stating that &quot;the Cranberries turned their struggles to art in &quot;No Need To Argue&quot;, an album that helped bring to light what the culture of Ireland was. Dolores O&#x27;Riordan made it all happen with her voice, and that&#x27;s not to discredit the rest of the band; but that voice is what made the Cranberries stand out amongst the rest. She voiced the struggle of a whole country&quot;. In a contemporary review, J. D. Considine wrote that some songs reminded the vocal styles of other artists like &quot;Ridiculous Thoughts&quot; recalling Sinéad O&#x27;Connor, &quot;particularly the way O&#x27;Riordan handles the phrase &#x27;Twister, aow&#x27; and &quot;Zombie&quot; is a bit too much like early Siouxsie and the Banshees&quot;. Though Considine positively added, &quot;neither song makes that debt seem especially problematic&quot;. The reviewer praised O&#x27;Riordan for her performance; &quot;the most memorable thing about her delivery is its unvarnished emotionality&quot;. In a retrospective review, AllMusic noted a progression in O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s way of singing: &quot;&quot;No Need to Argue&quot; starts to see O&#x27;Riordan take a more commanding and self-conscious role&quot;, notably on the heavy rock track &quot;Zombie&quot;. However, reviewer Ned Raggett stated; &quot;where &quot;No Need&quot; succeeds best is when the Cranberries stick at what they know, resulting in a number of charmers like &quot;Twenty One,&quot; the uilleann pipes-touched &quot;Daffodil&#x27;s Lament,&quot; [...] and the evocative &quot;Disappointment&quot;.&quot;

==Legacy==
On 5 August 1995, &quot;Billboard&quot; stated that &quot;No Need to Argue&quot; was PolyGram&#x27;s highest selling album of the year to date, with 5.1 million copies sold in six months. On 10 March 1996, the Cranberries won a Juno Awards for Best-Selling Album. In 2009, &quot;No Need to Argue&quot; was ranked No. 90 on &quot;Billboard&quot; magazine: &quot;300 Best-Selling Albums of All Time&quot;. In July 2014, &quot;Guitar World&quot; placed &quot;No Need to Argue&quot; at No. 41 in their &quot;Superunknown: 50 Iconic Albums That Defined 1994&quot; list.

==Track listing==
===Original release===


===25th Anniversary Edition (2020)===

==Personnel==
Personnel adapted from &quot;No Need to Argue&quot; liner notes

;The Cranberries
*Dolores O&#x27;Riordan – vocals, electric and acoustic guitars, keyboards, string arrangements
*Noel Hogan – electric and acoustic guitars
*Mike Hogan – bass guitar
*Fergal Lawler – drums, percussion

==Chart positions==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==Certifications and sales==









==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="53" end="69" title="Alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q483810" start="75" end="90" title="the Cranberries" label="the Cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="128" end="142" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q169298" start="308" end="314" title="Zombie (The Cranberries song)" label="Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382258" start="430" end="479" title="Everybody Else Is Doing It, So Why Can&amp;#x27;t We?" label="Everybody Else Is Doing It, So Why Can&amp;#x27;t We?"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="927" end="940" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q182427" start="1026" end="1040" title="Stephen Street" label="Stephen Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q101579921" start="1120" end="1130" title="Magic Shop (recording studio)" label="Magic Shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="1199" end="1219" title="William Butler Yeats" label="William Butler Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870012" start="1364" end="1395" title="Warrington bombings" label="Warrington IRA bombings in 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942329" start="1534" end="1546" title="Vox magazine" label="Vox magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308877" start="1565" end="1574" title="Hot Press" label="Hot Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q460887" start="1627" end="1639" title="Murder of James Bulger" label="James Bulger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776791" start="2067" end="2080" title="Dalkey Island" label="Dalkey Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="2229" end="2233" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755306" start="2671" end="2678" title="Alright (Supergrass song)" label="Alright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120684" start="2705" end="2715" title="Supergrass" label="Supergrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q16188946" start="3744" end="3759" title="J. D. Considine" label="J. D. Considine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193982" start="3872" end="3892" title="Sinéad O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Sinéad O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="4032" end="4057" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="4343" end="4351" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="4936" end="4945" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q700359" start="4997" end="5005" title="PolyGram" label="PolyGram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5140" end="5151" title="Juno Awards of 1996#Nominated and winning albums" label="Juno Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q930471" start="5336" end="5348" title="Guitar World" label="Guitar World"/>
<link wikidata="Q541599" start="5657" end="5679" title="Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan" label="Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704746" start="5753" end="5763" title="Noel Hogan" label="Noel Hogan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534822" wikidata="Q261107" url="?curid=534822" title="Unagisaki hōchō">
<text>An is a knife specialized for filleting eel. The sharp tip of the knife is pushed into the eel near the head, and then slid along the body of the eel to open up the entire length of the fish. Besides the standard version as shown in the picture, there are many other local styles that differ significantly for different cities in Japan like Nagoya, Osaka, and Kyoto.

==See also== 
*Japanese cutlery 
*List of Japanese cooking utensils

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5347044" start="40" end="43" title="Eel as food" label="eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="341" end="347" title="Nagoya" label="Nagoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="349" end="354" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="360" end="365" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984607" start="383" end="399" title="Japanese cutlery" label="Japanese cutlery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575075" start="402" end="435" title="List of Japanese cooking utensils" label="List of Japanese cooking utensils"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534824" wikidata="Q8640" url="?curid=534824" title="2004 FH">
<text>2004 FH is a micro-asteroid and near-Earth object of the Aten group, approximately 30 meters in diameter, that passed just above the Earth&#x27;s surface on 18 March 2004, at 22:08 UTC. It was the 11th closest approach to Earth recorded . The asteroid was first observed on 16 March 2004, by astronomers of the Lincoln Near-Earth Asteroid Research at the Lincoln Laboratory&#x27;s Experimental Test Site near Socorro, New Mexico.

== Orbit and classification ==
 is an Aten asteroid. It passed 43,000 km from the Earth on 18 March 2004. For comparison, geostationary satellites orbit Earth at 35,790 kilometers. Despite its small size, it is still the fourth largest asteroid detected coming closer to the Earth than the Moon.

Had this object hit Earth, it would probably have detonated high in the atmosphere. It might have produced a blast measured in hundreds of kilotons of TNT, but may not have produced any effect on the ground. It could also have been an Earth-grazing fireball if it had been much closer but not close enough to impact.

On 17 March 2044 the asteroid will pass no closer than from the Earth. also has the distinction of having the lowest inclination of any known near-Earth asteroids.

Two weeks later another asteroid approached even closer, , which was smaller, and a few years later , which was closer in size passed by at similar distance.

== Physical characteristics ==

 is an assumed stony S-type asteroid.

=== Rotation period ===

In March 2004, two rotational lightcurves of were obtained from photometric observations by astronomers Petr Pravec, Stefano Sposetti and Raoul Behrend. Lightcurve analysis gave a rotation period of 0.0504 hours (3.02 minutes) with a brightness amplitude of 1.16 and 0.75 magnitude, respectively ().

This makes this object a fast rotator, currently among the Top 100 known to exist. The photometric observations also revealed, that is a tumbler with a non-principal axis rotation.

=== Diameter and albedo ===

has been estimated to measure approximately 30 meters (100 feet) in diameter. The &quot;Collaborative Asteroid Lightcurve Link&quot; assumes a standard albedo for stony asteroids of 0.20 and calculates a diameter of 24 meters based on an absolute magnitude of 25.7.

== Notes ==

== References ==

== External links ==

* MPEC 2004-F24
* Images of 2004 FH at Klet
* Asteroid Lightcurve Database (LCDB), query form (info )
* Asteroids and comets rotation curves, CdR – Observatoire de Genève, Raoul Behrend
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8640" start="0" end="7" title="2004 FH" label="2004 FH"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="19" end="27" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q265392" start="32" end="49" title="near-Earth object" label="near-Earth object"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048390" start="57" end="67" title="Aten asteroid" label="Aten group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="133" end="138" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="181" end="184" title="Coordinated Universal Time" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606299" start="197" end="227" title="List of asteroid close approaches to Earth" label="11th closest approach to Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q735603" start="311" end="347" title="Lincoln Near-Earth Asteroid Research" label="Lincoln Near-Earth Asteroid Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138607" start="355" end="403" title="Lincoln Laboratory&amp;#x27;s Experimental Test Site" label="Lincoln Laboratory&amp;#x27;s Experimental Test Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048390" start="469" end="482" title="Aten asteroid" label="Aten asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192316" start="553" end="576" title="geostationary satellite" label="geostationary satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="800" end="810" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="879" end="882" title="Trinitrotoluene" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q603346" start="963" end="985" title="Earth-grazing fireball" label="Earth-grazing fireball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112212" start="1163" end="1174" title="inclination" label="inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q543157" start="1423" end="1438" title="S-type asteroid" label="S-type asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q675076" start="1496" end="1506" title="lightcurve" label="lightcurve"/>
<link wikidata="Q727817" start="1570" end="1581" title="Petr Pravec" label="Petr Pravec"/>
<link wikidata="Q115789" start="1583" end="1599" title="Stefano Sposetti" label="Stefano Sposetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995948" start="1604" end="1617" title="Raoul Behrend" label="Raoul Behrend"/>
<link wikidata="Q185981" start="1646" end="1661" title="rotation period" label="rotation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028919" start="1738" end="1747" title="Magnitude (astronomy)" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q27664543" start="1792" end="1804" title="List of fast rotators (minor planets)" label="fast rotator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1826" end="1833" title="List of fast rotators (minor planets)#Periods 0.05–0.1 hour" label="Top 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999017" start="1904" end="1911" title="List of tumblers (small Solar System bodies)" label="tumbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="2130" end="2136" title="astronomical albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="2216" end="2234" title="absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534835" wikidata="Q2116774" url="?curid=534835" title="Japanese counter word">
<text>In Japanese, counter words or counters are measure words used with numbers to count things, actions, and events. Counters are added directly after numbers. There are numerous counters, and different counters are used depending on the kind or shape of nouns that are being described. The Japanese term, , appears to have been literally calqued from the English term auxiliary numeral used by Basil Hall Chamberlain in &quot;A Handbook of Colloquial Japanese&quot;.

In Japanese, as in Chinese and Korean, numerals cannot quantify nouns by themselves (except, in certain cases, for the numbers from one to ten; see below). For example, to express the idea &quot;two dogs&quot; in Japanese one could say either:



but just pasting and together in either order is ungrammatical. Here is the number &quot;two&quot;, is the counter for small animals, is the possessive particle (a reversed &quot;of&quot;, similar to the &quot; &#x27;s&quot; in &quot;John&#x27;s dog&quot;), and is the word &quot;dog&quot;. 

Counters are not independent words; they must appear with a numeric prefix. The number can be imprecise: or, less commonly, , can both be used to mean &quot;some/several/many&quot;, and, in questions, &quot;what/how many/how much&quot;. For example:



Some nouns prefer , as in:
: &quot;how many nights?&quot;
: &quot;I was gone for many days.&quot;

Counters are similar in function to the word &quot;pieces&quot; in &quot;two pieces of paper&quot; or &quot;cups&quot; in &quot;two cups of coffee&quot;. However, they cannot take non-numerical modifiers. So while &quot;two pieces of paper&quot; translates fairly directly as:

&quot;two green pieces of paper&quot; must be rendered as , akin to &quot;two pieces of green paper&quot;.

Just as in English, different counters can be used to convey different types of quantity.



There are numerous counters, and depending on the kind or shape of nouns the number is describing, different counters are used.

Grammatically, counter words can appear either before or after the noun they count. They generally occur &quot;after&quot; the noun (following particles), and if used before the noun, they emphasize the quantity; this is a common mistake for English learners of Japanese. For example:

In contrast:

would only be appropriate when emphasizing the number as in responding with &quot;[I] drank &quot;two&quot; bottles of beer&quot; to &quot;How many beers did you drink?&quot;.

== Phrase structure involving numerals and counters ==

In generative grammar, one proposed structure of Japanese nominal phrases includes three layers of functional projections: #P, CaseP, and QuantifierP. Here, #P is placed above NP to explain Japanese&#x27;s lack of plural morphology, and to make clear the # head is the stem of such morphology. This structure relies on movement in order to satisfy agreement via extended projection principle features.

== Substitution of counters ==
In Japanese, virtually all nouns must use a counter to express number because Japanese lacks singular/plural morphology. In this sense, virtually all Japanese nouns are mass nouns. This grammatical feature can result in situations where one is unable to express the number of a particular object in a syntactically correct way because one does not know, or cannot remember, the appropriate counting word. With quantities from one to ten, this problem can often be sidestepped by using the traditional numerals (see below), which can quantify many nouns without help. For example, &quot;four apples&quot; is where is the counter, but can also be expressed, using the traditional numeral four, as . These traditional numerals cannot be used to count all nouns, however; some, including nouns for people and animals, require a proper counter (except for 1 and 2 people, which virtually always use variants of the traditional numerals; see exceptions).

Some of the more common counters may substitute for less common ones. For example, (see below) is often used for all animals, regardless of size. However, many speakers will prefer to use the traditionally correct counter, , when speaking of larger animals such as horses. This yields a range of possible counters, with differing degrees of usage and acceptability – for example, when ordering kushikatsu (fried skewers), one may order them as (two skewers), (two sticks), or (two items), in decreasing order of precision.

Counters may be intentionally misused for humorous, stupid, or insulting effects. For example, the phrase (&quot;one man [like an animal]&quot;), uses , the counter for animals, instead of the typical counters for people.

==Table of traditional numerals==
==Common counters by category==
This is a selective list of some of the more commonly used counting words.

==Extended list of counters==
This list also includes some counters and usages that are rarely used or not widely known; other words can also be used as counters more sporadically.

==Euphonic changes==
Systematic changes occur when particular numbers precede counters that begin with certain phonemes. For example, + → . The details are listed in the table below.

This can be the result of the morpho-phonological phenomenon of historical sound changes, as shown by the voicing of :

change from glottal to bilabial .

It may also be that some counters carry features which are responsible for for singular, dual, and plural nouns, where singular carries [+singular, −augmented] features, dual carries [−singular, −augmented] features, and plural carries [−singular, +augmented] features.



These changes are followed fairly consistently but exceptions and variations between speakers do exist. Where variations are common, more than one alternative is listed.

 is replaced by either or () followed by a doubled consonant before the voiceless consonants as shown in the table. is the older form, but it has been replaced by in the speech of recent generations.

==Exceptions==
The traditional numbers are used by and for young children to give their ages, instead of using the age counter (or ) .

Some counters, notably and , use the traditional numerals for some numbers as shown in the table below. Other uses of traditional numbers are usually restricted to certain phrases, such as and (one and two months respectively), (a single word) and (once).

Sometimes common numbers that have a derived meaning are written using different kanji. For example, (alone) is written , and (once more, another time) is normally written instead of . The counter for months (derived from kanji ) is commonly written .

 and are alternatives for 7, and are alternatives for 4, and and are alternatives for 9. In those three pairs of options, , and respectively are more commonly used. Some counters, however, notably (people), (month of the year), (day of the month, days), (time of day) and (hours) take certain alternatives only. These are shown in the table below.

While (occurrences) and (0.01 yen, now rarely used) follow the euphonic changes listed above, homophones (stories/floors of a building) and (1000) are slightly different as shown below, although these differences are not followed by all speakers. Thus (&quot;third floor&quot;) can be read either or , while (&quot;three times&quot;) can only be read .


==Ordinal numbers==
In general, the counter words mentioned above are cardinal numbers, in that they indicate quantity. To transform a counter word into an ordinal number that denotes position in a sequence, is added to the end of the counter. Thus &quot;one time&quot; would be translated as , whereas &quot;the first time&quot; would be translated as .

This rule is inconsistent, however, as counters without the suffix are often used interchangeably with cardinal and ordinal meanings. For example, can mean both &quot;three floors&quot; and &quot;third floor.&quot;

==Periods of time==
To express a period of time one may add to the following words: , , , (and its irregular readings aside from ), , and . Usage varies depending on the word, though. For example, omitting in the case of would be a mistake, whereas and are both in frequent use. In addition, is rarely heard due to essentially being superfluous, the already functioning to express the length.

== Counter for rabbits ==
The counter for rabbits is (), which is the same as the counter for birds. Usually,  () is used for &quot;small-to-medium-size animals&quot;, therefore, the counter for rabbits is an exception. There are many theories about why () is used for rabbits instead of  ().

One of the theories is that in Edo-era, eating four-legged animals was strictly forbidden by the government, and people were not allowed to consume rabbit meat. Then, people started to categorize rabbits as birds so that they can consume rabbit meat, and the counter was also changed from () to (). Another theory is that taste of rabbit meat is similar to bird meat, and in addition, the rabbits were captured using a net just like birds so () is used instead of  (). Takemitsu says that the origin of the word rabbit, , is which describes birds feather: therefore, the counter, (), is used for rabbits.

==See also==
* Japanese units of measurement

==References==
&lt;section begin=&quot;list-of-glossing-abbreviations&quot;/&gt;
OBJ:object
&lt;section end=&quot;list-of-glossing-abbreviations&quot;/&gt;

==External links==
* About.com - Counters 
* A list of numeral counters with ichi/hito set indicated.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="3" end="11" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116774" start="13" end="26" title="Japanese counter word" label="counter words"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116774" start="30" end="38" title="Japanese counter word" label="counters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916780" start="43" end="55" title="measure word" label="measure word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337084" start="67" end="74" title="Japanese numerals" label="numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q204826" start="335" end="341" title="calque" label="calque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337084" start="375" end="382" title="Japanese numerals" label="numeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q810029" start="391" end="413" title="Basil Hall Chamberlain" label="Basil Hall Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q849760" start="484" end="491" title="Chinese classifier" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q488953" start="496" end="502" title="Korean count word" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="529" end="533" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116774" start="819" end="826" title="Japanese counter word" label="counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480213" start="2108" end="2117" title="Japanese particles" label="particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q36108" start="2501" end="2519" title="generative grammar" label="generative grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901298" start="2817" end="2825" title="Syntactic movement" label="movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q335772" start="2860" end="2889" title="extended projection principle" label="extended projection principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q489168" start="3101" end="3110" title="mass noun" label="mass noun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3868" end="3878" title="#Exceptions" label="exceptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185709" start="4276" end="4286" title="kushikatsu" label="kushikatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329258" start="7357" end="7373" title="cardinal number (linguistics)" label="cardinal numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q923933" start="7443" end="7457" title="ordinal number (linguistics)" label="ordinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029751" start="9168" end="9197" title="Japanese units of measurement" label="Japanese units of measurement"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534839" wikidata="Q111660583" url="?curid=534839" title="Sunbeam">
<text>A sunbeam, in meteorological optics, is a beam of sunlight that appears to radiate from the position of the Sun. Shining through openings in clouds or between other objects such as mountains and buildings, these beams of particle-scattered sunlight are essentially parallel shafts separated by darker shadowed volumes. Their apparent convergence in the sky is a visual illusion from linear perspective. The same illusion causes the apparent convergence of parallel lines on a long straight road or hallway at a distant vanishing point. The scattering particles that make sunlight visible may be air molecules or particulates.

==Crepuscular rays==


&quot;Crepuscular rays&quot; or &quot;god rays&quot; are sunbeams that originate when the sun is just below the horizon, during twilight hours. Crepuscular rays are noticeable when the contrast between light and dark is most obvious. Crepuscular comes from the Latin word &quot;crepusculum&quot;, meaning twilight. Crepuscular rays usually appear orange because the path through the atmosphere at sunrise and sunset passes through up to 40 times as much air as rays from a high midday sun. Particles in the air scatter short wavelength light (blue and green) through Rayleigh scattering much more strongly than longer wavelength yellow and red light.

Loosely, the term &quot;crepuscular rays&quot; is sometimes extended to the general phenomenon of rays of sunlight that appear to converge at a point in the sky, irrespective of time of day.

==Anticrepuscular rays==

In some cases, sunbeams may extend across the sky and appear to converge at the antisolar point, the point on the celestial sphere opposite of the Sun&#x27;s direction. In this case, they are called &quot;antisolar rays&quot; (anytime not during astronomical night) or &quot;anticrepuscular rays&quot; (during the twilight period). This apparent dual convergence (at both the solar and the antisolar points) is a perspective effect analogous to the apparent dual convergence of the parallel lines of a long straight road or hallway at directly opposite points (to an observer above the ground).

==Alternative names==
* Backstays of the sun, a nautical term, from the fact that backstays that brace the mast of a sailing ship converge in a similar way
* Buddha rays
* God rays, used by some members of the computer graphics industry
* Jacob&#x27;s Ladder
* Light shafts, sometimes used in the computer graphics industry, such as the game engine Unreal Engine
* Ropes of Maui, originally &quot;taura a Maui&quot;from the Maori tale of Maui Potiki restraining the sun with ropes to make the days longer
* Sun drawing water, from the ancient Greek belief that sunbeams drew water into the sky (an early description of evaporation)
==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==

==External links==
* Sunrays – Crepuscular rays, Explanation &amp; Images
* Detailed description of how crepuscular rays occur</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q111660583" start="2" end="9" title="Sunbeam" label="sunbeam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367365" start="14" end="35" title="meteorological optics" label="meteorological optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493660" start="42" end="46" title="lightbeam" label="beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="50" end="58" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653577" start="92" end="111" title="position of the Sun" label="position of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546227" start="221" end="239" title="light scattering by particles" label="particle-scattered"/>
<link wikidata="Q53875" start="265" end="273" title="parallel (geometry)" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q160020" start="301" end="307" title="shadow" label="shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q174923" start="362" end="377" title="visual illusion" label="visual illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="383" end="401" title="linear perspective" label="linear perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q163362" start="519" end="534" title="vanishing point" label="vanishing point"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="612" end="624" title="particulates" label="particulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q875322" start="656" end="672" title="Crepuscular rays" label="Crepuscular rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q164160" start="778" end="786" title="twilight" label="twilight"/>
<link wikidata="Q193709" start="1217" end="1236" title="Rayleigh scattering" label="Rayleigh scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429633" start="1600" end="1615" title="antisolar point" label="antisolar point"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="1634" end="1650" title="celestial sphere" label="celestial sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620282" start="1795" end="1815" title="anticrepuscular rays" label="anticrepuscular rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q164160" start="1834" end="1842" title="twilight" label="twilight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="1933" end="1944" title="perspective (graphical)" label="perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q340982" start="2198" end="2206" title="backstay" label="backstay"/>
<link wikidata="Q607715" start="2355" end="2374" title="Jacob&amp;#x27;s Ladder" label="Jacob&amp;#x27;s Ladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q608276" start="2465" end="2478" title="Unreal Engine" label="Unreal Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806741" start="2554" end="2565" title="Maui-Potiki" label="Maui Potiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="2651" end="2664" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="2735" end="2746" title="evaporation" label="evaporation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534847" wikidata="Q7836159" url="?curid=534847" title="Traverse County">
<text>Traverse County may refer to:

;Places
*Traverse County, Minnesota
*Grand Traverse County, Michigan

;Ships
*USS &quot;Traverse County&quot; (LST-1160), a United States Navy tank landing ship in commission from 1952 to 1970, which also saw non-commissioned service in the Military Sealift Command from 1972 to 1973 as USNS &quot;Traverse County&quot; (T-LST-1160)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q491160" start="40" end="66" title="Traverse County, Minnesota" label="Traverse County, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q490647" start="68" end="99" title="Grand Traverse County, Michigan" label="Grand Traverse County, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874843" start="109" end="151" title="USS Traverse County (LST-1160)" label="USS &amp;quot;Traverse County&amp;quot; (LST-1160)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534850" wikidata="Q2870168" url="?curid=534850" title="Bulkington">
<text>Bulkington is a large village and former civil parish near Bedworth, in the Nuneaton and Bedworth district of Warwickshire, England. In the 2011 census the ward had a population of 6,146 decreasing slightly to 6,080 at the 2021 census. It is located around northeast of Coventry, just south of the town of Nuneaton, east of Bedworth and southwest of Hinckley. Despite historically having stronger links with Bedworth, Bulkington forms part of the Nuneaton Urban Area. Bulkington was mentioned in the Domesday Book as &quot;Bochintone&quot;, meaning &quot;estate associated with a man called Bulca&quot;. 

The parish originally contained seven hamlets, two of which were subsumed by Bulkington village following residential building expansion which began in the 1930s. 

Historically the main industry in Bulkington was ribbon weaving. Today Bulkington is largely a commuter village for larger nearby urban centres such as Coventry, Nuneaton, Bedworth, Hinckley and Leicester. 

Bulkington has connections with the locally born author George Eliot (Mary Ann Evans), who knew the village well. She is thought to have referred to it as &quot;Raveloe&quot; in her book &quot;Silas Marner&quot; (1861). The church of St James is where George Eliot&#x27;s uncle and aunt are buried.

==History==

===Medieval===
The early history of Bulkington can be traced in the Domesday Book of 1086, where it is mentioned as among the estates of the Count of Meulan, overseen by his sub-tenant Salo. Originally the parish of Bulkington consisted of two five-hide vills - in the south Bulkington and Barnacle, and in the North Marston, Weston and Bramcote. The first four of these were all held by the Count of Meulan. Bulkington was the largest of these sub-divisions (at 4 hides and 1 virgate) and functioned as the centre of the manor; however, by the late 13th century the centre of the manor had moved to Weston-in-Arden. By 1285 the manor of Weston contained Bulkington, Bramcote, Barnacle, Ryton, Clifton, and Wibtoft. The manor house Weston Hall, which dates to the 16th century, still stands in Weston-in Arden. It was substantially renovated in 1892, and after serving for a time as a night club in the 1970s and 1980s, it now functions as a hotel.

===Early modern===
Throughout the medieval period and until the late 18th century, the principal employment in Bulkington had been agriculture: of meadow land were recorded in 1086; further, windmills are recorded for Weston and Marston Jabbett, and a water mill in Bramcote. However, in 1766 of common land were enclosed at Ryton, and 4 years later enclosure was applied to the remainder of land in Bulkington, totalling . Because of this, ribbon weaving supplemented or replaced agriculture as the main source of income for the majority of Bulkington&#x27;s population. This cottage industry had spread to Bulkington from the major centres of Coventry and Bedworth, where it had been introduced by the Huguenots in the 18th century.

The late 18th century and early 19th century was a period of significant growth for the village, with its population almost tripling in size. The 1830s saw a slump in the industry, due in part to the introduction of factory production at Coventry, and competition from cheap imports. However, the 1840s brought another period of growth when many buildings were re-fronted or rebuilt in chequered brick work (characteristic of North Warwickshire buildings of the period). The industry collapsed in the 1860s &quot;when the Cobden treaty with France removed the duty on French silks entering England&quot;. This was accompanied by a depression in agriculture and led to a fall in the population by almost a third by 1891. 

The Bulkington Baptismal register, 1841–1861, records that: &#x27;On Thursday, 15 August 1861, six families comprising 27 members left for Quebec, Canada, in consequence of the continued depression of the Ribbon trade… . At the same time 83 houses were vacant in the parish. Robert Potter, Vicar&#x27;. Nonetheless, ribbon production continued in Bulkington into the middle of the 20th century, through small factory production rather than as a cottage industry. The last factory, in Arden Road, closed in the early 1950s. 

In 1847 the Trent Valley Line was built near the village, and Bulkington railway station was opened. The station was closed in 1931.

===Recent developments===
Speculative private housing development began in the 1930s and by the 1960s surrounded the village with expansive suburban areas. In addition to the greenfield development of the 1960s, much of the village itself was redeveloped. This involved the creation of a shopping precinct in Leicester Street, which was the traditional heart of the village. Additionally, many of the chequered-pattern brick buildings were replaced by typical 1960s suburban houses. In 1968 a new east-west distributor road linking School Road and Bedworth Road replaced an ancient footpath. 

This development divorced the Church from Church Street; further road developments led to the demolition of many of the buildings in the historic precinct, and by the 1980s only Church Street retained any historic continuity. The remaining historic buildings were threatened with demolition which led directly to the creation of the Bulkington Conservation Area in 1985, which covers Church Street and the area surrounding St James&#x27; Parish Church. 

In November 2008 the Barbridge Close area, north of St James&#x27; Church, was excluded from the conservation area. St. James&#x27; is a Grade II listed building, along with two 19th-century chest tombs in the grounds. Numbers 3 and 4 Church Street, and the wrought iron railings on St James&#x27; are also afforded listed status.

==Governance==
===Political representation===
Bulkington is a ward of the Nuneaton and Bedworth local government district which, like the other wards in the district, is represented by 2 councillors. Bulkington is represented by Richard Smith (Conservative Party) &amp; Lubs Cvetkovic (Conservative Party).

The Nuneaton and Bedworth district is a subdivision of the Warwickshire County Council, which is currently Conservative controlled. Bulkington elects a councillor to the county council along with part of Whitestone ward. They are currently represented by Jeff Morgan (Conservative). 

Bulkington was part of the Nuneaton constituency in the House of Commons. However, following the changes to the Warwickshire parliamentary constituency boundaries which came into effect on 13 June 2007, and used for the first time at the 2010 general election, Bulkington was transferred into the Rugby constituency.

===Civic history===
In July 1850, Bulkington Local Board of Health was formed under the Public Health Act 1848, and in 1894 this was converted into an urban district council. From 1894 to 1932 Bulkington functioned as an independent urban district; however, the village lost its independence in 1932 under the Warwickshire Review Order, when it became part of the Rugby Rural District. Six years later, in 1938, it became part of Bedworth Urban District, which had been established in 1928. 

From 1938 Bulkington was therefore treated as part of Bedworth for administrative purposes. An administrative oversight at the time of the 1938 order merging Bulkington into Bedworth Urban District meant that the civil parish of Bulkington nominally continued to exist as an urban parish until 1954, but did not have a parish council of its own, being administered by Bedworth Urban District Council. The two civil parishes of Bedworth and Bulkington merged in 1954 to create a single parish called Bedworth covering the whole area of Bedworth Urban District. In 1951 the parish had a population of 3240. In 1974 the Bedworth Urban District became part of the Nuneaton and Bedworth district, which was created by the Local Government Act 1972. No successor parish was created for Bedworth, and so it became an unparished area.

==Religion and church history==
The 2001 Census records Bulkington&#x27;s population as being predominantly Christian, with 84.7% of residents naming Christianity as their religion. 8.4% stated No Religion, 0.8% Other and 6.0% did not disclose. The village is served by four churches: the Anglican St James&#x27; Parish Church, Our Lady of the Sacred Heart Catholic Church, Ryton Methodist Church, and Bulkington Congregational Church.

===Parish Church of St James===
St James&#x27; is the oldest church in Bulkington, dating to the 12th century. The church was given to the Abbey of Leicester after its foundation in 1143. Following the Dissolution of the Monasteries the church came into the Crown&#x27;s hands until 1554, when it was passed on and sold numerous times before returning to the Crown&#x27;s possession by 1662. It has remained in the possession of the Crown since. Records for baptisms and burials begin in 1606 and for marriages in 1683. The church had chapels in Weston, Ryton, Marston, Bramcote, Shilton and Ansty; the latter two were transferred from the Abbey of Leicester to Coventry Priory, and subsequently became independent parishes. The rectory, &quot;was acquired in 1587 by Robert Johnson, Archdeacon of Leicester, as part of the endowment of the grammar schools which he founded at Oakham and Uppingham&quot;. 

The Old Vicarage, a Victorian Tudor-Gothic building lies to the north-east of the church; a modern, suburban style vicarage lies closer to the church. The church today &quot;consists of a chancel with a vestry on the north; a nave, with a clearstory to the south only; north and south aisles; south porch; and a western tower&quot;. It displays a series of architectural developments from the 13th century through to the 20th, though the earliest material in the church dates from the 12th century, represented by a single voussoir and bell capital found in 1907 and built into the south porch. The tower was built in the mid-15th century and restored in 1907. The church has eight bells, the earliest of which belongs to the 16th century; these can be heard on Sundays, and during the week when the bell ringers practice.

===Bulkington Congregational Church===

Little is known of the history of this church, as its records were recently destroyed in a fire. However, a plaque on the front gable of the building records that it was built in 1811 and restored in 1883, making it the second oldest church building in the village. Further, the records for births and baptisms from 1812 to 1836 are available in the Warwickshire County archive. The church is a rectangular, two-storey brick building with a balcony. A later, single storey extension from the south of the building serves as the church hall. The church manse is situated to the south of the church. It lay unoccupied for some time but has since been renovated and is now occupied by the new pastor and his wife who moved to the area in the summer of 2008.

===Ryton Methodist Church===

There were originally two Methodist churches in the parish of Bulkington: Bulkington Methodist and Ryton Methodist. Ryton Methodist Church was initially situated in Long Street but moved to Rugby Road in 1911. A gazetteer from 1848 reports that there was a place of worship for &#x27;Wesleyans&#x27; in the parish, making the Methodist church (though not church building) the third oldest church in the village. Bulkington Methodist closed after 110 years on 12 October 1960 when the building had become unsafe; its congregation joined Ryton Methodist Church.

===Our Lady of the Sacred Heart Catholic Church===

The presence of the (post-Reformation) Catholic Church in Bulkington begins in 1842 when Richard Brome de Bary, owner of Weston Hall, converted to Catholicism. He established a mission at his home, dedicated to Our Lady of Bethlehem. As well as Bulkington, the church also serves the nearby village of Wolvey. The parish belongs to the archdiocese of Birmingham. The church is a brick building in Gothic style and was built in 1869; it holds 150 people. Recent architectural additions include the extension of the sacristy, the building of a parish hall, and the erection of a grotto to the Virgin Mary. The church has held a bi-annual flower festival since 1990.

==Education==
Bulkington has two schools: St James&#x27; Church of England Academy and Arden Forest Infant School, with a combined total of approximately 420 pupils. What is now St James&#x27; Church of England Junior School was built in 1959 as a 2-form entry school. In 1973, following the North Warwickshire primary school reorganisation plan, it became a Middle School and it was at this time that the school&#x27;s name was changed to St James&#x27; Church of England Middle School. In 1996, the school was redesignated a junior school, returning it to its original status. 

Arden Forest Infant School was founded in 1996 due to the Warwickshire reorganisation of schools and the subsequent amalgamation of Bulkington First School and Weston-in-Arden First School.

==Demography==
At the 2001 census, the Bulkington ward, which includes Bulkington, Weston-in-Arden, Ryton, Marston Jabbett, Bramcote (west), had a total population of 6,303. There were 3,214 females (51.0%) and 3,089 males (49.0%). The largest age groups in the ward were: 45–59 (1,526, 24.2%); 30–44 (1,104, 17.5%); and 65–74 (873, 13.9%). The vast majority of residents are white: 6,236 (98.9%). The largest ethnic minority was Asian: 38 (0.60%).



==Notes==
== References ==
==Sources==

*Allen, G. (2000) Warwickshire Towns &amp; Villages, Sigma Leisure 
*&#x27;Wyman, P. (1981) Bulkington Through the Ages
== External links ==

* Bulkington Congregational Church
*Our Lady of the Sacred Heart Catholic Church
*Ryton Methodist Church
*St James&#x27; Parish Church
*Arden Forest Infant School
*St James&#x27; Junior School</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2870168" start="0" end="10" title="Bulkington" label="Bulkington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="41" end="53" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q813962" start="59" end="67" title="Bedworth" label="Bedworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q920466" start="76" end="97" title="Nuneaton and Bedworth" label="Nuneaton and Bedworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23140" start="110" end="122" title="Warwickshire" label="Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="140" end="151" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="156" end="160" title="electoral ward" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="223" end="234" title="United Kingdom Census 2021" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="270" end="278" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q175632" start="306" end="314" title="Nuneaton" label="Nuneaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q813962" start="324" end="332" title="Bedworth" label="Bedworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020362" start="350" end="358" title="Hinckley" label="Hinckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="500" end="513" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="610" end="616" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="644" end="651" title="hamlet (place)" label="hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918773" start="820" end="826" title="ribbon" label="ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="827" end="834" title="weaving" label="weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q48442" start="866" end="874" title="commuter" label="commuter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="923" end="931" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q175632" start="933" end="941" title="Nuneaton" label="Nuneaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q813962" start="943" end="951" title="Bedworth" label="Bedworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020362" start="953" end="961" title="Hinckley" label="Hinckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q83065" start="966" end="975" title="Leicester" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q131333" start="1035" end="1047" title="George Eliot" label="George Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q638327" start="1172" end="1184" title="Silas Marner" label="Silas Marner"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="1360" end="1373" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991324" start="1433" end="1448" title="Count of Meulan" label="Count of Meulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="1498" end="1504" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q521994" start="1541" end="1545" title="Hide (unit)" label="hide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930254" start="1546" end="1550" title="vill" label="vill"/>
<link wikidata="Q48897389" start="1582" end="1590" title="Barnacle, Warwickshire" label="Barnacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956140" start="1629" end="1637" title="Bramcote, Warwickshire" label="Bramcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112014" start="1769" end="1776" title="virgate" label="virgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="1814" end="1819" title="manorialism" label="manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q728327" start="1999" end="2006" title="Wibtoft" label="Wibtoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="2012" end="2023" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="2177" end="2187" title="night club" label="night club"/>
<link wikidata="Q27686" start="2234" end="2239" title="hotel" label="hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2276" end="2284" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="2433" end="2441" title="windmill" label="windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q28792265" start="2471" end="2486" title="Marston Jabbett" label="Marston Jabbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="2494" end="2504" title="water mill" label="water mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956140" start="2508" end="2516" title="Bramcote, Warwickshire" label="Bramcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="2538" end="2549" title="common land" label="common land"/>
<link wikidata="Q792164" start="2592" end="2601" title="enclosure" label="enclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543799" start="2819" end="2835" title="cottage industry" label="cottage industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="2887" end="2895" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q813962" start="2900" end="2908" title="Bedworth" label="Bedworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="2946" end="2955" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="3216" end="3224" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14290457" start="3364" end="3373" title="chequered" label="chequered"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3519" end="3525" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="3839" end="3845" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="3847" end="3853" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918773" start="3905" end="3911" title="Ribbon" label="Ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="3967" end="3973" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q193364" start="3990" end="3995" title="Vicar" label="Vicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543799" start="4145" end="4161" title="cottage industry" label="cottage industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787912" start="4184" end="4189" title="Arden, Warwickshire" label="Arden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838471" start="4237" end="4254" title="Trent Valley Line" label="Trent Valley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209023" start="4287" end="4313" title="Bulkington railway station" label="Bulkington railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q473972" start="5297" end="5314" title="Conservation Area" label="Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="5545" end="5553" title="listed building" label="Grade II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083647" start="5599" end="5609" title="chest tomb" label="chest tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="5802" end="5806" title="Ward (country subdivision)" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q920466" start="5814" end="5835" title="Nuneaton and Bedworth" label="Nuneaton and Bedworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187580" start="5836" end="5861" title="Non-metropolitan district" label="local government district"/>
<link wikidata="Q708492" start="5927" end="5938" title="councillors" label="councillors"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="5984" end="6002" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="6026" end="6044" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066348" start="6107" end="6134" title="Warwickshire County Council" label="Warwickshire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996276" start="6252" end="6262" title="Whitestone, Warwickshire" label="Whitestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051057" start="6360" end="6381" title="Nuneaton (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Nuneaton constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="6389" end="6405" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="6571" end="6592" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031923" start="6630" end="6635" title="Rugby (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664281" start="6696" end="6717" title="Local Board of Health" label="Local Board of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q374614" start="6802" end="6824" title="Urban district (Great Britain and Ireland)" label="urban district council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378243" start="7015" end="7035" title="Rugby Rural District" label="Rugby Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="7357" end="7369" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137435" start="7463" end="7477" title="Parish councils in England" label="parish council"/>
<link wikidata="Q920466" start="7804" end="7825" title="Nuneaton and Bedworth" label="Nuneaton and Bedworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="7861" end="7886" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632657" start="7891" end="7907" title="successor parish" label="successor parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897276" start="7954" end="7969" title="unparished area" label="unparished area"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="8008" end="8019" title="United Kingdom Census 2001" label="2001 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="8080" end="8089" title="Christian" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="8261" end="8269" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8329" end="8337" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="8352" end="8361" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="8385" end="8399" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980614" start="8548" end="8566" title="Leicester Abbey" label="Abbey of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="8611" end="8641" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="Dissolution of the Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q331055" start="8880" end="8886" title="burial" label="burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956140" start="8979" end="8987" title="Bramcote, Warwickshire" label="Bramcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703370" start="8989" end="8996" title="Shilton, Warwickshire" label="Shilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772253" start="9001" end="9006" title="Ansty, Warwickshire" label="Ansty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590394" start="9071" end="9086" title="Coventry Priory" label="Coventry Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="9124" end="9130" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q607241" start="9138" end="9145" title="rectory" label="rectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346143" start="9177" end="9191" title="Robert Johnson (rector)" label="Robert Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q633730" start="9193" end="9203" title="Archdeacon" label="Archdeacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83065" start="9207" end="9216" title="Leicester" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="9250" end="9264" title="grammar school" label="grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073892" start="9286" end="9292" title="Oakham School" label="Oakham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403302" start="9297" end="9306" title="Uppingham School" label="Uppingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q607241" start="9324" end="9332" title="Vicarage" label="Vicarage"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="9336" end="9345" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q509364" start="9346" end="9351" title="Tudor architecture" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="9352" end="9358" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103841669" start="9504" end="9511" title="chancel" label="chancel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923504" start="9519" end="9525" title="vestry" label="vestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="9542" end="9546" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q580731" start="9555" end="9565" title="clearstory" label="clearstory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007996" start="9601" end="9606" title="aisle" label="aisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q200334" start="9636" end="9641" title="bell tower" label="tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316819" start="9839" end="9847" title="voussoir" label="voussoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q101401" start="9852" end="9856" title="bell" label="bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q721747" start="10288" end="10294" title="commemorative plaque" label="plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161370" start="10308" end="10313" title="gable" label="gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="10482" end="10489" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23140" start="10530" end="10542" title="Warwickshire" label="Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170552" start="10621" end="10628" title="balcony" label="balcony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116768" start="10708" end="10719" title="church hall" label="church hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051104" start="10732" end="10737" title="manse" label="manse"/>
<link wikidata="Q152002" start="10870" end="10876" title="pastor" label="pastor"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="10992" end="11001" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633792" start="11250" end="11258" title="Wesleyan" label="Wesleyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645505" start="11605" end="11616" title="English Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="11618" end="11633" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110768" start="11790" end="11811" title="Our Lady of Bethlehem" label="Our Lady of Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q765948" start="11881" end="11887" title="Wolvey" label="Wolvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="11915" end="11926" title="diocese" label="archdiocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="11976" end="11982" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q468939" start="12093" end="12101" title="sacristy" label="sacristy"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="12170" end="12181" title="Mary (mother of Jesus)" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="12301" end="12318" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787912" start="12331" end="12343" title="Arden, Warwickshire" label="Arden Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q131293161" start="12344" end="12357" title="Infant School" label="Infant School"/>
<link wikidata="Q18193" start="12494" end="12498" title="Form (education)" label="form"/>
<link wikidata="Q23140" start="12542" end="12554" title="Warwickshire" label="Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="12555" end="12569" title="primary school" label="primary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q149566" start="12603" end="12616" title="Middle School" label="Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17033249" start="12968" end="12980" title="First School" label="First School"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="13038" end="13049" title="United Kingdom Census 2001" label="2001 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="13066" end="13070" title="Ward (country subdivision)" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q28792265" start="13123" end="13138" title="Marston Jabbett" label="Marston Jabbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956140" start="13140" end="13148" title="Bramcote, Warwickshire" label="Bramcote"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534852" wikidata="Q226434" url="?curid=534852" title="NFC">
<text>NFC usually refers to: 
* Near-field communication, a set of communication protocols for electronic devices
* National Football Conference, part of US National Football League

NFC may also refer to:
== Psychology==
* Need for cognition, in psychology
* Need for closure, social psychological term

==Sports==
* NFC Championship Game, the National Football Conference Championship Game
* NCAA Football Championship (Philippines)
* National football centre, soccer centre in several countries
* Newcastle F.C., Northern Irish football team
* Newington F.C., Northern Irish football team
* Newtowne F.C., Northern Irish football team
* Northeast Football Conference, junior college football conference

==Organizations==
* National Fertilizer Corporation, a state-owned enterprise in Pakistan
* National Finance Center of the US Department of Agriculture
* Nuclear Fuel Complex, a division of the Department of Atomic Energy in India
* National Finance Commission Award, a series of economic reforms in Pakistan

==Other==
* New Friends Colony, a residential neighborhood in India
* News First Class, a news website
* No Fem el CIM, Catalan social movement
* Normalization Form Canonical Composition, one of the forms of Unicode normalization
* Norwegian Forest cat, a breed of domestic cat

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q226434" start="0" end="3" title="NFC" label="NFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q273353" start="26" end="50" title="Near-field communication" label="Near-field communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q319007" start="110" end="138" title="National Football Conference" label="National Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q226434" start="177" end="180" title="NFC" label="NFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778408" start="218" end="236" title="Need for cognition" label="Need for cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979672" start="254" end="270" title="Need for closure" label="Need for closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784597" start="312" end="333" title="NFC Championship Game" label="NFC Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952959" start="388" end="428" title="NCAA Football Championship (Philippines)" label="NCAA Football Championship (Philippines)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979590" start="431" end="455" title="National football centre" label="National football centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017413" start="494" end="508" title="Newcastle F.C." label="Newcastle F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7018275" start="541" end="555" title="Newington F.C." label="Newington F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q16846092" start="588" end="601" title="Newtowne F.C." label="Newtowne F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7057921" start="634" end="663" title="Northeast Football Conference" label="Northeast Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q85787890" start="721" end="752" title="National Fertilizer Corporation" label="National Fertilizer Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972672" start="793" end="816" title="National Finance Center" label="National Finance Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067950" start="855" end="875" title="Nuclear Fuel Complex" label="Nuclear Fuel Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972674" start="934" end="967" title="National Finance Commission Award" label="National Finance Commission Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q15651159" start="1023" end="1041" title="New Friends Colony" label="New Friends Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407309" start="1081" end="1097" title="News First Class" label="News First Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781247" start="1116" end="1129" title="No Fem el CIM" label="No Fem el CIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q250798" start="1157" end="1197" title="Normalization Form Canonical Composition" label="Normalization Form Canonical Composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q42667" start="1243" end="1263" title="Norwegian Forest cat" label="Norwegian Forest cat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534869" wikidata="Q5958541" url="?curid=534869" title="Hyperreal">
<text>Hyperreal may refer to:

* Hyperreal numbers, an extension of the real numbers in mathematics that are used in non-standard analysis
* Hyperreal.org, a rave culture website based in San Francisco, US
* Hyperreality, a term used in semiotics and postmodern philosophy
* Hyperrealism (visual arts), a school of painting
* Hyperreal (The Shamen song), 1990
* Hyperreal (Flume song)&quot;, 2017
* &quot;Hyperreal&quot;, a song by My Ticket Home
* &quot;Hyper Real&quot;, a song by Negativland from &quot;Dispepsi&quot;

== See also ==
* Hypernumber
* Superreal number</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5958541" start="0" end="9" title="Hyperreal" label="Hyperreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958543" start="27" end="43" title="Hyperreal number" label="Hyperreal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q96381524" start="135" end="148" title="Hyperreal.org" label="Hyperreal.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479785" start="202" end="214" title="Hyperreality" label="Hyperreality"/>
<link wikidata="Q749832" start="269" end="295" title="Hyperrealism (visual arts)" label="Hyperrealism (visual arts)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85234732" start="320" end="347" title="Hyperreal (The Shamen song)" label="Hyperreal (The Shamen song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30606941" start="356" end="378" title="Hyperreal (Flume song)" label="Hyperreal (Flume song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14639103" start="426" end="440" title="My Ticket Home" label="My Ticket Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282564" start="500" end="508" title="Dispepsi" label="Dispepsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q837414" start="533" end="544" title="Hypernumber" label="Hypernumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111211" start="547" end="563" title="Superreal number" label="Superreal number"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534872" wikidata="Q435183" url="?curid=534872" title="Caroline Dhavernas">
<text>Caroline Dhavernas ( ; born May 15, 1978) is a Canadian actress. In the United States, her best known work has been her collaborations with Bryan Fuller. She played Jaye Tyler in the Fox comedy-drama series &quot;Wonderfalls&quot;, and Alana Bloom in the NBC psychological horror drama series &quot;Hannibal&quot;. 

She also starred as Lily Brenner in the ABC medical drama &quot;Off the Map&quot;. From 2017 to 2019, she portrayed the titular character in the Canada-produced and Canadian- and American-distributed medical drama-black comedy &quot;Mary Kills People&quot;.

==Early life==
Dhavernas was born in Montreal, Quebec, the daughter of the Québécois actors Sébastien Dhavernas and Michèle Deslauriers. Her sister Gabrielle Dhavernas is also an actress and specializes in dubbing. The voice timbre of both actresses is very similar, enabling Gabrielle to dub the voice of Caroline. She learned English at a very young age, as her parents sent her to an English-speaking elementary school called The Priory School.

==Career==
She began her career at the age of 8, dubbing voices for television productions such as &quot;Babar&quot;. At the age of 12 she began her acting career in the film &quot;Comme un Voleur&quot; (1990). Also in 1990, she played bubbly magic wizard fairy Lucy in the children&#x27;s musical film via home video, &quot;The Magic Dragon Tales.&quot; In 1992, she appeared as the dark brunette haired girl who played with the horse in the bedtime story hit &quot;Black Beauty&quot;. In 1996, she played her main role as magical blonde mermaid princess Summer Rose in the girly romance drama &quot;Summer&#x27;s Colors.&quot;

Dhavernas portrayed swimmer Marilyn Bell in the television film &quot;Heart: The Marilyn Bell Story&quot; (1999). She trained for two months with the Pointe-Claire Swim Club to convincingly portray Bell, who was the first to cross 32-mile Lake Ontario in 1954. Other notable films have included a leading role in &quot;Edge of Madness&quot; (2002), and supporting roles in &quot;Out Cold&quot; (2001) and &quot;Lost and Delirious&quot; (2001). She also had a notable role on &quot;Law &amp; Order&quot; as a closeted, gay teenager who killed her girlfriend in the episode &quot;Girl Most Likely&quot; (season 12, episode 17).

Dhavernas portrayed Jaye Tyler, the central character in &quot;Wonderfalls&quot;, which debuted on US television in March 2004. Jaye is an over-educated underachiever from a wealthy family who lives in a trailer park and works at the Wonderfalls Gift Emporium, a Niagara Falls gift shop. The show&#x27;s premise is that Jaye is spoken to by inanimate objects, which encourage her to help others. Dhavernas has described the show as being like &quot;&quot;Touched by an Angel&quot; on acid&quot;. The show received widespread critical praise, but Fox cancelled the show after only four episodes aired. Millions of fans signed an online petition with the hope that Fox would continue the show, and as a result 20th Century Fox released the DVD with all 13 completed episodes. She did her own voice-overs for the French translation of &quot;Wonderfalls&quot;. She appeared as Cerise in the 2003 horror flick &quot;A Tale of Two Sisters&quot;, inspired the South Korea hit from 2001, whom she and Katharine Isabelle starred together.

Since the cancellation of &quot;Wonderfalls&quot;, Dhavernas has continued to appear in Canadian-made features in 2004, such as &quot;Niagara Motel&quot; and &quot;These Girls&quot;. In early 2006, she played Isabella Marie, who lived in love, tragedy, and ugliness with suggesting her family, winding up being pregnant, and haunting her dark vengeance with luciferin of fallen agony, in &quot;The Beautiful Beast&quot; and the follow-up &quot;The Diary Of Isabella.&quot; She also appeared in &quot;Black Sheep&quot;, produced by Jonathan King and directed by Eli Roth, as Nikki, &quot;Hollywoodland&quot; (2006) as Barbara about the death of actor George Reeves, and Juliana O&#x27;Neill, the wife of Eric O&#x27;Neill, on &quot;Breach&quot; (2007).

Dhavernas also took the lead role in &quot;Surviving My Mother&quot; (which went under the working title of &quot;The Yellow Woman&quot;), a film directed by Émile Gaudreault which premiered at the Festival des films du monde of Montreal on August 28, 2007. In 2008, Dhavernas starred in &quot;Passchendaele&quot;, a film written and directed by Paul Gross about the Battle of Passchendaele. &quot;Passchendaele&quot; accounted for half of 2008&#x27;s box office revenue from made-in-Canada anglophone films and as of 2009 is the most expensive film in Canadian history.
It&#x27;s a beautiful film and I&#x27;m really, really happy to be part of it. It&#x27;s about battle of Passchendaele, which was a very important battle for Canadians and it&#x27;s a big part of our history. It was just so amazing to be privileged to live a little part of that history. A piece of our history.

Other projects include &quot;The Cry of the Owl&quot;, a film adaptation of Patricia Highsmith&#x27;s novel of the same name, and the popular Quebec comedy &quot;Father and Guns (De père en flic)&quot;. In 2009, she played Bethany in the romance action drama &quot;In Heat&quot;. She also appeared in the first and last episodes of HBO&#x27;s miniseries &quot;The Pacific&quot;, produced by Steven Spielberg and Tom Hanks, and a guest role on &quot;Law &amp; Order: Criminal Intent&quot;, where she played Maya in the episode &quot;Love Sick&quot; in May 2010. In 2011, she played Emily in the rare appearance in the HS reading hit &quot;The Awakening&quot;.

In 2012, audiences saw her in Martin Villeneuve&#x27;s &quot;Mars et Avril&quot;, a science fiction film based on the graphic novels of the same name.

In 2013, she was cast as Alana Bloom, the female lead in &quot;Hannibal&quot;, reuniting her with &quot;Wonderfalls&quot; creator Bryan Fuller.

Dhavernas starred in the Canadian black comedy-drama medical thriller &quot;Mary Kills People&quot;, which premiered on Global on January 25, 2017. The series premiered in the U.S. on April 23 on the Lifetime U.S. basic cable network. Season 2 debuted on Global on January 3, 2018, and also on Lifetime on March 13. Each season consisted of six episodes on both Global and Lifetime. Lifetime did not air the third and final season when the network announced in December 2018. The series concluded in 2019.

She also voiced the narrator in the video game from Ubisoft titled &quot;Child of Light&quot;.

In November 2021, CDPQ Infra announced that Dhavernas was selected to become the official voice announcer of the Réseau express métropolitain, following in the footsteps of her mother, Michèle Deslauriers, who has been the voice of the Montreal Metro since 2003.

==Personal life==
Dhavernas has been in a relationship with actor Maxime Le Flaguais since 2016. In September 2018 she gave birth to their daughter, named Françoise.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
===Video game===
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q435183" start="0" end="18" title="Caroline Dhavernas" label="Caroline Dhavernas"/>
<link wikidata="Q995026" start="140" end="152" title="Bryan Fuller" label="Bryan Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="183" end="186" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q593857" start="213" end="224" title="Wonderfalls" label="Wonderfalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="255" end="258" title="National Broadcasting Company" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q888841" start="299" end="307" title="Hannibal (TV series)" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="357" end="360" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q630532" start="381" end="392" title="Off the Map (TV series)" label="Off the Map"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="531" end="543" title="black comedy" label="black comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883621" start="550" end="567" title="Mary Kills People" label="Mary Kills People"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="613" end="621" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="623" end="629" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q245507" start="651" end="660" title="Québécois people" label="Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510050" start="668" end="687" title="Sébastien Dhavernas" label="Sébastien Dhavernas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311613" start="692" end="711" title="Michèle Deslauriers" label="Michèle Deslauriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="782" end="789" title="Dubbing (filmmaking)" label="dubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="801" end="807" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="904" end="911" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="963" end="970" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="1074" end="1081" title="dubbing (filmmaking)" label="dubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="1093" end="1103" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q797587" start="1130" end="1135" title="Babar (TV series)" label="Babar"/>
<link wikidata="Q880092" start="1492" end="1504" title="Black Beauty" label="Black Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937996" start="1683" end="1695" title="Marilyn Bell" label="Marilyn Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q142271" start="1805" end="1818" title="Pointe-Claire" label="Pointe-Claire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062" start="1894" end="1906" title="Lake Ontario" label="Lake Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337710" start="1974" end="1989" title="Edge of Madness" label="Edge of Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339994" start="2034" end="2042" title="Out Cold (2001 film)" label="Out Cold"/>
<link wikidata="Q902480" start="2066" end="2084" title="Lost and Delirious" label="Lost and Delirious"/>
<link wikidata="Q321423" start="2136" end="2151" title="Law &amp;amp; Order" label="Law &amp;amp; Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q593857" start="2345" end="2356" title="Wonderfalls" label="Wonderfalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q128133" start="2545" end="2558" title="Niagara Falls, New York" label="Niagara Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q174972" start="2737" end="2756" title="Touched by an Angel" label="Touched by an Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="2766" end="2770" title="LSD" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="2828" end="2831" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084961" start="2990" end="3006" title="20th Century Fox Home Entertainment" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3092" end="3098" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q255260" start="3193" end="3214" title="A Tale of Two Sisters" label="A Tale of Two Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q251063" start="3447" end="3460" title="Niagara Motel" label="Niagara Motel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156493" start="3477" end="3488" title="These Girls" label="These Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206555" start="3707" end="3726" title="The Beautiful Beast" label="The Beautiful Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q464316" start="3807" end="3830" title="Black Sheep (2006 New Zealand film)" label="&amp;quot;Black Sheep&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q358714" start="3874" end="3882" title="Eli Roth" label="Eli Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138011" start="3900" end="3913" title="Hollywoodland" label="Hollywoodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q342537" start="3963" end="3976" title="George Reeves" label="George Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387202" start="4016" end="4033" title="Eric O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Eric O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345585" start="4044" end="4050" title="Breach (2007 film)" label="Breach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647232" start="4109" end="4128" title="Surviving My Mother" label="Surviving My Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q730064" start="4224" end="4240" title="Émile Gaudreault" label="Émile Gaudreault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070586" start="4264" end="4291" title="New Montreal FilmFest" label="Festival des films du monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060453" start="4360" end="4373" title="Passchendaele (film)" label="Passchendaele"/>
<link wikidata="Q720723" start="4412" end="4422" title="Paul Gross" label="Paul Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q426227" start="4433" end="4456" title="Battle of Passchendaele" label="Battle of Passchendaele"/>
<link wikidata="Q443773" start="4979" end="4997" title="The Cry of the Owl (2009 film)" label="The Cry of the Owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q270635" start="5026" end="5044" title="Patricia Highsmith" label="Patricia Highsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196742" start="5052" end="5074" title="The Cry of the Owl" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q618208" start="5112" end="5127" title="Father and Guns" label="Father and Guns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5215" end="5222" title="In Heat (film)" label="In Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="5282" end="5285" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q598499" start="5310" end="5321" title="The Pacific (miniseries)" label="The Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="5341" end="5357" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="5362" end="5371" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5399" end="5431" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Criminal Intent" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Criminal Intent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474154" start="5582" end="5607" title="The Awakening (2011 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Awakening&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295670" start="5640" end="5657" title="Martin Villeneuve" label="Martin Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294972" start="5671" end="5684" title="Mars et Avril" label="Mars et Avril"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="5694" end="5709" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q888841" start="5825" end="5833" title="Hannibal (TV series)" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q995026" start="5892" end="5904" title="Bryan Fuller" label="Bryan Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983009" start="5932" end="5940" title="Television in Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="5941" end="5953" title="black comedy" label="black comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="5954" end="5959" title="dramedy" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q182015" start="5968" end="5976" title="thriller (genre)" label="thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883621" start="5983" end="6000" title="Mary Kills People" label="Mary Kills People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142327" start="6027" end="6033" title="Global Television Network" label="Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="6107" end="6115" title="Lifetime (TV network)" label="Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q188273" start="6466" end="6473" title="Ubisoft" label="Ubisoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q16319370" start="6487" end="6501" title="Child of Light" label="Child of Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q19582331" start="6623" end="6651" title="Réseau express métropolitain" label="Réseau express métropolitain"/>
<link wikidata="Q392377" start="6746" end="6760" title="Montreal Metro" label="Montreal Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16183418" start="6840" end="6858" title="Maxime Le Flaguais" label="Maxime Le Flaguais"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534875" wikidata="Q1723895" url="?curid=534875" title="Kanowna, Western Australia">
<text>Kanowna is a ghost town in the Goldfields region of Western Australia, about east of Kalgoorlie. At the 2016 census, Kanowna had a population of 10 people.

After the discovery of gold in the area in 1893, the townsite was gazetted in 1894. and the population grew from 2,500 in 1897 to over 12,500 by 1899.

However, the alluvial gold supply was rapidly exhausted and underground mines following the outcropping vein produced decreasing amounts of gold, resulting in a slow but steady decrease in the population. The railway station, terminus of the Kalgoorlie to Kanowna railway line, was closed during the Great Depression, and by 1953 the town had been abandoned. The railway station platform, two cemeteries and mine workings are all that is left of the original town of Kanowna. Signs erected by the Eastern Goldfields Historical Society mark the sites of significant buildings.

Increasing gold prices in the late 1970s sparked renewed interest in exploring the geology of the area for new sources of gold. The discovery of a large amount of gold, previously undiscovered because the vein did not reach the surface, made gold mining in the region economically viable again. Mining recommenced in 1986, initially as open-cut mining, before moving to underground mines. As of 2002, the Kanowna Belle mine employed more than 300 people.

==See also==
* Electoral district of Kanowna

==References==
==Further reading==
* Laurie, Kris (Kristien Elizabeth) (1993) &quot;Kanowna heritage trail : commemorating Kanowna&#x27;s centenary, 1893–1993&quot;. Kalgoorlie, W.A : Kalgoorlie-Boulder Tourist Centre for Delta Gold N.L.
* Baugh, Robert (2016), &quot;Wealth for the Willing: The Story of Kanowna&quot;. 4/67 McCallum Lane, Victoria Park, Western Australia. ISBN 978-0-646-96359-4</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1723895" start="0" end="7" title="Kanowna, Western Australia" label="Kanowna"/>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="13" end="23" title="ghost town" label="ghost town"/>
<link wikidata="Q60120" start="31" end="41" title="Goldfields-Esperance region of Western Australia" label="Goldfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="52" end="69" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q329503" start="85" end="95" title="Kalgoorlie, Western Australia" label="Kalgoorlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="180" end="184" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="322" end="330" title="alluvial" label="alluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q130213364" start="551" end="585" title="Kalgoorlie to Kanowna railway line" label="Kalgoorlie to Kanowna railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="609" end="625" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104297" start="1222" end="1237" title="open-cut mining" label="open-cut mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690200" start="1291" end="1304" title="Kanowna Belle" label="Kanowna Belle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355548" start="1357" end="1386" title="Electoral district of Kanowna" label="Electoral district of Kanowna"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534882" wikidata="Q1144655" url="?curid=534882" title="Ronja, the Robber's Daughter">
<text>Ronia, the Robber&#x27;s Daughter (Swedish: &quot;Ronja rövardotter&quot;) is a children&#x27;s fantasy book by the Swedish author Astrid Lindgren, first published in 1981.

The book has been translated into at least 39 languages. It was adapted as a film in 1984, a Danish and a German musical, the Japanese anime, and a live-action television adaptation.

== Plot summary==

Ronia is a girl growing up among a clan of robbers living in a castle in the woodlands of early-Medieval Scandinavia. As the only child of Matt, the chief, she is expected to become the leader of the clan someday. Their castle, Matt&#x27;s Fort, is split into two parts by a lightning bolt on the day of Ronia&#x27;s birth. Ronia grows up with Matt&#x27;s clan of robbers as her only company, until a rival robber group led by Borka moves into the other half of the castle, exacerbating the longstanding rivalry between the two bands.

One day, Ronia sees Birk Borkason, the only son of Borka, idling by the chasm. He is the only other child she has ever met, and so she is sorry that he is a Borka. He engages her in a game of jumping across, which does not end until Birk almost falls down. Ronia saves him, and they eventually become friends.

The following winter is long and cold and although Matt&#x27;s robbers are well fed, their counterparts are suffering on the other side of the chasm. Ronia brings food to Birk through a secret passageway. They grow very close but both know that they cannot tell their families. Later that year, Birk is captured by Ronia&#x27;s father. Ronia gives herself to the Borkas so she must be exchanged, but as a result, her father disowns her and refuses to acknowledge her as his daughter. Birk and Ronia run away to the woods, where they live in a cave and experience several harrowing adventures with the wood&#x27;s indigenous wildlife, including trolls, forest gnomes, and harpies. Ultimately their families repent of their feuding, and everyone is reunited, but the story concludes with both Ronia and Birk deciding that the robber&#x27;s life is not for them.

==Adaptations==
===Literature===
In 1983, Trina Schart Hyman illustrated a cover for the book, which is published by Puffin Books.

===Film===

In 1984, the book was made into a Swedish fantasy film. It was directed by the Swedish film director Tage Danielsson and adapted for screenplay by Astrid Lindgren herself. It was a major success, becoming the highest-grossing film in Sweden, and winning a Silver Bear at the 1985 Berlin International Film Festival. More than 1.5 million people attended its screenings in Sweden.

===Musical===

In 1991 the book was made into a Danish musical called &quot;Ronja Røverdatter&quot;. The musical is written by Danish composer Sebastian.

In 1994 the book was made into a German musical called &quot;Ronja Räubertochter&quot;. The musical is written by Axel Bergstedt in the German language, and has orchestra, band and more than one hundred people on the stage.

===Stage===
A production in the Balver Höhle was performed in 1993 and 2004 and in Oberkirch in 2006.

A production of &quot;Ronja the Robber&#x27;s Daughter&quot; interpreted by Ronny Danielsson performed at Stadsteatern Stockholm Sweden 2014, 2016, and 2018.

A stage play based on the novel was written by Allison Gregory.

=== TV series===
==== Live-action ====

A live-action television adaptation of the novel premiered in March 2024. Hans Rosenfeldt wrote the script while Lisa James Larsson directed the series. The series was produced by Filmlance Productions, the company behind Swedish TV productions such as &quot;Beck&quot;, &quot;Bron&quot;, and &quot;Caliphate&quot;.

====Anime====

A CGI television series from Japan debuted in October 2014. Titled &quot;Sanzoku no Musume Ronia&quot;, the show was produced by Dwango, NHK, NHK Enterprises and animated by Polygon Pictures with cooperation from Studio Ghibli. The show was directed by Goro Miyazaki and scripted by Hiroyuki Kawsaki.

==Translations==
&quot;Ronia, the Robber&#x27;s Daughter&quot; has been translated into 39 languages. The two English versions translate the Swedish names differently. The Swedish word &quot;&quot; is more akin to the English word reaver, rather than robber ().

==References==
==External links==
* Astrid Lindgren: Ronia, the Robber&#x27;s Daughter (blog)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="35" end="43" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish:"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="96" end="103" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="116" end="123" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q55767" start="131" end="146" title="Astrid Lindgren" label="Astrid Lindgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465323" start="249" end="263" title="Ronia, the Robber&amp;#x27;s Daughter (film)" label="a film in 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q18177839" start="300" end="314" title="Ronja, the Robber&amp;#x27;s Daughter (2014 TV series)" label="Japanese anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q113638147" start="322" end="355" title="Ronja, the Robber&amp;#x27;s Daughter (2024 TV series)" label="live-action television adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="467" end="481" title="Early Middle Ages" label="early-Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="482" end="493" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="652" end="661" title="lightning" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q12581" start="1868" end="1873" title="troll" label="troll"/>
<link wikidata="Q188215" start="1883" end="1888" title="gnome" label="gnome"/>
<link wikidata="Q181360" start="1895" end="1902" title="Harpy" label="harpies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842292" start="2127" end="2145" title="Trina Schart Hyman" label="Trina Schart Hyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907694" start="2202" end="2214" title="Puffin Books" label="Puffin Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q753312" start="2232" end="2236" title="1984 in film" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q157394" start="2271" end="2283" title="fantasy film" label="fantasy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384021" start="2330" end="2345" title="Tage Danielsson" label="Tage Danielsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q130871" start="2509" end="2543" title="Berlin International Film Festival" label="Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q687268" start="2753" end="2762" title="Sebastian (singer)" label="Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="2901" end="2916" title="German language" label="German language"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="2926" end="2935" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088357" start="2937" end="2941" title="musical ensemble" label="band"/>
<link wikidata="Q194428" start="2982" end="2987" title="Stage (theatre)" label="stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274" start="3022" end="3027" title="Balve" label="Balve"/>
<link wikidata="Q541381" start="3073" end="3082" title="Oberkirch (Baden)" label="Oberkirch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6079725" start="3431" end="3446" title="Hans Rosenfeldt" label="Hans Rosenfeldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939437" start="3616" end="3620" title="Beck (Swedish TV series)" label="Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211796" start="3634" end="3638" title="The Bridge (2011 TV series)" label="Bron"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070811" start="3656" end="3665" title="Caliphate (TV series)" label="Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="3691" end="3694" title="computer animation" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045458" start="3818" end="3824" title="Dwango" label="Dwango"/>
<link wikidata="Q212128" start="3826" end="3829" title="NHK" label="NHK"/>
<link wikidata="Q212128" start="3831" end="3846" title="NHK Enterprises" label="NHK Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543894" start="3863" end="3879" title="Polygon Pictures" label="Polygon Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q182950" start="3902" end="3915" title="Studio Ghibli" label="Studio Ghibli"/>
<link wikidata="Q459078" start="3942" end="3955" title="Goro Miyazaki" label="Goro Miyazaki"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534887" wikidata="Q27353" url="?curid=534887" title="Anglo-America">
<text>Anglo-America most often refers to a region in the Americas in which English is the main language and British culture and the British Empire have had significant historical, ethnic, linguistic, and cultural impact. This includes the United States, most of Canada, and some Caribbean countries. Anglo-America is distinct from Latin America, a region of the Americas where Romance languages (e.g., Spanish, Portuguese, and French) are prevalent. The adjective is commonly used, for instance, in the phrase &quot;Anglo-American law&quot;, a concept roughly coterminous with Common Law.

== Geographic region ==
While Canada is one of the two principal Anglo-American countries, the province of Quebec and the region of Inuit Nunangat both have non-English speaking majorities, and for this reason they are excluded from Anglo-America. Sint Eustatius, Sint Maarten, and Saba are also not typically included in Anglo-America, despite their English-speaking majorities, because they are constituent countries or &quot;public bodies&quot; that form part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

==Ethnic groups==

== Economy ==

People from other parts of the world have immigrated to Anglo-America in search of a better quality of life, better employment, and an escape from famine, poverty, violence, and conflict. People from many different ethnic origins in Latin America and more remote places all over the world, including the less English-dominant parts of Oceania, continental Europe, Asia, and Africa, all live in Anglo-America contemporarily.


==See also==
General
* Anglo
* English Americans
* Americas (terminology)
* Americas
* North American English
* North America
* Northern America
* Central America
* South American English
* South America
* Caribbean English
* Caribbean
* Anglophone Caribbean
* Commonwealth Caribbean
* British America
* British diaspora in Africa
* British North America
* White Anglo-Saxon Protestant

Anglosphere
* Anglosphere
* English-speaking world

Languages
* French America
* Spanish America
* Hispanic America
* Ibero-America
* Latin America
* Portuguese America

Lists
* List of North American countries by GDP (nominal)
* List of North American countries by GDP per capita
* List of North American countries by GDP (PPP)
* List of South American countries by GDP (nominal)
* List of South American countries by GDP per capita
* List of South American countries by GDP (PPP)
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27353" start="0" end="13" title="Anglo-America" label="Anglo-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="51" end="59" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342549" start="69" end="76" title="International English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q32501" start="102" end="117" title="culture of the United Kingdom" label="British culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="126" end="140" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="233" end="246" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="256" end="262" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="273" end="282" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065184" start="294" end="299" title="Anglo" label="Anglo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="325" end="338" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="371" end="388" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q111180987" start="396" end="403" title="Spanish America" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q107015964" start="405" end="415" title="Portuguese America" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844848" start="421" end="427" title="French America" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="571" end="581" title="Common Law" label="Common Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="691" end="697" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089304" start="716" end="730" title="Inuit Nunangat" label="Inuit Nunangat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26180" start="832" end="846" title="Sint Eustatius" label="Sint Eustatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273" start="848" end="860" title="Sint Maarten" label="Sint Maarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q25528" start="866" end="870" title="Saba (island)" label="Saba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648563" start="1012" end="1025" title="Public body (Netherlands)" label="public bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q29999" start="1054" end="1080" title="Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="Kingdom of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065184" start="1566" end="1571" title="Anglo" label="Anglo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="1574" end="1591" title="English Americans" label="English Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745665" start="1594" end="1616" title="Americas (terminology)" label="Americas (terminology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="1619" end="1627" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053766" start="1630" end="1652" title="North American English" label="North American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1655" end="1668" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017699" start="1671" end="1687" title="Northern America" label="Northern America"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="1690" end="1705" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631145" start="1708" end="1730" title="South American English" label="South American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="1733" end="1746" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567134" start="1749" end="1766" title="Caribbean English" label="Caribbean English"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="1769" end="1778" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486921" start="1781" end="1801" title="Anglophone Caribbean" label="Anglophone Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290293" start="1804" end="1826" title="Commonwealth Caribbean" label="Commonwealth Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="1829" end="1844" title="British America" label="British America"/>
<link wikidata="Q655981" start="1847" end="1873" title="British diaspora in Africa" label="British diaspora in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="1876" end="1897" title="British North America" label="British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q256898" start="1900" end="1928" title="White Anglo-Saxon Protestant" label="White Anglo-Saxon Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q541576" start="1944" end="1955" title="Anglosphere" label="Anglosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="1958" end="1980" title="English-speaking world" label="English-speaking world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844848" start="1994" end="2008" title="French America" label="French America"/>
<link wikidata="Q111180987" start="2011" end="2026" title="Spanish America" label="Spanish America"/>
<link wikidata="Q653884" start="2029" end="2045" title="Hispanic America" label="Hispanic America"/>
<link wikidata="Q377916" start="2048" end="2061" title="Ibero-America" label="Ibero-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="2064" end="2077" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q107015964" start="2080" end="2098" title="Portuguese America" label="Portuguese America"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355475" start="2108" end="2157" title="List of North American countries by GDP (nominal)" label="List of North American countries by GDP (nominal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592392" start="2160" end="2210" title="List of North American countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="List of North American countries by GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579481" start="2213" end="2258" title="List of North American countries by GDP (PPP)" label="List of North American countries by GDP (PPP)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2261" end="2310" title="List of South American countries by GDP (nominal)" label="List of South American countries by GDP (nominal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597464" start="2313" end="2363" title="List of South American countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="List of South American countries by GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581683" start="2366" end="2411" title="List of South American countries by GDP (PPP)" label="List of South American countries by GDP (PPP)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534888" wikidata="Q1711962" url="?curid=534888" title="The Conqueror Worm">
<text>&quot;The Conqueror Worm&quot; is a poem by Edgar Allan Poe about human mortality and the inevitability of death. It was first published separately in &quot;Graham&#x27;s Magazine&quot; in 1843, but quickly became associated with Poe&#x27;s short story &quot;Ligeia&quot; after Poe added the poem to a revised publication of the story in 1845. In the revised story, the poem is composed by the eponymous Ligeia, and taught to the narrator in the fits of her death throes.

==Synopsis==
An audience of weeping angels watches a play performed by &quot;mimes, in the form of God on high&quot;, and controlled by vast formless shapes looming behind the scenes. The mimes chase a &quot;&quot; which they can never capture, running around in circles. Finally, a monstrous &quot;crawling shape&quot; emerges, and eats the mimes. The final curtain comes down, &quot;a funeral pall&quot;, signaling an end to the &quot;tragedy, &#x27;Man&#x27;&quot;, whose only hero is &quot;The Conqueror Worm&quot;.

==Publication history==
&quot;The Conqueror Worm&quot; was first published as a stand-alone poem in the January 1843 issue of &quot;Graham&#x27;s Magazine&quot;. Shortly after, it was included among several other poems by Poe in the February 25 issue of the &quot;Saturday Museum&quot; in a feature called &quot;The Poets &amp; Poetry of Philadelphia: Edgar Allan Poe&quot;. It was later included in Poe&#x27;s poetry collection &quot;The Raven and Other Poems&quot; in 1845. That same year, it was incorporated into &quot;Ligeia&quot; for the first time when the story was reprinted in the February 15, 1845, issue of the &quot;New York World&quot;. &quot;Ligeia&quot; was again republished with &quot;The Conqueror Worm&quot; in the September 27, 1845, issue of &quot;The Broadway Journal&quot; while Poe was its editor. This was not unusual for Poe, who had also incorporated poems &quot;The Coliseum&quot; and &quot;To One in Paradise&quot; into tales.

==Text==

Lo! &#x27;tis a gala night&lt;br&gt;
Within the lonesome latter years!&lt;br&gt;
An angel throng, bewinged, bedight&lt;br&gt;
In veils, and drowned in tears,&lt;br&gt;
Sit in a theatre, to see&lt;br&gt;
A play of hopes and fears,&lt;br&gt;
While the orchestra breathes fitfully&lt;br&gt;
The music of the spheres.&lt;br&gt;

Mimes, in the form of God on high,&lt;br&gt;
Mutter and mumble low,&lt;br&gt;
And hither and thither fly—&lt;br&gt;
Mere puppets they, who come and go&lt;br&gt;
At bidding of vast formless things&lt;br&gt;
That shift the scenery to and fro,&lt;br&gt;
Flapping from out their Condor wings&lt;br&gt;
Invisible Wo!&lt;br&gt;

That motley drama—oh, be sure&lt;br&gt;
It shall not be forgot!&lt;br&gt;
With its Phantom chased for evermore,&lt;br&gt;
By a crowd that seize it not,&lt;br&gt;
Through a circle that ever returneth in&lt;br&gt;
To the self-same spot,&lt;br&gt;
And much of Madness, and more of Sin,&lt;br&gt;
And Horror the soul of the plot.&lt;br&gt;

But see, amid the mimic rout&lt;br&gt;
A crawling shape intrude!&lt;br&gt;
A blood-red thing that writhes from out&lt;br&gt;
The scenic solitude!&lt;br&gt;
It writhes!—it writhes!—with mortal pangs&lt;br&gt;
The mimes become its food,&lt;br&gt;
And the angels sob at vermin fangs&lt;br&gt;
In human gore imbued.&lt;br&gt;

Out—out are the lights—out all!&lt;br&gt;
And, over each quivering form,&lt;br&gt;
The curtain, a funeral pall,&lt;br&gt;
Comes down with the rush of a storm,&lt;br&gt;
And the angels, all pallid and wan,&lt;br&gt;
Uprising, unveiling, affirm&lt;br&gt;
That the play is the tragedy, &quot;Man,&quot;&lt;br&gt;
And its hero the Conqueror Worm.&lt;br&gt;

==Interpretation==
Poe&#x27;s mother and father were both actors, and the poem uses theater metaphors throughout to deal with human life on a universal level.

The poem seems to imply that human life is mad folly ending in hideous death, the universe is controlled by dark forces man cannot understand, and the only supernatural forces that might help are powerless spectators who can only affirm the tragedy of the scene.

Though Poe was referring to an ancient connection between worms and death, he may have been inspired by &quot;The Proud Ladye&quot;, a poem by Spencer Wallis Cone which was reviewed in an 1840 issue of &quot;Burton&#x27;s Gentleman&#x27;s Magazine&quot;. That poem contained the lines &quot;Let him meet the conqueror worm / With his good sword by his side&quot;.

&quot;The Conqueror Worm&quot; also uses the word &quot;evermore&quot;, which would later evolve into &quot;nevermore&quot; in Poe&#x27;s famous poem &quot;The Raven&quot; in 1845.

===Role in &quot;Ligeia&quot;===

The poem plays an important symbolic role as part of its inclusion in the short story &quot;Ligeia.&quot; The poem is written by Ligeia as she is dying, though it is actually recited by the narrator, her husband.

Because it emphasizes the finality of death, it calls to question Ligeia&#x27;s resurrection in the story. Also, the inclusion of the bitter poem may have been meant to be ironic or a parody of the convention at the time, both in literature and in life. In the mid-19th century it was common to emphasize the sacredness of death and the beauty of dying (examples include Charles Dickens&#x27;s Little Johnny character in &quot;Our Mutual Friend&quot; and the death of Helen Burns in Charlotte Brontë&#x27;s &quot;Jane Eyre&quot;). Instead, Ligeia speaks of fear personified in the &quot;blood-red thing.&quot;

==Adaptations==
In 1935, Baltimore-born composer Franz Bornschein wrote a three-part chorus for women with orchestra or piano accompaniment based on &quot;The Conqueror Worm&quot;. The poem was also rewritten and adapted as the first track to Lou Reed&#x27;s 2003 album of Poe adaptations and Poe-inspired songs, &quot;The Raven&quot;. It was also adapted as a song by the Darkwave act, Sopor Aeternus &amp; the Ensemble of Shadows on the album &quot;Flowers in Formaldehyde&quot; in 2004. Vol. 5 of the Hellboy comic book mini-series by Mike Mignola titled &quot;&quot; was based on the poem.

The British horror film &quot;Witchfinder General&quot; was retitled &quot;The Conqueror Worm&quot; for U.S. release. Although American International Pictures&#x27; prints featured a voice-over with Vincent Price in character as Matthew Hopkins reciting &quot;The Conqueror Worm&quot;, the film is not actually an adaptation of Poe&#x27;s poem.

Dark Horse Comics released &quot;Edgar Allan Poe Conqueror Worm&quot;, a one-shot comic by Richard Corben in November 2012.

The music video for &quot;Curtain&quot; by Australian extreme metal band Portal features an adaptation of the poem using puppets.

The album &quot;Dies Irae&quot; by the band Devil Doll is loosely based on &quot;The Conqueror Worm&quot;. The text of the poem is paraphrased liberally, and the entire final stanza of the poem is reproduced almost verbatim.

Goth musician Voltaire wrote a song adaptation of &quot;The Conqueror Worm&quot; and followed the text of the poem verbatim. It was released in early 2014 on his album &quot;Raised by Bats&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
*Reading by Classic Poetry Aloud (MP3)
*The Conqueror Worm: A Study Guide
* Project Gutenberg Etext containing &quot;The Conqueror Worm&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1711962" start="6" end="24" title="The Conqueror Worm" label="The Conqueror Worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="36" end="40" title="poetry" label="poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="44" end="59" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879167" start="157" end="179" title="Graham&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Graham&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="241" end="252" title="short story" label="short story"/>
<link wikidata="Q948786" start="259" end="265" title="Ligeia" label="Ligeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="910" end="917" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1258" end="1273" title="Saturday Museum" label="Saturday Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q129875" start="1764" end="1784" title="The Broadway Journal" label="The Broadway Journal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4158" end="4173" title="The Proud Ladye" label="The Proud Ladye"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4191" end="4210" title="Spencer Wallis Cone" label="Spencer Wallis Cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928637" start="4256" end="4295" title="Burton&amp;#x27;s Gentleman&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Burton&amp;#x27;s Gentleman&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22726" start="4569" end="4578" title="The Raven" label="The Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="5027" end="5033" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="5214" end="5229" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557935" start="5270" end="5287" title="Our Mutual Friend" label="Our Mutual Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q127332" start="5326" end="5342" title="Charlotte Brontë" label="Charlotte Brontë"/>
<link wikidata="Q182961" start="5356" end="5365" title="Jane Eyre" label="Jane Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492711" start="5503" end="5519" title="Franz Bornschein" label="Franz Bornschein"/>
<link wikidata="Q189080" start="5697" end="5705" title="Lou Reed" label="Lou Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736804" start="5773" end="5782" title="The Raven (Lou Reed album)" label="The Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840596" start="5827" end="5835" title="Darkwave" label="Darkwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q545686" start="5841" end="5885" title="Sopor Aeternus &amp;amp; the Ensemble of Shadows" label="Sopor Aeternus &amp;amp; the Ensemble of Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462312" start="5905" end="5928" title="Flowers in Formaldehyde" label="Flowers in Formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150106" start="5958" end="5965" title="Hellboy" label="Hellboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="5966" end="5976" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="5977" end="5988" title="mini-series" label="mini-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q544975" start="5992" end="6004" title="Mike Mignola" label="Mike Mignola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194311" start="6079" end="6098" title="Witchfinder General (film)" label="Witchfinder General"/>
<link wikidata="Q465224" start="6176" end="6207" title="American International Pictures" label="American International Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="6248" end="6261" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239699" start="6278" end="6293" title="Matthew Hopkins" label="Matthew Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387300" start="6486" end="6500" title="Richard Corben" label="Richard Corben"/>
<link wikidata="Q465978" start="6574" end="6587" title="extreme metal" label="extreme metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231470" start="6593" end="6599" title="Portal (Australian band)" label="Portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377070" start="6695" end="6705" title="Devil Doll (Slovenian band)" label="Devil Doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q944759" start="6891" end="6899" title="Aurelio Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022647" start="7051" end="7065" title="Raised by Bats" label="Raised by Bats"/>
<link wikidata="Q42591" start="7142" end="7145" title="MP3" label="MP3"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534889" wikidata="Q1930617" url="?curid=534889" title="To the Faithful Departed">
<text>To the Faithful Departed is the third studio album by Irish alternative rock band the Cranberries, released on 22 April 1996. The album was made in memory of Denny Cordell who signed the band to Island Records and Joe O&#x27;Riordan (vocalist Dolores O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s grandfather), who had both died that year. The album reached number one in four countries and became the band&#x27;s highest-charting album on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, where it peaked at number four.

==Packaging==

The album sleeve photo session was made up of two parts, the first being the original design for the front cover, a naked baby boy (supplied by their press officer Smash at Island Records) lying on his back, which was shot in photographer Andy Earl&#x27;s new studio on Shad Thames in London, and the band seated in a yellow room. At the last minute, at Dolores O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s request, the two were swapped and the yellow room became the front cover.

The yellow room was designed to be an echo of the previous two album sleeves. It was built in London and transported to the Lake District and erected in a forest near Loughrigg Holme. Snow fell on the day of the photoshoot, and the band spent as little time as possible on the shoot clad, as they were wearing new purple Dolce &amp; Gabbana outfits.

A new logo and typeface were decided upon signifying the band&#x27;s desire to move on from the strict repetition of the previous album sleeves. Incidental studio photos were included, taken by Cally in the band&#x27;s studio in Vancouver, Canada. Cally added: &quot;I attended the surreal Brit Awards where Jarvis Cocker invaded Michael Jackson&#x27;s stage and left soon after to drive through horizontal snow to get to the Lake District in readiness for the photo shoot the next day. On waking in the Ambleside Hotel I saw Jarvis on the front cover of every paper, being released from jail with Nigel, The Cranberries A&amp;R man beside him. Things only became more surreal when we realised that later we were shooting the band bravely clad in thin purple suits under snowfall in a yellow room in a forest in the Lake District&quot;.

==Television performances==
To promote &quot;To the Faithful Departed&quot;, the Cranberries appeared on different television shows (1995–1996).

==Free to Decide World Tour==
In 1996, the Cranberries toured in Asia, Oceania and North America to promote their third studio album &quot;To the Faithful Departed&quot;. The band embarked on a 117-date world tour which began on 30 April 1996 in Philippines but was stopped on 8 June 1996 in Cairns during the Australian leg, due to a knee injury of O&#x27;Riordan. The remaining dates of the Australian tour were canceled and O&#x27;Riordan returned to Ireland for surgery. The tour resumed on 1 August 1996 in North America but was stopped after twenty-eight concerts because of poor physical and mental health of O&#x27;Riordan. The Cranberries complained that they never had a rest since the beginning of their career and invoked saturation. O&#x27;Riordan was pressured by managers not to stop the tour because of a cost between $8 million to $14 million. Despite this, the remaining dates of the North American tour and the European leg of the Free to Decide World Tour were canceled.

===Dates===
==Track listing==
===Original release===

===1996 US version===
==Personnel==
===The Cranberries===
*Dolores O&#x27;Riordan – vocals, electric guitar, acoustic guitar, keyboards, whistle, mandolin
*Noel Hogan – electric guitar, acoustic guitar, mandolin
*Mike Hogan – bass guitar
*Fergal Lawler – drums, percussion

===Additional musicians===
*Michael Kamen – orchestration
*Henry Daag – saw (&quot;Bosnia&quot;)
*Richie Buckley – tenor saxophone (&quot;Salvation&quot;)
*Michael Buckley – baritone saxophone (&quot;Salvation&quot;)
*Bruce Fairbairn – trumpet (&quot;Salvation&quot;)
*Randy Raine-Reusch – additional percussion

===Producing and technical staff===
*Bruce Fairbairn – producer
*The Cranberries – producer
*Mike Plontikoff – engineering, mixing
*Andy Earl – photographer
*Adrian Myers – assistant photographer
*Baron Kallstein – incidental photographs (aka Cally: art director)

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===


===Year-end charts===

==Certifications==






==References==
==External links==
* Cranberries official discography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="60" end="76" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q483810" start="82" end="97" title="the Cranberries" label="the Cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189655" start="158" end="171" title="Denny Cordell" label="Denny Cordell"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="195" end="209" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q541599" start="243" end="265" title="Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan" label="Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="423" end="448" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276190" start="768" end="779" title="Shad Thames" label="Shad Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="783" end="789" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="1081" end="1094" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q214480" start="1278" end="1297" title="Dolce &amp;amp; Gabbana" label="Dolce &amp;amp; Gabbana"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="1537" end="1546" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1598" end="1609" title="1996 Brit Awards#Michael Jackson and Jarvis Cocker" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q356994" start="1616" end="1629" title="Jarvis Cocker" label="Jarvis Cocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="1638" end="1653" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q483810" start="2223" end="2238" title="the Cranberries" label="the Cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="2357" end="2361" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="2363" end="2370" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="2375" end="2388" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="2538" end="2549" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q189133" start="2584" end="2590" title="Cairns" label="Cairns"/>
<link wikidata="Q541599" start="3397" end="3419" title="Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan" label="Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q204917" start="3475" end="3482" title="whistle" label="whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="3484" end="3492" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704746" start="3494" end="3504" title="Noel Hogan" label="Noel Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q483810" start="3551" end="3561" title="Mike Hogan (The Cranberries)" label="Mike Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q483810" start="3577" end="3590" title="Fergal Lawler" label="Fergal Lawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q156300" start="3640" end="3653" title="Michael Kamen" label="Michael Kamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367000" start="3656" end="3669" title="orchestration" label="orchestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144761" start="3684" end="3687" title="Musical saw" label="saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414932" start="3727" end="3742" title="tenor saxophone" label="tenor saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q808218" start="3786" end="3804" title="baritone saxophone" label="baritone saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q285116" start="3830" end="3845" title="Bruce Fairbairn" label="Bruce Fairbairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292385" start="3881" end="3899" title="Randy Raine-Reusch" label="Randy Raine-Reusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q285116" start="3962" end="3977" title="Bruce Fairbairn" label="Bruce Fairbairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="3980" end="3988" title="record producer" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q483810" start="3990" end="4005" title="The Cranberries" label="The Cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="4036" end="4047" title="audio engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="4049" end="4055" title="audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534897" wikidata="Q987345" url="?curid=534897" title="Starobilsk">
<text>Starobilsk (; ) is a city in Luhansk Oblast, Ukraine. It serves as the administrative center of Starobilsk Raion. The modern settlement was founded in 1686, and it was granted city status in 1938. The city has a population of As a result of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, it has been under Russian occupation since 2 March 2022.

== History ==
=== Prehistory ===
Presumably, Starobilsk traces its heritage to the settlement of Bielska Sloboda which originally might have been named after Okolnichy Bogdan Belsky of Litvin Bielsky family who at that time was a subject of the Grand Duchy of Moscow.

Bielsky arrived at the banks of Siversky Donets to build a fortress at the southern borders &quot;Tsare-Borisov&quot; (after Muscovite Tsar Boris Godunov) which was erected not far away in 1598–1600. In 1602 Godunov became suspicious of Belsky and order him to be arrested, stripped of any estates, and exiled to Siberia. After the death of Godunov Belsky was granted amnesty in 1605 due to the fact that his sister being the wife of the deceased Boris Godunov, Maria Skuratova-Belskaya, became a regent. Belsky was sent as a &quot;voivode&quot; to Kazan where in 1611 was killed by a mob after refusing to pledge allegiance to False Dmitry II. Sloboda gradually became abandoned, while the fortress was destroyed in 1612 in one of the Tatar raids.

=== Origin ===
In 1686 the settlement was repopulated by servicemen of the Ostrohozk Sloboda Cossack Regiment who originally came from Poltava and Chernihiv regions and named their settlement after a town of Bilsk, Cossack Hetmanate that might have belonged to another Litvin who sided with Muscovites, Theodore Bielsky.

Being runaway serfs, the Tsarist government allowed them to settle in the military frontier with the Crimean realm to carry out border guard functions. After the place became populated with serfs from the central regions of today&#x27;s Russia, the Tsarist government took measures to find and return those fugitives. In 1701 the Ambassadorial Prikaz decided to conduct a population census in new settlements along Aidar and Siversky Donets. Most population avoided the census. According to data of stolnik M.Pushkin who in 1703 conducted a population census in 34 settlements, in Bielsky was registered only 41 residents although in reality there were much more.

Trying to meet the demands of Russian landlords who repeatedly turned to the Tsar with complaints and requests to return fugitives, on 6 July 1707 Peter the Great issued an edict (ukase) about the search of &quot;newly arrived from Rus all ranks of people&quot;. To the Don was sent a punitive detachment under the command of Colonel Prince Yuriy Dolgorukiy. He was charged to search for fugitives and &quot;take them to those landowners from whom they ran away&quot;. That action led to the well-known Bulavin Rebellion. Struggling with the rebellion, Tsarist troops eventually burnt the settlement to the ground.
In 1732 the settlement was repopulated again by peasants from around Ostrogozhsk (Ostrohozk) turning it into a sloboda Stara-Bila. Among the first of its new residents were again servicemen of the Ostrohozk Regiment led by sotnik I. Senelnykov. In 1782 Staro-Bila was assigned to the Derkul Horse Factory of Bilovodsk district (Voronezh Governorate). On Tsarist edict (ukase) from 1 May 1797 sloboda Staro-Bila was renamed into Starobelsk and became the administrative center of Starobelsk uyezd in Kharkov Governorate of the Russian Empire.

=== Modern era ===
Founded on 12 October 1851, Starobilsk &quot;Joy of All Who Sorrows&quot; Convent (Свято-Скорботний жіночий монастир) became a spiritual center for the region. After the Bolshevik revolution, the convent was restricted and, in April 1924, it was closed down. In 1992, the state returned it to the Orthodox Church. It was reconsecrated and opened in 1995.

The town was occupied by Austrian troops during the Central Powers&#x27; advance through Ukraine in the spring of 1918 but soon became a center of activity for the Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine or Anarchists. A photograph in the City Regional Museum (Старобільський краєзнавчий музей) shows Anarchist leader Nestor Makhno addressing the people of Starobilsk from a balcony on the main square in 1919.

==== Prison camp for Polish POW officers ====

During World War II, the old convent was the site of a Soviet prison camp for Polish prisoners of war (POWs), especially officers. 48 of those who died in the camp were buried at the Starobilsk cemetery. In 1994, their bodies were moved to the Polish War Quarter built by the Council for the Protection of Struggle and Martyrdom Sites at the Chmyrivka cemetery. A plaque on the outside wall of the convent states that &quot;more than 4,000 Polish prisoners of war were confined&quot; inside the convent and ultimately executed in 1940. The Starobilsk prisoners were executed at the District Directorate of the NKVD in Kharkov and later buried in the forest in Pyatykhatky. These executions, together with executions of Polish officers held in POW camps at Kozelsk, Ostashkov, and some smaller camps, became known as the Katyn massacre.

The German Wehrmacht entered Starobilsk in late 1942, and evacuated nine months later, destroying much of the city but neglecting to dynamite the milk factory. The Germans operated a Nazi prison in the city. The town was rebuilt around this factory, which in turn helped the region recover after the war.

=== 21st century ===

During the first phase of the Russo-Ukrainian War many places in Luhansk Oblast were taken over by pro-Russian separatists; however, Starobilsk remained under Ukrainian control. The flag of the Luhansk People&#x27;s Republic was raised over the Hotel Aidar on 17 June 2014, but swiftly removed. The city was occupied by a military presence for two years thereafter, during which time the statue of Lenin in Starobilsk city park was toppled by a tank.

In 2016, Lenin Street was renamed Monastery Street as it had been before the Bolshevik revolution.

==== Russian occupation ====

On 24 February 2022, at the start of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Russian Forces began an assault on Starobilsk, consisting of an unspecified number of Tanks, BMPS, and infantry.

On 6 March 2022, hundreds of locals gathered and took down the flag of the so-called Luhansk People&#x27;s Republic, burning it and singing the Ukrainian national anthem. The pro-Russian forces dispersed the pro-Ukrainian meeting with shots in the air.

On 11 August 2022, Askyar Laishev, a former law enforcement officer and collaborator, was killed in a car bombing on Shevchenko Street.

In early September 2022, Ukraine launched a major counteroffensive in the region. On 13 September, Ukrainian Governor of Luhansk Oblast, Serhiy Haidai, stated that Russian forces had fled Starobilsk adding that the city was &quot;practically empty&quot;. As for December 2022, the latter claim was proven to be false, as the Ukrainian counteroffensive has stalled outside Svatove, around 60 KM from Starobilsk.

On 1 April 2024 a car bomb in the centre of Starobilsk killed the pro-Russian Deputy Head of the Centre for Servicing Educational Organisations of the Luhansk People’s Republic, Valerii Chaika.

==Demographics==

Ethnic makeup as of 2001:
Native language according to the 2001 Ukrainian census:
===Historical population data===
As of the first general census of the Russian Empire in 1897, Starobilsk counted a population of 9,801 inhabitants. The native language composition was as follows:
== International relations ==
=== Twin cities ===
Starobilsk is twinned with:
* Lublin, Poland

== Notable people ==
* Tamara Iosifovna Balezina, biologist
* Georgy Langemak, engineer for the Soviet space program
* Nadiya Svitlychna attended school in Starobilsk
* Oleh Liashko, Ukrainian politician and founder of the nationalist Radical Party
* Serhiy Zhadan, Ukrainian poet

== Gallery ==
== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==

* Butkov, V., Voitenko, O., Semenov, V., Kholdobin, I. &quot;Starobilsk&quot;. The history of cities and villages of the Ukrainian SSR.
* The list of Polish POWs held in the NKVD Starobielsk Camp in 1939-40 and murdered in Kharkov</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q987345" start="0" end="10" title="Starobilsk" label="Starobilsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q171965" start="29" end="43" title="Luhansk Oblast" label="Luhansk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="45" end="52" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q103821034" start="96" end="112" title="Starobilsk Raion" label="Starobilsk Raion"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="245" end="272" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="292" end="299" title="Russia" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130491" start="415" end="425" title="Sloboda (settlement)" label="settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q614827" start="490" end="499" title="Okolnichy" label="Okolnichy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083305" start="500" end="513" title="Bogdan Belsky" label="Bogdan Belsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997706" start="517" end="523" title="Litvin" label="Litvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965011" start="524" end="538" title="Belsky family (Gediminid)" label="Bielsky family"/>
<link wikidata="Q170770" start="577" end="598" title="Grand Duchy of Moscow" label="Grand Duchy of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q191238" start="633" end="648" title="Donets" label="Siversky Donets"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="736" end="740" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170172" start="741" end="754" title="Boris Godunov" label="Boris Godunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="914" end="921" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664161" start="1063" end="1087" title="Maria Skuratova-Belskaya" label="Maria Skuratova-Belskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="1150" end="1155" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q469791" start="1229" end="1244" title="False Dmitry II" label="False Dmitry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q248095" start="1559" end="1564" title="Bilsk, Kotelva Raion" label="Bilsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q212439" start="1566" end="1583" title="Cossack Hetmanate" label="Cossack Hetmanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q523058" start="2017" end="2023" title="Prikaz" label="Prikaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469194" start="2088" end="2093" title="Aidar River" label="Aidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q191238" start="2098" end="2113" title="Siversky Donets" label="Siversky Donets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278370" start="2172" end="2179" title="stolnik" label="stolnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="2485" end="2500" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q534026" start="2518" end="2523" title="ukase" label="ukase"/>
<link wikidata="Q4098701" start="2841" end="2858" title="Bulavin Rebellion" label="Bulavin Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q177737" start="3022" end="3033" title="Ostrogozhsk" label="Ostrogozhsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130491" start="3064" end="3071" title="sloboda (settlement)" label="sloboda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210140" start="3176" end="3182" title="sotnik" label="sotnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q956083" start="3281" end="3301" title="Voronezh Governorate" label="Voronezh Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q534026" start="3322" end="3327" title="ukase" label="ukase"/>
<link wikidata="Q14915593" start="3432" end="3448" title="Starobelsk uyezd" label="Starobelsk uyezd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363136" start="3452" end="3471" title="Kharkov Governorate" label="Kharkov Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="3479" end="3493" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="3685" end="3705" title="October Revolution" label="Bolshevik revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q682645" start="3896" end="3904" title="Austro-Hungarian Army" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="3923" end="3937" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8666419" start="4035" end="4080" title="Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine" label="Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q47900" start="4195" end="4208" title="Nestor Makhno" label="Nestor Makhno"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4343" end="4355" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="4391" end="4397" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="4414" end="4420" title="Poland" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="4421" end="4437" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571846" start="4612" end="4670" title="Council for the Protection of Struggle and Martyrdom Sites" label="Council for the Protection of Struggle and Martyrdom Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q45308181" start="4678" end="4687" title="Chmyrivka rural hromada" label="Chmyrivka"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308" start="4954" end="4961" title="Kharkiv" label="Kharkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666625" start="4996" end="5007" title="Piatykhatky, Kharkiv" label="Pyatykhatky"/>
<link wikidata="Q154661" start="5092" end="5099" title="Kozelsk" label="Kozelsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q176761" start="5101" end="5110" title="Ostashkov" label="Ostashkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q134301" start="5156" end="5170" title="Katyn massacre" label="Katyn massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="5184" end="5193" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="5531" end="5550" title="Russo-Ukrainian War" label="Russo-Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q171965" start="5566" end="5580" title="Luhansk Oblast" label="Luhansk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029471" start="5600" end="5623" title="Russian separatist forces in Donbas" label="pro-Russian separatists"/>
<link wikidata="Q16746854" start="5695" end="5725" title="Luhansk People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Luhansk People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="6124" end="6156" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111025771" start="6179" end="6189" title="Eastern Ukraine campaign" label="an assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q16746854" start="6357" end="6387" title="Luhansk People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Luhansk People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161744" start="6416" end="6441" title="State Anthem of Ukraine" label="Ukrainian national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q113865480" start="6713" end="6729" title="2022 Ukrainian eastern counteroffensive" label="counteroffensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q18108969" start="6772" end="6798" title="Governor of Luhansk Oblast" label="Governor of Luhansk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q65199830" start="6800" end="6813" title="Serhiy Haidai" label="Serhiy Haidai"/>
<link wikidata="Q114500533" start="7019" end="7042" title="Battle of the Svatove–Kreminna line" label="stalled outside Svatove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976830" start="7347" end="7368" title="2001 Ukrainian census" label="2001 Ukrainian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163579" start="7413" end="7455" title="Russian Empire census" label="first general census of the Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="7631" end="7638" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q37333" start="7647" end="7653" title="Lublin" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27859099" start="7686" end="7711" title="Tamara Iosifovna Balezina" label="Tamara Iosifovna Balezina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600801" start="7725" end="7740" title="Georgy Langemak" label="Georgy Langemak"/>
<link wikidata="Q849730" start="7759" end="7779" title="Soviet space program" label="Soviet space program"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957877" start="7782" end="7799" title="Nadiya Svitlychna" label="Nadiya Svitlychna"/>
<link wikidata="Q12119499" start="7832" end="7844" title="Oleh Liashko" label="Oleh Liashko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355317" start="7898" end="7911" title="Radical Party of Oleh Liashko" label="Radical Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q458209" start="7914" end="7927" title="Serhiy Zhadan" label="Serhiy Zhadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5954201" start="8089" end="8144" title="The history of cities and villages of the Ukrainian SSR" label="The history of cities and villages of the Ukrainian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8148" end="8240" title=":pl:Ofiary zbrodni katyńskiej – zamordowani w Charkowie" label="The list of Polish POWs held in the NKVD Starobielsk Camp in 1939-40 and murdered in Kharkov"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534900" wikidata="Q25683725" url="?curid=534900" title="Muhammad Thakurufaanu al-Auzam">
<text>As-Sulṭaan al-Ghaazee Muhammad Thakurufaanu al-A&#x27;uẓam or As-Sultan Ghazi Muhammad Bodu Thakurufaanu (; died 18 August 1585) ruled over the Maldives Islands from 1573 to 1585. He is known for fighting the Portuguese who ruled over the Maldives from 1558–1573 after killing Sultan Ali VI in Malé. His victory is commemorated in the Maldives as &quot;Qaumee Dhuvas&quot; or National Day. He was also the first Maldivian Sultan to form a  (a unified military body). He is regarded as a national hero.

==Early years==
Muhammad Thakurufaanu was the son of Katheebu Hussain of Utheemu in Thiladhummathi Atoll and Lady Aiminaa Dhiye of Ihavandhoo. Muhammad Thakurufan learned Hevikan (Martial Arts).

==Defeat of the Portuguese==
After killing Sultan Ali IV, the Maldives was ruled by and the Portuguese. was a regent of the (Sultan Hassan IX) who was the first Maldivian and the only member of its royalty to renounce Islam and convert to Christianity, later upon his deposition he took refuge in Goa, India.

After the invasion, the Portuguese ruled over the Maldives for 15 years and forcefully imposed Christianity with the threat of death on the locals in a period which the &quot;history&quot; describes as 

A time when intolerable enormities were committed by the invading infidels, a time when the sea grew red with Maldivian blood, a time when people were sunk in despair
Muhammad Thakurufaanu, left the Maldives with his brothers Ali and Hasan to Minicoy off the coast of India in the Laccadive Archipelago. They met the &quot;Aaji&quot; brothers. Hassan Aaji and Ali Aaji which helped the Utheemu brothers to defeat the Portuguese
The three Utheemu brothers built the ship &quot;&quot;. It is said that Muhammad Thakurufaanu received a help from the Maroshi (toddy-tapper) who mended and maintained the sail of the – the ship used in the battle and supply water to the vessel every time it docked at Maroshi. The island has the tree that grew from the (a raw wooden post) used to make the sail of . It is also the largest tree of its kind in the country.
Kalhuoffumi shipwrecked near the south coast of Kolhufushi.

Muhammad Thakurufaanu wanted to construct one of the first Mosque in the country in the island, He went to the island off the coast of Kolhufushi&#x27;s current harbor; and Muhammed Thakurufaanu wasn&#x27;t pleased with how the sun sets and rises in the island. So, he constructed the Mosque on the south coast of the island with the planks and slats of his and his teams vessel into a Mosque.

&quot;History has it that In the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami that the area where the Mosque was, The tsunami affected greatly, but; only the area around the Mosque was affected, and it was a copious amount of damage. The Mosque was left untouched by the tsunami and not a single droplet of water reached it.&quot;

The Mosque holds great importance to the islanders and the people of The Maldives.
The brothers landed on a different island every night, fought the Portuguese and set sail into the ocean before daybreak. They reached the capital island Malé on the night before the day fixed by the Portuguese garrison of for the forcible conversion of the inhabitants to Christianity, on the penalty of death for non-compliance. The Utheemu brothers along with other Maldivians, fought and killed the Portuguese garrison and regained independence for the country. was killed by a musket shot of Muhammad Thakurufaanu.

==Aftermath==
After killing , as per a treaty he got refuge from Ali Raja of Cannanore, India. Muhammad Thakurufaanu&#x27;s base of operation was Maliku under the sovereignty of Cannanore. The Ali Raja demanded dominion over the Maldives, as promised to him by the Muhammad Thakurufaanu. The nature of the relationship between Muhammad Thakurufan and Ali Raja of Cannanore was outlined in a letter sent by a later Ali Raja, Mariambe Ali-Adi Raja Bibi, to the Sultan Muhammad Mueenuddine I of the Maldives. The letter was dated Friday 17 Jumad al-Awla Anno Hegirae 1243 (7 December AD 1827). According to the letter Muhammad Thakurufan had entered into a treaty ceding sovereignty of the Maldives to the Ali Raja of Cannanore in the event Thakurufan was established in power in Male.

Muhammad Thakurufaanu concluded a treaty with the King Dom Manoel who lived in Goa, in order to ward off the Ali Raja of Cannanore. Although Muhammad Thakurufaanu was made a regent of King Dom Manoel (as per the treaty), the Maldivians assigned Muhammad Thakurufaanu as the Sultan of the Maldives, no longer recognizing the sovereignty of the self-exiled Christian kings in Goa or their regents. The chronicles report him to have ruled wisely, being just and considerate, protecting all the poor, and even solicitous for the people’s interests. Muhammed Thakurufaanu died a natural death on 16 August 1585.

==Death==

As-Sultan Muhammad Thakurufaanu al-Auzam died on 1st Ramadan 993 AH, after 11 years and 6 months in power. It was on 18 August 1585. He was buried on the Mausoleum of the Muhammad Thakurufaanu al-Auzam near Bihuroazu Kamanaa Mosque in Malé.

==Legacy==
British author Royston Ellis&#x27;s novel &quot;A Hero in Time&quot; is about the life and adventures of Muhammad Thakurufaanu.

The army (lashkaru) organised by him has evolved into the Maldives National Defence Force.

The Islamic Centre, the largest mosque in Maldives, &quot;Masjid as-Sultan Muhammad Thakurufaanu al-Auzam&quot; is named after him.

Qaumee Dhuvas (Maldives National Day), is a day to celebrate Thakurufaanu&#x27;s win over the Portuguese occupation. Culturally he has become is regarded as a national hero.

==See also==
*List of Sultans of the Maldives
*Islamic Centre (Maldives)
*Qaumee Dhuvas
*Origin of the Security Force in Maldives

==References==

*Dhivehi Tārīkhah Au Alikameh. &quot;Divehi Bahāi Tārikhah Khidmaiykurā Qaumī Markazu&quot;. Reprint 1958 edn. Male’ 1990.
*H.C.P. Bell, &quot;The Maldives Islands, An account of the physical features, History, Inhabitants, Productions and Trade&quot;. Colombo 1883, </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25683725" start="0" end="58" title="Muhammad Thakurufaanu al-Auzam" label="As-Sulṭaan al-Ghaazee Muhammad Thakurufaanu al-A&amp;#x27;uẓam"/>
<link wikidata="Q25683725" start="62" end="104" title="Muhammad Thakurufaanu al-Auzam" label="As-Sultan Ghazi Muhammad Bodu Thakurufaanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="144" end="160" title="Maldives" label="Maldives Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="209" end="219" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9347" start="294" end="298" title="Malé" label="Malé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267190" start="353" end="366" title="Qaumee Dhuvas (Maldives National Day)" label="Qaumee Dhuvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076959" start="439" end="439" title="Maldives National Defence Force" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q84164296" start="487" end="500" title="folk hero" label="national hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175428" start="576" end="583" title="Utheemu (Haa Alif Atoll)" label="Utheemu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360912" start="587" end="607" title="Haa Alif Atoll" label="Thiladhummathi Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304596" start="634" end="644" title="Ihavandhoo (Haa Alif Atoll)" label="Ihavandhoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567406" start="749" end="755" title="List of sultans of the Maldives" label="Ali IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="809" end="815" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567406" start="831" end="840" title="Hassan IX" label="Hassan IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="917" end="922" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="996" end="999" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q162448" start="1456" end="1463" title="Minicoy" label="Minicoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1481" end="1486" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q26927" start="1494" end="1515" title="Lakshadweep" label="Laccadive Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q966403" start="1689" end="1689" title="Maroshi (Shaviyani Atoll)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q966403" start="1910" end="1917" title="Maroshi (Shaviyani Atoll)" label="Maroshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071244" start="2113" end="2123" title="Kolhufushi (Meemu Atoll)" label="Kolhufushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071244" start="2261" end="2271" title="Kolhufushi (Meemu Atoll)" label="Kolhufushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="2554" end="2579" title="2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami" label="2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="2907" end="2915" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q9347" start="3071" end="3075" title="Malé" label="Malé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="3190" end="3202" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725139" start="3503" end="3511" title="Ali Raja" label="Ali Raja"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789666" start="3515" end="3524" title="Cannanore" label="Cannanore"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3526" end="3531" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q162448" start="3584" end="3590" title="Minicoy Island" label="Maliku"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725139" start="3631" end="3639" title="Ali Raja" label="Ali Raja"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="4256" end="4262" title="treaty" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="4301" end="4304" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789666" start="4343" end="4352" title="Cannanore" label="Cannanore"/>
<link wikidata="Q41662" start="4894" end="4901" title="Ramadan" label="Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="4995" end="5004" title="Mausoleum" label="Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375252" start="5109" end="5122" title="Royston Ellis" label="Royston Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076959" start="5281" end="5312" title="Maldives National Defence Force" label="Maldives National Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q15544113" start="5315" end="5333" title="Islamic Centre (Maldives)" label="The Islamic Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267190" start="5448" end="5485" title="Qaumee Dhuvas (Maldives National Day)" label="Qaumee Dhuvas (Maldives National Day)"/>
<link wikidata="Q84164296" start="5607" end="5620" title="folk hero" label="national hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567406" start="5637" end="5668" title="List of Sultans of the Maldives" label="List of Sultans of the Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q15544113" start="5670" end="5695" title="Islamic Centre (Maldives)" label="Islamic Centre (Maldives)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267190" start="5697" end="5710" title="Qaumee Dhuvas" label="Qaumee Dhuvas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5712" end="5752" title="Maldives National Defence Force#Origin of the Security Force" label="Origin of the Security Force in Maldives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534905" wikidata="Q228446" url="?curid=534905" title="Todd County">
<text>Todd County is the name of three counties in the United States:

*Todd County, Kentucky
*Todd County, Minnesota
*Todd County, South Dakota</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q502920" start="66" end="87" title="Todd County, Kentucky" label="Todd County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q485370" start="89" end="111" title="Todd County, Minnesota" label="Todd County, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q502081" start="113" end="138" title="Todd County, South Dakota" label="Todd County, South Dakota"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534908" wikidata="Q236727" url="?curid=534908" title="Elizabeth George">
<text>Susan Elizabeth George (born February 26, 1949) is an American writer of mystery novels set in Great Britain.

She is best known for a series of novels featuring Inspector Thomas Lynley. The 21st book in the series was published in January 2022. The first 11 were adapted for television by the BBC as earlier episodes of &quot;The Inspector Lynley Mysteries&quot;. 
A separate four-part series entitled &quot;Lynley&quot; to be shown on BBC One began filming in 2024, starring Leo Suter and Sofia Barclay.

== Biography ==

Elizabeth George was born in Warren, Ohio, the second child of Robert Edwin and Anne (née Rivelle) George. She has an older brother, author Robert Rivelle George. Her mother was a nurse, and her father a manager for a conveyor company. The family moved to the San Francisco Bay Area when she was 18 months old as her father wanted to get away from Midwestern weather.

She studied at Foothill Community College (now Foothill College) in California, and at the University of California, Riverside, where she received a BA in 1970. While teaching English in the public school system, she completed a master&#x27;s degree in counseling and psychology. She received an honorary doctorate in humane letters from Cal State University Fullerton in 2004 and was awarded an honorary Masters in Fine Arts from the Northwest Institute of Literary Arts in 2010. 

She established the Elizabeth George Foundation, a grant for unpublished and emerging writers, in 1997.

== Personal life ==
George married Ira Jay Toibin in 1971 and they divorced in 1995. George is currently married to retired firefighter Tom McCabe.

== Career ==
George taught English in the public school system for 13 years before the success of her first novel, &quot;A Great Deliverance&quot; (1988), allowed her to give up teaching and become a full-time writer. The novel introduces the upper-class Detective Inspector Thomas Lynley (in private life, the Earl of Asherton) and his working-class partner Detective Sergeant Barbara Havers - both from Scotland Yard. 

Since then George has published 20 more Inspector Lynley mysteries, 4 YA novels in the Whidbey Island series, three collections of short stories and two self-help books for writers.

She now teaches creative writing seminars in the US, Canada and the UK.

== Awards ==

George&#x27;s first novel, &quot;A Great Deliverance&quot;, won the Agatha Award for Best First Novel in 1988 and the 1989 Anthony Award in the same category. It was nominated for an Edgar Award in 1988.

== Bibliography == 
=== Inspector Lynley ===
* 1988: &quot;A Great Deliverance&quot; ()
* 1989: &quot;Payment in Blood&quot; ()
* 1990: &quot;Well-Schooled in Murder&quot; ()
* 1991: &quot;A Suitable Vengeance&quot; ()
* 1992: &quot;For the Sake of Elena&quot; ()
* 1992: &quot;Missing Joseph&quot; ()
* 1993: &quot;Playing for the Ashes&quot; ()
* 1996: &quot;In the Presence of the Enemy&quot; ()
* 1997: &quot;Deception on His Mind&quot; ()
* 1999: &quot;In Pursuit of the Proper Sinner&quot; ()
* 2001: &quot;A Traitor to Memory&quot; ()
* 2003: &quot;A Place of Hiding&quot; ()
* 2005: &quot;With No One as Witness&quot; ()
* 2006: &quot;What Came Before He Shot Her&quot; ()
* 2008: &quot;Careless in Red&quot; ()
* 2010: &quot;This Body of Death&quot; ()
* 2012: &quot;Believing the Lie&quot; ()
* 2013: &quot;Just One Evil Act&quot; ()
* 2015: &quot;A Banquet of Consequences&quot; ()
* 2018: &quot;The Punishment She Deserves&quot; ()
* 2022: &quot;Something to Hide&quot; ()
* 2025: &quot;A Slowly Dying Cause&quot;

=== Whidbey Island Saga ===
* 2012: &quot;The Edge of Nowhere&quot; ()
* 2013: &quot;The Edge of the Water&quot; ()
* 2015: &quot;The Edge of the Shadows&quot; ()
* 2016: &quot;The Edge of the Light&quot; ()

=== Short story collections ===
* 2001: &quot;The Evidence Exposed&quot; (; Short story collection UK)
* 2002: &quot;I, Richard&quot; (; short story collection)
* 2004: &quot;A Moment on the Edge: 100 Years of Crime Stories by Women&quot; (editor; )

=== Nonfiction ===
* 2004: &quot;Write Away&quot; ()
* 2020: &quot;Mastering the Process: From Idea to Novel&quot;

== References ==
== External ==
* 
* Elizabeth George at Goodreads </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q236727" start="0" end="22" title="Elizabeth George" label="Susan Elizabeth George"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585139" start="73" end="86" title="mystery novel" label="mystery novel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="133" end="151" title="#Fiction:_Inspector_Lynley" label="a series of novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="294" end="297" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q984207" start="327" end="357" title="The Inspector Lynley Mysteries" label="The Inspector Lynley Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741937" start="409" end="415" title="Lynley (TV series)" label="Lynley"/>
<link wikidata="Q43170911" start="477" end="486" title="Leo Suter" label="Leo Suter"/>
<link wikidata="Q113143263" start="491" end="504" title="Sofia Barclay" label="Sofia Barclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q862733" start="553" end="565" title="Warren, Ohio" label="Warren, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="784" end="806" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466480" start="940" end="956" title="Foothill College" label="Foothill College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075148" start="984" end="1019" title="University of California, Riverside" label="University of California, Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="1161" end="1171" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054552" start="1751" end="1770" title="A Great Deliverance" label="A Great Deliverance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1885" end="1904" title="Inspector#United Kingdom" label="Detective Inspector"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1989" end="2007" title="Sergeant#Police 7" label="Detective Sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q184619" start="2035" end="2048" title="Scotland Yard" label="Scotland Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q360141" start="2139" end="2153" title="Whidbey Island" label="Whidbey Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q390975" start="2390" end="2402" title="Agatha Award" label="Agatha Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q572811" start="2445" end="2458" title="Anthony Awards" label="Anthony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q833154" start="2505" end="2516" title="Edgar Award" label="Edgar Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054552" start="2586" end="2605" title="A Great Deliverance" label="A Great Deliverance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223918" start="2629" end="2645" title="Payment in Blood" label="Payment in Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010378" start="2669" end="2692" title="Well-Schooled in Murder" label="Well-Schooled in Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549418" start="2716" end="2736" title="A Suitable Vengeance" label="A Suitable Vengeance"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279204" start="2760" end="2781" title="For the Sake of Elena" label="For the Sake of Elena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281069" start="2805" end="2819" title="Missing Joseph" label="Missing Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3548645" start="2843" end="2864" title="Playing for the Ashes" label="Playing for the Ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228171" start="2888" end="2916" title="In the Presence of the Enemy" label="In the Presence of the Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2940" end="2961" title="Deception on His Mind" label="Deception on His Mind"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2985" end="3016" title="In Pursuit of the Proper Sinner" label="In Pursuit of the Proper Sinner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3040" end="3059" title="A Traitor to Memory" label="A Traitor to Memory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3083" end="3100" title="A Place of Hiding" label="A Place of Hiding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3124" end="3146" title="With No One as Witness" label="With No One as Witness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3170" end="3198" title="What Came Before He Shot Her" label="What Came Before He Shot Her"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3222" end="3237" title="Careless in Red" label="Careless in Red"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3261" end="3279" title="This Body of Death" label="This Body of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q17632217" start="3303" end="3320" title="Believing the Lie" label="Believing the Lie"/>
<link wikidata="Q21895137" start="3344" end="3361" title="Just One Evil Act" label="Just One Evil Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869201" start="3385" end="3410" title="A Banquet of Consequences" label="A Banquet of Consequences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3809" end="3829" title="The Evidence Exposed" label="The Evidence Exposed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3880" end="3890" title="I, Richard" label="I, Richard"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3938" end="3995" title="A Moment on the Edge: 100 Years of Crime Stories by Women" label="A Moment on the Edge: 100 Years of Crime Stories by Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q48834610" start="4047" end="4057" title="Write Away" label="Write Away"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534911" wikidata="Q2600030" url="?curid=534911" title="Yellow pine (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Yellow pine]] is a number of conifer species which yield similar strong wood.

Yellow pine may also refer to:
== Plants ==
* &quot;Pinus palustris&quot;, longleaf pine
* &quot;Pinus echinata&quot;, shortleaf pine
* &quot;Pinus elliottii&quot;, slash pine
* &quot;Pinus jeffreyi&quot;, Jeffrey pine
* &quot;Pinus ponderosa&quot;, ponderosa pine
* &quot;Pinus taeda&quot;, loblolly pine
* &quot;Pinus strobus&quot;, eastern white pine
* &quot;Pinus sylvestris&quot;, Scots pine
* &quot;Halocarpus biformis&quot;, yellow pine or pink pine, a tree endemic to New Zealand

== Places ==
* Yellow Pine, Alabama
* Yellow Pine, Idaho
* Yellow Pine, Louisiana

== See also ==
* Bull pine
* List of &quot;Pinus&quot; species</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2600030" start="0" end="15" title="Yellow pine (disambiguation)" label="[[Yellow pine]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600030" start="81" end="92" title="Yellow pine (disambiguation)" label="Yellow pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q148542" start="133" end="148" title="Pinus palustris" label="Pinus palustris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237846" start="178" end="192" title="Pinus echinata" label="Pinus echinata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249109" start="223" end="238" title="Pinus elliottii" label="Pinus elliottii"/>
<link wikidata="Q251370" start="265" end="279" title="Pinus jeffreyi" label="Pinus jeffreyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q460523" start="308" end="323" title="Pinus ponderosa" label="Pinus ponderosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q368248" start="354" end="365" title="Pinus taeda" label="Pinus taeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q157230" start="395" end="408" title="Pinus strobus" label="Pinus strobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133128" start="443" end="459" title="Pinus sylvestris" label="Pinus sylvestris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396601" start="486" end="505" title="Halocarpus biformis" label="Halocarpus biformis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16904081" start="585" end="605" title="Yellow Pine, Alabama" label="Yellow Pine, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022666" start="608" end="626" title="Yellow Pine, Idaho" label="Yellow Pine, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q16904083" start="629" end="651" title="Yellow Pine, Louisiana" label="Yellow Pine, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16767861" start="670" end="679" title="Bull pine" label="Bull pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924659" start="682" end="715" title="List of Pinus species" label="List of &amp;quot;Pinus&amp;quot; species"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534914" wikidata="Q3180727" url="?curid=534914" title="Spectral graph theory">
<text>In mathematics, spectral [[graph theory]] is the study of the properties of a graph in relationship to the characteristic polynomial, eigenvalues, and eigenvectors of matrices associated with the graph, such as its adjacency matrix or Laplacian matrix.

The adjacency matrix of a simple undirected graph is a real symmetric matrix and is therefore orthogonally diagonalizable; its eigenvalues are real algebraic integers.

While the adjacency matrix depends on the vertex labeling, its spectrum is a graph invariant, although not a complete one.

Spectral graph theory is also concerned with graph parameters that are defined via multiplicities of eigenvalues of matrices associated to the graph, such as the Colin de Verdière number.

==Cospectral graphs==
Two graphs are called cospectral or isospectral if the adjacency matrices of the graphs are isospectral, that is, if the adjacency matrices have equal multisets of eigenvalues.
Cospectral graphs need not be isomorphic, but isomorphic graphs are always cospectral.

=== Graphs determined by their spectrum ===
A graph formula_1 is said to be determined by its spectrum if any other graph with the same spectrum as formula_1 is isomorphic to formula_1.

Some first examples of families of graphs that are determined by their spectrum include:
* The complete graphs.
* The finite starlike trees.

=== Cospectral mates ===
A pair of graphs are said to be cospectral mates if they have the same spectrum, but are non-isomorphic.

The smallest pair of cospectral mates is {&quot;K&quot;1,4, &quot;C&quot;4 ∪ &quot;K&quot;1}, comprising the 5-vertex star and the graph union of the 4-vertex cycle and the single-vertex graph. The first example of cospectral graphs was reported by Collatz and Sinogowitz in 1957.

The smallest pair of polyhedral cospectral mates are enneahedra with eight vertices each.

=== Finding cospectral graphs ===
Almost all trees are cospectral, i.e., as the number of vertices grows, the fraction of trees for which there exists a cospectral tree goes to 1.

A pair of regular graphs are cospectral if and only if their complements are cospectral.

A pair of distance-regular graphs are cospectral if and only if they have the same intersection array.

Cospectral graphs can also be constructed by means of the Sunada method.

Another important source of cospectral graphs are the point-collinearity graphs and the line-intersection graphs of point-line geometries. These graphs are always cospectral but are often non-isomorphic.

==Cheeger inequality==
The famous Cheeger&#x27;s inequality from Riemannian geometry has a discrete analogue involving the Laplacian matrix; this is perhaps the most important theorem in spectral graph theory and one of the most useful facts in algorithmic applications. It approximates the sparsest cut of a graph through the second eigenvalue of its Laplacian.

===Cheeger constant===

The Cheeger constant (also Cheeger number or isoperimetric number) of a graph is a numerical measure of whether or not a graph has a &quot;bottleneck&quot;. The Cheeger constant as a measure of &quot;bottleneckedness&quot; is of great interest in many areas: for example, constructing well-connected networks of computers, card shuffling, and low-dimensional topology (in particular, the study of hyperbolic 3-manifolds).

More formally, the Cheeger constant &quot;h&quot;(&quot;G&quot;) of a graph &quot;G&quot; on &quot;n&quot; vertices is defined as
: formula_4
where the minimum is over all nonempty sets &quot;S&quot; of at most &quot;n&quot;/2 vertices and ∂(&quot;S&quot;) is the &quot;edge boundary&quot; of &quot;S&quot;, i.e., the set of edges with exactly one endpoint in &quot;S&quot;.

===Cheeger inequality===
When the graph &quot;G&quot; is &quot;d&quot;-regular, there is a relationship between &quot;h&quot;(&quot;G&quot;) and the spectral gap &quot;d&quot; − λ2 of &quot;G&quot;. An inequality due to Dodziuk and independently Alon and Milman states that

: formula_5

This inequality is closely related to the Cheeger bound for Markov chains and can be seen as a discrete version of Cheeger&#x27;s inequality in Riemannian geometry.

For general connected graphs that are not necessarily regular, an alternative inequality is given by Chung 
:formula_6
where formula_7 is the least nontrivial eigenvalue of the normalized Laplacian, and formula_8 is the (normalized) Cheeger constant 
: formula_9
where formula_10 is the sum of degrees of vertices in formula_11.

== Hoffman–Delsarte inequality ==
There is an eigenvalue bound for independent sets in regular graphs, originally due to Alan J. Hoffman and Philippe Delsarte.

Suppose that formula_1 is a formula_13-regular graph on formula_14 vertices with least eigenvalue formula_15. Then:formula_16where formula_17 denotes its independence number.

This bound has been applied to establish e.g. algebraic proofs of the Erdős–Ko–Rado theorem and its analogue for intersecting families of subspaces over finite fields.

For general graphs which are not necessarily regular, a similar upper bound for the independence number can be derived by using the maximum eigenvalue
formula_18 of the normalized Laplacian of formula_1:
formula_20
where formula_21 and formula_22 denote the maximum and minimum degree in formula_1, respectively. This a consequence of a more general inequality (pp. 109 in
formula_24 
where formula_25 is an independent set of vertices and formula_10 denotes the sum of degrees of vertices in formula_11 .

==Historical outline==
Spectral graph theory emerged in the 1950s and 1960s. Besides graph theoretic research on the relationship between structural and spectral properties of graphs, another major source was research in quantum chemistry, but the connections between these two lines of work were not discovered until much later. The 1980 monograph &quot;Spectra of Graphs&quot; by Cvetković, Doob, and Sachs summarised nearly all research to date in the area. In 1988 it was updated by the survey &quot;Recent Results in the Theory of Graph Spectra&quot;. The 3rd edition of &quot;Spectra of Graphs&quot; (1995) contains a summary of the further recent contributions to the subject. Discrete geometric analysis created and developed by Toshikazu Sunada in the 2000s deals with spectral graph theory in terms of discrete Laplacians associated with weighted graphs, and finds application in various fields, including shape analysis. In most recent years, the spectral graph theory has expanded to vertex-varying graphs often encountered in many real-life applications.

==See also==
* Strongly regular graph
* Algebraic connectivity
* Algebraic graph theory
* Spectral clustering
* Spectral shape analysis
* Estrada index
* Lovász theta
* Expander graph

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* Pavel Kurasov (2024), &quot;Spectral Geometry of Graphs&quot;, Springer(Birkhauser), Open Access (CC4.0).

==External links==
* [chapter from Combinatorial Scientific Computing]
* [presented at FOCS 2007 Conference]
* [course page and lecture notes]</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180727" start="16" end="41" title="Spectral graph theory" label="spectral [[graph theory]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="78" end="83" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q849705" start="107" end="132" title="characteristic polynomial" label="characteristic polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="134" end="144" title="eigenvalue" label="eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="151" end="162" title="eigenvector" label="eigenvector"/>
<link wikidata="Q727035" start="215" end="231" title="adjacency matrix" label="adjacency matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q772067" start="235" end="251" title="Laplacian matrix" label="Laplacian matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="309" end="313" title="Real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q339011" start="314" end="330" title="symmetric matrix" label="symmetric matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104529" start="348" end="375" title="Orthogonal diagonalization" label="orthogonally diagonalizable"/>
<link wikidata="Q646245" start="402" end="419" title="algebraic integer" label="algebraic integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490774" start="486" end="494" title="Spectrum of a matrix" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q722659" start="500" end="515" title="graph invariant" label="graph invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q245673" start="709" end="733" title="Colin de Verdière graph invariant" label="Colin de Verdière number"/>
<link wikidata="Q6086323" start="850" end="861" title="isospectral" label="isospectral"/>
<link wikidata="Q864377" start="909" end="917" title="multiset" label="multiset"/>
<link wikidata="Q303100" start="965" end="975" title="Graph isomorphism" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45715" start="1305" end="1319" title="complete graph" label="complete graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q30672836" start="1335" end="1348" title="starlike tree" label="starlike tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589168" start="1601" end="1605" title="star (graph theory)" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028355" start="1614" end="1625" title="graph union" label="graph union"/>
<link wikidata="Q245595" start="1642" end="1647" title="cycle (graph theory)" label="cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555371" start="1786" end="1796" title="polyhedral graph" label="polyhedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379147" start="1818" end="1828" title="enneahedron" label="enneahedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397701" start="1890" end="1900" title="Almost all" label="Almost all"/>
<link wikidata="Q272735" start="1901" end="1905" title="tree (graph theory)" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q826467" start="2047" end="2060" title="regular graph" label="regular graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115556" start="2137" end="2159" title="distance-regular graph" label="distance-regular graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6086323" start="2289" end="2302" title="isospectral" label="Sunada method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582901" start="2421" end="2442" title="incidence geometry" label="point-line geometries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2544" end="2569" title="Cheeger constant#Cheeger.27s inequality" label="Cheeger&amp;#x27;s inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q761383" start="2575" end="2594" title="Riemannian geometry" label="Riemannian geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="2970" end="2975" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="3198" end="3219" title="Computer networking" label="networks of computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930567" start="3221" end="3235" title="Shuffling" label="card shuffling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939186" start="3241" end="3265" title="Geometric topology" label="low-dimensional topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q209306" start="3295" end="3305" title="Hyperbolic geometry" label="hyperbolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="3308" end="3316" title="manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q92927" start="3943" end="3947" title="Noga Alon" label="Alon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425084" start="3952" end="3958" title="Vitali Milman" label="Milman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089261" start="4027" end="4040" title="Cheeger bound" label="Cheeger bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q176645" start="4045" end="4058" title="Markov chains" label="Markov chains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4100" end="4125" title="Cheeger constant#Cheeger.27s inequality" label="Cheeger&amp;#x27;s inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q761383" start="4129" end="4148" title="Riemannian geometry" label="Riemannian geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060343" start="4548" end="4564" title="Independent set (graph theory)" label="independent sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q826467" start="4568" end="4581" title="regular graph" label="regular graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q679783" start="4602" end="4617" title="Alan J. Hoffman" label="Alan J. Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060343" start="4796" end="4815" title="independence number" label="independence number"/>
<link wikidata="Q718875" start="4888" end="4909" title="Erdős–Ko–Rado theorem" label="Erdős–Ko–Rado theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q603880" start="4971" end="4983" title="finite field" label="finite field"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="5579" end="5594" title="graph theory" label="graph theoretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188403" start="5715" end="5732" title="quantum chemistry" label="quantum chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399383" start="6231" end="6247" title="Toshikazu Sunada" label="Toshikazu Sunada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575207" start="6410" end="6424" title="Spectral shape analysis" label="shape analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q692823" start="6578" end="6600" title="Strongly regular graph" label="Strongly regular graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723998" start="6603" end="6625" title="Algebraic connectivity" label="Algebraic connectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724003" start="6628" end="6650" title="Algebraic graph theory" label="Algebraic graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976589" start="6653" end="6672" title="Spectral clustering" label="Spectral clustering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575207" start="6675" end="6698" title="Spectral shape analysis" label="Spectral shape analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401753" start="6701" end="6714" title="Estrada index" label="Estrada index"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692699" start="6717" end="6729" title="Lovász theta" label="Lovász theta"/>
<link wikidata="Q776602" start="6732" end="6746" title="Expander graph" label="Expander graph"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534915" wikidata="Q297105" url="?curid=534915" title="Tipton County">
<text>Tipton County is the name of two counties in the United States:

* Tipton County, Indiana
* Tipton County, Tennessee</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q507336" start="67" end="89" title="Tipton County, Indiana" label="Tipton County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q474999" start="92" end="116" title="Tipton County, Tennessee" label="Tipton County, Tennessee"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534923" wikidata="Q616529" url="?curid=534923" title="Apache Point Observatory">
<text>The Apache Point Observatory (APO; obs. code: 705) is an astronomical observatory located in the Sacramento Mountains in Sunspot, New Mexico, United States, approximately south of Cloudcroft. The observatory is operated by New Mexico State University (NMSU) and owned by the Astrophysical Research Consortium (ARC). Access to the telescopes and buildings is private and restricted.

== History ==

The ARC was formed in 1984 with the goal of building the 3.5 m telescope. It originally consisted of five institutions: New Mexico State University, University of Washington, University of Chicago, Princeton University, and Washington State University, some of which have since withdrawn.

Several additional organizations have joined over time: Johns Hopkins University, University of Colorado, University of Virginia, Georgia State University, University of Oklahoma, University of Wyoming, and Brigham Young University. Funding for the 3.5 m and 0.5 m telescopes comes from the consortium members, but funds for the 2.5 m telescope come from a much wider array of sources. The 1.0 m telescope is supported exclusively by NMSU.

== Telescopes ==

=== ARC 3.5 m ===
The ARC telescope is a Ritchey-Chretien reflector on an alt-azimuth mount with instruments attached at several focal points. Construction of the building began in 1985, but full operations of the telescope were delayed until November 1994 due to problems with fabricating the primary mirror. From 1991 until early 1993, the telescope was fitted with a 1.8 m mirror, now located at Rothney Astrophysical Observatory under a cost-sharing agreement.

There are a variety of optical and near-infrared instruments available for the 3.5 m telescope, including:
* The ARC echelle spectrometer (ARCES) uses a 2048 × 2048 pixel CCD and has a resolution of formula_1.
* The Double Imaging Spectrometer (DIS) is a low-resolution optical spectrometer.
*KOSMOS, on long-term loan from NOIRLab, is a low-resolution optical spectrometer.
* The Near Infrared Camera/Fabry–Pérot Spectrometer (NICFPS) was developed at the University of Colorado. It uses a 1024 × 1024 H1RG HgCdTe infrared detector and a near-infrared Fabry–Pérot interferometer. It has many narrow band filters, including H2, [Fe II], and [SiVI]. It is unique among astronomical Fabry-Pérot devices in that it is cooled with liquid nitrogen.
* The Astrophysical Research Consortium Telescope Imaging Camera (ARCTIC) is an optical imaging instrument with a 4096 × 4096 pixel CCD.
* TripleSpec (Tspec) is a near infrared spectrograph which provides continuous wavelength coverage over the range 0.94–2.46 μm at moderate resolution (formula_2, depending on the choice of slit).
*Agile is a high-speed imager with a 1024 x 1024 frame transfer CCD.

The 3.5 m telescope is also used by the Apache Point Observatory Lunar Laser-ranging Operation (APOLLO) lunar-ranging project. The APOLLO laser has been operational since October 2005, and routinely accomplishes millimeter-level range accuracy between the Earth and the Moon.

Observations using the 3.5 m telescope can be carried out remotely by observers using TUI, the Telescope User Interface, via the internet.

=== SDSS 2.5 m ===
The SDSS telescope is used for the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, and began operating in 2000. It is a Ritchey-Chretien reflector on an alt-azimuth mount housed under a roll-off enclosure. It was designed with an unusually large 3° field of view to better support its primary task of surveying the entire sky.

=== NMSU 1.0 m ===

The NMSU telescope is a Ritchey-Chretien reflector set on an alt-azimuth mount, and was completed in 1994. A 2048 × 2048 CCD mounted at the Nasmyth focus provides at 15.7 arcminute view of the sky.

=== 0.5 m ARCSAT ===

The ARC Small Aperture Telescope (ARCSAT) was previously called the Photometric Telescope (PT) when it was part of the SDSS project. It is a reflecting telescope on an equatorial mount, with a single CCD camera cooled by a CryoTiger unit. It was built in 1991, moved from its previous location in 1998, and used by the SDSS until 2005. It is currently used for small research projects.

=== Former telescopes ===

* A reflecting telescope was built in 1993 to monitor sky conditions for the SDSS project. It never operated in a satisfactory manner, and was replaced with the 0.5 m PT.

== List of discovered minor planets ==

The Minor Planet Center credits the discovery of the following minor planets directly to the Apache Point Observatory:


== See also ==
* List of astronomical observatories
* List of largest optical reflecting telescopes
* Sunspot Solar Observatory

== References ==
== External links ==

* Astronomy Department at NMSU
* Sloan Digital Sky Survey homepage
* Apache Point Clear Sky Clock Forecasts of observing conditions.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q616529" start="4" end="28" title="Apache Point Observatory" label="Apache Point Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q953917" start="35" end="44" title="List of observatory codes" label="obs. code"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46" end="49" title="IAU code#705" label="705"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="57" end="69" title="astronomy" label="astronomical"/>
<link wikidata="Q62832" start="70" end="81" title="observatory" label="observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388756" start="97" end="117" title="Sacramento Mountains (New Mexico)" label="Sacramento Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273462" start="121" end="128" title="Sunspot, New Mexico" label="Sunspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="130" end="140" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q432556" start="180" end="190" title="Cloudcroft, New Mexico" label="Cloudcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353248" start="223" end="250" title="New Mexico State University" label="New Mexico State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353248" start="518" end="545" title="New Mexico State University" label="New Mexico State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="547" end="571" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="573" end="594" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="596" end="616" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q597236" start="622" end="649" title="Washington State University" label="Washington State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="744" end="768" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206658" start="770" end="792" title="University of Colorado" label="University of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="794" end="816" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509333" start="818" end="842" title="Georgia State University" label="Georgia State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="844" end="866" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326975" start="868" end="889" title="University of Wyoming" label="University of Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="895" end="919" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062138" start="1188" end="1204" title="Ritchey-Chretien" label="Ritchey-Chretien"/>
<link wikidata="Q677971" start="1221" end="1238" title="alt-azimuth mount" label="alt-azimuth mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q190909" start="1276" end="1288" title="Focus (optics)" label="focal points"/>
<link wikidata="Q613628" start="1441" end="1455" title="primary mirror" label="primary mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168759" start="1546" end="1579" title="Rothney Astrophysical Observatory" label="Rothney Astrophysical Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q10384130" start="1588" end="1610" title="cost-sharing agreement" label="cost-sharing agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q910407" start="1730" end="1750" title="echelle grating" label="echelle spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="1784" end="1787" title="Charge-coupled device" label="CCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457898" start="1798" end="1808" title="spectral resolution" label="resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="2070" end="2092" title="University of Colorado at Boulder" label="University of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q422717" start="2121" end="2127" title="HgCdTe" label="HgCdTe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359945" start="2166" end="2192" title="Fabry–Pérot interferometer" label="Fabry–Pérot interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="2237" end="2239" title="Molecular cloud" label="H2"/>
<link wikidata="Q932483" start="2241" end="2247" title="forbidden line" label="[Fe II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139370" start="2340" end="2355" title="liquid nitrogen" label="liquid nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="2618" end="2620" title="μm" label="μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778939" start="2800" end="2854" title="Apache Point Observatory Lunar Laser-ranging Operation" label="Apache Point Observatory Lunar Laser-ranging Operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q840332" start="3231" end="3255" title="Sloan Digital Sky Survey" label="Sloan Digital Sky Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076893" start="3423" end="3436" title="field of view" label="field of view"/>
<link wikidata="Q550089" start="3475" end="3484" title="Astronomical survey" label="surveying"/>
<link wikidata="Q899003" start="3662" end="3675" title="Nasmyth focus" label="Nasmyth focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061971" start="3911" end="3927" title="equatorial mount" label="equatorial mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q522039" start="4373" end="4392" title="Minor Planet Center" label="Minor Planet Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022867" start="4432" end="4444" title="minor planet" label="minor planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344875" start="4507" end="4541" title="List of astronomical observatories" label="List of astronomical observatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638347" start="4544" end="4589" title="List of largest optical reflecting telescopes" label="List of largest optical reflecting telescopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641904" start="4592" end="4617" title="Sunspot Solar Observatory" label="Sunspot Solar Observatory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534931" wikidata="Q7951025" url="?curid=534931" title="WIYN Observatory">
<text>The WIYN Observatory is owned and operated by the WIYN Consortium. Its 3.5-meter telescope is the second largest optical telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona. Most of the capital costs for the observatory were provided by the University of Wisconsin–Madison, Indiana University, and Yale University, while the National Optical Astronomy Observatory (NOAO) provides most of the operating services. The NOAO is an institution of the United States; it is the national optical observatory program and supports a collection of ground-based telescopes at Kitt Peak (where WIYN is located) as well as other locations.

== Telescope ==
WIYN is a Ritchey–Chrétien telescope with an altitude-azimuth mount. The lightweight borosilicate primary mirror has a diameter of 3.49885 m (137.75&quot;) and was manufactured at the Richard F. Caris Mirror Lab. Sixty-six active optics actuators support the primary mirror.

The telescope is located in a half-Rhombicuboctahedron dome.

==Current instrumentation==

=== Hydra ===
Hydra is a multiobject spectrograph using fiber optics robotically positioned in the focal plane to allow up to 100 separate objects to be observed at a time. The light is guided to a spectrograph room under the main telescope where a CCD camera records the spectrum of each object. The field of view is approximately 1 degree. Hydra has been operating since 1990. It was originally located at the Nicholas U. Mayall Telescope before being moved to WIYN in 1994. In 2021, Hydra received a major upgrade to the &quot;gripper&quot; fiber positioning robot.

=== NEID ===
Funded by the NN-EXPLORE collaboration between NASA and the National Science Foundation, the NEID spectrograph searches for extra-solar planets by looking for minute variations in the radial velocity of the host star caused by the orbiting planet(s). The extremely precise radial velocities (50 cm/s) provided by NEID will provide masses and densities for exoplanets discovered by the TESS space telescope. The name NEID comes from the Tohono Oʼodham word for &quot;to see.&quot;

The spectrograph was designed and built at Pennsylvania State University, with the construction beginning in 2016. The Port Adapter portion of the instrument, which provides guiding, focus correction, fast tip-tilt correction, and atmospheric dispersion correction to the starlight before injecting it into the optical fiber feeding the spectrograph, was built by the University of Wisconsin in collaboration with NOAO. On June 2, 2021, NEID completed commissioning.

The NEID is also assisted by The Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) with super-computer time and expertise in the scientific search for new exoplanets.

=== One Degree Imager (ODI) ===

The One Degree Imager (ODI) is the flagship of WIYN&#x27;s new instrument initiatives. ODI utilizes both WIYN&#x27;s one degree field of view and excellent image quality. The original design for ODI was to cover the one square degree field using a total of 64 Orthogonal Transfer Arrays (OTAs) with a total of 1 GigaPixel and a pixelscale of 0.11 arcseconds per pixel. Orthogonal transfer arrays allow to actively improve image sharpness by correcting images for tip/tilt motion during the integration. Corrections will be done over the entire field of view, making ODI a unique and competitive instrument in the era of wide-field surveys. ODI is funded by the WIYN partners and the National Science Foundation.

ODI was first commissioned in a partial or prototype configuration (pODI) using 13 OTAs in the summer of 2012, and was available for science observations since early 2013. pODI was decommissioned in late 2014 to undergo a significant upgrade. The upgraded ODI, now using 30 OTAs in a 5x6 layout was recommissioned in summer 2015 and has been available for science observations since October 2015.

=== WIYN High Resolution InfraRed Camera (WHIRC) ===
WHIRC is a near infrared high resolution imaging camera commissioned in 2008. WHIRC was a joint project between the WIYN partners and STScI. It consists of a 2k × 2k detector providing an excellent pixel scale of 0.1&quot;/pixel and a field of view of 200 × 200 arcsec. WHIRC can be used with the WIYN Tip/Tilt Module (WTTM) to provide exquisite high-resolution images. A large set of filters is available.

== Past (no longer available) instruments ==
=== Mini-Mosaic ===
MiniMo is a CCD consisting of two 2048 × 4096 pixel chips, with a field of view of 9.6 arcminutes. The two separate chips allow for faster readout of the image than would have been otherwise possible, as they can be read out simultaneously. 

==Governance==
The WIYN Consortium is governed by a board of directors, which includes three members of each partner institution. The board meets twice a year. The Science Steering Committee provides scientific guidance to the board and the WIYN director.

From 2000 to 2008, the WIYN director was George Jacoby, followed by Pierre Martin (2008–2010). From 2010 to 2013, Pat Knezek served as interim director. Since 2013, Eric Hooper (UW-Madison) has served as interim director.

Yale University withdrew from the WIYN consortium on April 1, 2014 and was replaced by the University of Missouri in the fall of that year. In 2015, a NASA-NSF partnership called NN-EXPLORE effectively took over NOAO&#x27;s share, although NOAO still manages the operations.

==See also==
* List of astronomical observatories
* List of largest optical reflecting telescopes
* List of the largest optical telescopes in the contiguous United States

== References ==
==External links==
* WIYN Observatory – official site.
* Abell 39 image by WIYN</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7951025" start="4" end="20" title="WIYN Observatory" label="WIYN Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951024" start="50" end="65" title="WIYN Consortium" label="WIYN Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11573" start="75" end="80" title="Metre" label="meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="81" end="90" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q592248" start="134" end="164" title="Kitt Peak National Observatory" label="Kitt Peak National Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="168" end="175" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q62832" start="211" end="222" title="observatory" label="observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="244" end="275" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079140" start="277" end="295" title="Indiana University Bloomington" label="Indiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="301" end="316" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315390" start="328" end="366" title="National Optical Astronomy Observatory" label="National Optical Astronomy Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="449" end="462" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062138" start="656" end="682" title="Ritchey–Chrétien telescope" label="Ritchey–Chrétien telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q677971" start="691" end="713" title="Altazimuth mount" label="altitude-azimuth mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120109" start="830" end="857" title="Steward Observatory" label="Richard F. Caris Mirror Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054449" start="869" end="882" title="active optics" label="active optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q860923" start="957" end="976" title="Rhombicuboctahedron" label="Rhombicuboctahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="1050" end="1062" title="spectrograph" label="spectrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="1069" end="1081" title="fiber optics" label="fiber optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q376733" start="1112" end="1123" title="focal plane" label="focal plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="1211" end="1223" title="spectrograph" label="spectrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="1262" end="1272" title="CCD camera" label="CCD camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q654182" start="1285" end="1293" title="spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076893" start="1314" end="1327" title="field of view" label="field of view"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546489" start="1425" end="1453" title="Nicholas U. Mayall Telescope" label="Nicholas U. Mayall Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="1643" end="1647" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="1656" end="1683" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323537" start="1981" end="2001" title="Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite" label="TESS space telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937531" start="2032" end="2046" title="Tohono Oʼodham" label="Tohono Oʼodham"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="2120" end="2149" title="Pennsylvania State University" label="Pennsylvania State University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2278" end="2302" title="Adaptive optics#Tip–tilt correction" label="fast tip-tilt correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707491" start="2578" end="2609" title="Texas Advanced Computing Center" label="Texas Advanced Computing Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q254532" start="2955" end="2968" title="square degree" label="square degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="3915" end="3923" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540619" start="4033" end="4038" title="Space Telescope Science Institute" label="STScI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076893" start="4438" end="4451" title="field of view" label="field of view"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="4459" end="4469" title="arcminutes" label="arcminutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q579968" start="5186" end="5208" title="University of Missouri" label="University of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344875" start="5386" end="5420" title="List of astronomical observatories" label="List of astronomical observatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638347" start="5423" end="5468" title="List of largest optical reflecting telescopes" label="List of largest optical reflecting telescopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625028" start="5471" end="5541" title="List of the largest optical telescopes in the contiguous United States" label="List of the largest optical telescopes in the contiguous United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534934" wikidata="Q60738776" url="?curid=534934" title="Checks and Balances (organization)">
<text>Checks and Balances is a group of conservative and libertarian attorneys that was formed in November 2018. It is composed of some members of the conservative-libertarian Federalist Society, which had assisted the Trump administration in selecting appointees for federal courts. Charter members of the new organization included, George Conway, Tom Ridge, Peter Keisler, Jonathan H. Adler, Orin Kerr, Lori S. Meyer, Paul McNulty, Phillip D. Brady, John B. Bellinger III, Carrie Cordero, Marisa C. Maleck, Alan Charles Raul, and Paul Rosenzweig, amongst others. The group was formed to provide a conservative legal voice for responses when, in its words, &quot;Trump attacks the Justice Department and the news media&quot;.

Organization member Peter Keisler said the group had received an &quot;overwhelmingly positive response&quot;, including from Federalist Society members, however, the formation of the group was sharply criticized by Federalist Society leader Leonard Leo, saying he found &quot;the underlying premise of the group rather offensive&quot;.

On October 10, 2019, the group released a statement offering its legal reasoning for an &quot;expeditious&quot; impeachment probe into President Trump. Citing the Special Counsel&#x27;s report, which highlights that the &quot;Trump 2016 campaign was open to and enthusiastic about receiving Russian government-facilitated assistance to gain an advantage in the previous election&quot;, it outlined the recent facts regarding Trump&#x27;s attempts to put pressure on Ukraine for his personal and political benefit. After the statement by Checks and Balances was published, organization member George Conway said that the White House letter (reported by the &quot;Daily Beast&quot; as mostly written by Trump), refusing to cooperate in the House of Representatives impeachment hearings, was &quot;trash&quot;.

In November 2023, an opinion piece in &quot;The New York Times&quot; by George Conway, J. Michael Luttig, and Barbara Comstock announced that Checks and Balances had become Society for the Rule of Law.

==See also==
*Impeachment trial of Donald Trump following Impeachment inquiry against Donald Trump
*Timeline of Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections
*Timeline of Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections (July 2016 – election day)

==References==
==External links==
*Society for the Rule of Law, successor to Checks and Balances</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q60738776" start="0" end="19" title="Checks and Balances (organization)" label="Checks and Balances"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440666" start="170" end="188" title="Federalist Society" label="Federalist Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q28964312" start="328" end="341" title="George Conway" label="George Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q559822" start="343" end="352" title="Tom Ridge" label="Tom Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376685" start="354" end="367" title="Peter Keisler" label="Peter Keisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485645" start="369" end="386" title="Jonathan H. Adler" label="Jonathan H. Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102690" start="388" end="397" title="Orin Kerr" label="Orin Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q369381" start="414" end="426" title="Paul McNulty" label="Paul McNulty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185656" start="428" end="444" title="Phillip D. Brady" label="Phillip D. Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219857" start="446" end="467" title="John B. Bellinger III" label="John B. Bellinger III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440666" start="938" end="956" title="Federalist Society" label="Federalist Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525494" start="964" end="975" title="Leonard Leo" label="Leonard Leo"/>
<link wikidata="Q63213423" start="1223" end="1252" title="Mueller report" label="Special Counsel&amp;#x27;s report"/>
<link wikidata="Q68451938" start="1526" end="1533" title="Trump–Ukraine scandal" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q68497894" start="1823" end="1843" title="Impeachment inquiry against Donald Trump" label="impeachment hearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="1913" end="1931" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676364" start="1956" end="1973" title="J. Michael Luttig" label="J. Michael Luttig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858820" start="1979" end="1995" title="Barbara Comstock" label="Barbara Comstock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2042" end="2069" title="Society for the Rule of Law" label="Society for the Rule of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q79077052" start="2086" end="2119" title="First impeachment trial of Donald Trump" label="Impeachment trial of Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q68497894" start="2130" end="2170" title="Impeachment inquiry against Donald Trump" label="Impeachment inquiry against Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q30538707" start="2172" end="2240" title="Timeline of Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections" label="Timeline of Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q85852107" start="2242" end="2337" title="Timeline of Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections (July 2016 – election day)" label="Timeline of Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections (July 2016 – election day)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534935" wikidata="Q578886" url="?curid=534935" title="Wall gun">
<text>The wall gun or wall piece was a type of smoothbore firearm used in the 16th through 19th centuries by defending forces to break the advance of enemy troops. Essentially, it was a scaled-up version of the army&#x27;s standard infantry musket, operating under the same principles, but with a bore of up to one-inch (25.4 mm) calibre. These weapons filled a gap in firepower between the musket and the lightest artillery pieces, such as the swivel gun. This sort of weapon may also be found described as a rampart gun, [[hackbut]] or amusette, a name originally given to early medieval hand cannon.

== Use ==

Wall pieces were so named because they were designed to be used along the walls of fortifications. They were equipped with a yoke at the point of balance, which tapered into a pivot, which could be inserted into several sockets along the walls, which would absorb the recoil of the piece and also provide a stable gun platform. (In this respect they were much like a scaled-down version of the swivel gun.) Many were fitted with a barrel hook to absorb shock. Some of these weapons had multiple barrels which enabled volleys to be fired much faster than a normal single-shot wall gun. Wall pieces could also be mounted on very light carriages for service in the field, usually in support of the larger guns. They were also used on small naval vessels.

A wall gun&#x27;s barrel could be over in length with a bore of at least . This made them more accurate than the standard flintlock or matchlock musket.

George Washington acquired several wall guns during the American War of Independence. Tests showed that they were capable of hitting a sheet of common writing paper at , but as this is comparable angular precision to that of a modern full-bore target rifle these results may be optimistic.

Wall guns were part of the standard equipment of some artillery pieces at that time.

During the Napoleonic Wars many of these guns were cut down and turned into blunderbusses. They fired lead shot and were used by naval boarding parties, and by coachmen as protection from highwaymen. A surviving example is preserved in New Zealand.

A breech-loading wall gun was issued to the French army in 1819 for the defense of towns. Improved caplock versions were introduced in 1831 and 1842, as were muzzleloading versions. Bolt action wall guns firing metallic cartridges were used in India and China in the late 19th century.

=== Naval use ===

When captured the Genoese privateer &quot;Liguria&quot; on 7 August 1798, &quot;Espoir″&quot;s captain, Commander Loftus Otway Bland, catalogued &quot;Liguria″&quot;s armaments as: 12 long 18-pounders, four long 12-pounders, 10 long 6-pounders, 12 long wall-pieces, and four swivel guns. While wall-pieces were stocked similar to a musket, though would often have a forged yoke to help support the gun, and in some cases were rifled. Mentions of wall guns are rare in such enumerations; what is more common are mentions of the &quot;swivel guns&quot;.

== Asian wall guns ==
In the Far East, a jingal, gingal or gingall (), from Hindi &quot;janjal&quot;, was a type of large matchlock gun, usually a light piece mounted on a swivel. It fired iron bullets in diameter and was classified as a form of wall gun either by design or use. It sometimes took the form of a heavy musket fired from a rest, and usually required a crew of two men. The weapon was used by the Chinese in the 19th century, such as by the Taiping armies, imperial forces during the Opium Wars, and Chinese rebels in Hong Kong during the Six Day War of 1899.

Wall guns were used in India as early as the 17th century and there is a Burmese source from the late 15th century mentioning the use of &quot;cannon and muskets&quot; by the defenders of the besieged town of Prome. There are examples of later wall guns fitted with bipods. This weapon figures in Kipling&#x27;s poem &quot;The Grave of the Hundred Head&quot;. In Sinhala wall guns were called &quot;Maha Thuwakku&quot; and the Kingdom of Kandy used tripod-mounted guns to defend the city of Kandy and the Royal Palace.

== Gallery ==

== See also ==

*Zamburak
*Java arquebus
*Jiaozhi arquebus
*Istinggar
*Punt gun
*Volley gun
*Organ gun
*Recoilless rifle
*Anti-tank rifle
*Anti-materiel rifle

== References ==

== Bibliography ==

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q578886" start="4" end="12" title="Wall gun" label="wall gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q578886" start="16" end="26" title="Wall gun" label="wall piece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064392" start="41" end="51" title="smoothbore" label="smoothbore"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="52" end="59" title="firearm" label="firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="235" end="241" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q170417" start="324" end="331" title="Caliber" label="calibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="409" end="418" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256431" start="439" end="449" title="swivel gun" label="swivel gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q578886" start="504" end="515" title="Wall gun" label="rampart gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q578886" start="517" end="528" title="Wall gun" label="[[hackbut]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q578886" start="532" end="540" title="Wall gun" label="amusette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430251" start="584" end="595" title="hand cannon" label="hand cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q203290" start="734" end="738" title="yoke" label="yoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700804" start="1040" end="1051" title="barrel hook" label="barrel hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403171" start="1484" end="1493" title="flintlock" label="flintlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243678" start="1497" end="1506" title="matchlock" label="matchlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="1516" end="1533" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1572" end="1600" title="American War of Independence" label="American War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q740898" start="1712" end="1729" title="angular precision" label="angular precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="1904" end="1919" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148444" start="1969" end="1980" title="blunderbuss" label="blunderbuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q278938" start="1995" end="2004" title="lead shot" label="lead shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221610" start="2053" end="2061" title="coachmen" label="coachmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11242506" start="2081" end="2091" title="Highwayman" label="highwaymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933955" start="2145" end="2159" title="breech-loading" label="breech-loading"/>
<link wikidata="Q614853" start="2242" end="2249" title="caplock" label="caplock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461850" start="2301" end="2314" title="Muzzleloader" label="muzzleloading"/>
<link wikidata="Q870863" start="2325" end="2336" title="Bolt action" label="Bolt action"/>
<link wikidata="Q37144" start="2354" end="2373" title="Cartridge (firearms)" label="metallic cartridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256431" start="2724" end="2734" title="swivel gun" label="swivel gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="3031" end="3039" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="3078" end="3083" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243678" start="3124" end="3133" title="matchlock" label="matchlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="3320" end="3326" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="3413" end="3420" title="Qing" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q192408" start="3457" end="3464" title="Taiping Rebellion" label="Taiping"/>
<link wikidata="Q220984" start="3500" end="3510" title="Opium Wars" label="Opium Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="3534" end="3543" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867411" start="3555" end="3574" title="Six Day War of 1899" label="Six Day War of 1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="3650" end="3657" title="Burma" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q691747" start="3786" end="3791" title="Prome" label="Prome"/>
<link wikidata="Q232287" start="3843" end="3848" title="bipod" label="bipod"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="3874" end="3881" title="Kipling" label="Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530762" start="4004" end="4020" title="Kingdom of Kandy" label="Kingdom of Kandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920615" start="4129" end="4137" title="Zamburak" label="Zamburak"/>
<link wikidata="Q84934955" start="4139" end="4152" title="Java arquebus" label="Java arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q98381952" start="4154" end="4170" title="Jiaozhi arquebus" label="Jiaozhi arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q84937094" start="4172" end="4181" title="Istinggar" label="Istinggar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834809" start="4183" end="4191" title="Punt gun" label="Punt gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q730016" start="4193" end="4203" title="Volley gun" label="Volley gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366139" start="4205" end="4214" title="Organ gun" label="Organ gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q641196" start="4216" end="4232" title="Recoilless rifle" label="Recoilless rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131614" start="4234" end="4249" title="Anti-tank rifle" label="Anti-tank rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770971" start="4251" end="4270" title="Anti-materiel rifle" label="Anti-materiel rifle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534936" wikidata="Q1315390" url="?curid=534936" title="National Optical Astronomy Observatory">
<text>The National Optical Astronomy Observatory (NOAO) was the United States national observatory for ground-based nighttime ultraviolet-optical-infrared (OUVIR) astronomy. The National Science Foundation (NSF) funded NOAO to provide forefront astronomical research facilities for US astronomers. Professional astronomers from any country in the world could apply to use the telescopes operated by NOAO under the NSF&#x27;s &quot;open skies&quot; policy.

NOAO was operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA) under a cooperative agreement with the NSF. Its headquarters in Tucson, Arizona, were co-located with the headquarters of the National Solar Observatory. The budget for NOAO during the 2017 fiscal year was nearly $23 million.

NOAO was founded in 1984 to join the operations of the Kitt Peak National Observatory in the United States with the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory in Chile. On October 1, 2019, NOAO merged its operations with the Gemini Observatory and the Vera C. Rubin Observatory to form NOIRLab.

== Telescopes ==
NOAO operated world class research telescopes in both the northern and southern hemispheres. These telescopes, located at Kitt Peak and Cerro Tololo in the US and Chile respectively, remain in operation under the auspices of the NSF’s NOIRLab. The two sites allow US astronomers to make observations over the entire sky. Instrumentation includes optical to near infrared wavelength (0.4 to 5 micrometers) cameras and spectrometers.

===Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO)===

CTIO has a base and office facility in the seaside town of La Serena, Chile. The CTIO telescopes are located some 70 km inland in the foothills of the Chilean Andes. Access to the observatory is made through the picturesque Elqui Valley.

Telescopes at CTIO include the Victor M. Blanco Telescope (named after astronomer Victor Manuel Blanco in 1995) which employs a wide-field of view CCD (Charge-coupled device), a wide field of view near infrared imager (1-2.5 micrometers) and a multi-object fiber fed spectrograph working at visible wavelengths.

The Blanco 4m played the central role in the discovery of dark energy, a poorly understood component to the universe which is currently causing the universe to accelerate in its expansion. The Blanco began hosting a new 3-degree field of view camera called the Dark Energy Camera, also known as DECam, in 2012. This camera is being built at Fermilab in Chicago, USA, and will be operated by CTIO. This instrument was built to execute the Dark Energy Survey, an undertaking to image a large part of the sky to faint light levels, detecting galaxy large scale structure as a function of look back time to shed light on the nature of dark energy.

CTIO operates, and is a partner in the 4.1m Southern Astrophysical Research Telescope (SOAR). SOAR concentrates on high angular resolution observations and will soon deploy an adaptive optics module to help support such observations.

===Kitt Peak National Observatory (KPNO)===
KPNO is located near Tucson, Arizona, US. The mountain, Kitt Peak, is part of the tribal lands of the Native American people the Tohono O&#x27;odham. The mountain has been leased from the Tohono O&#x27;odham since 1958. The native name for the mountain is &quot;loligam&quot; which means manzanita.

The observatory was established in 1958, and its largest telescope, the 4-meter Nicholas U. Mayall Telescope, was dedicated in 1973. The Mayall played a key role in the discovery of dark matter though observations of external galaxies which showed that the galaxies rotated faster than they should have if the motion were due only to the mass in stars seen in visible light images.

A new wide field imager working at near infrared wavelengths (NEWFIRM) has been deployed to advance studies of galactic star formation, cosmology, and the structure and evolution of galaxies.

===NOAO Gemini Science Center (NGSC)===
NOAO also managed US participation in the international Gemini Observatory. Gemini is a partnership of Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The US holds a 50% share of the project (funded by the NSF) which provides public access time on each of Gemini&#x27;s two 8-meter telescopes. One telescope is located near CTIO in Chile, and the other is located on the island of Hawaii.

Gemini is the only facility available to all US astronomers on a permanent basis for large aperture science. Large apertures are typically taken to be between 6.5 m and 10 m. Gemini provides near infrared, mid infrared (10–20 micrometer), and optical imaging and spectroscopy in both the southern and northern hemispheres.

One of Gemini&#x27;s strengths is high angular resolution imaging accomplished through laser guide star adaptive optics. These facilities are already making an impact. For example, Gemini astronomers, along with their collaborators at the 10m W. M. Keck Observatory, recently announced the first images of an extra solar system with three detected planets circling their parent star, an A-type star known as HR 8799.

=== Vera C. Rubin Observatory (LSST) ===
NOAO was a founding partner in the Vera C. Rubin Observatory project, formerly known as the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST). Rubin Observatory is an 8-meter class telescope which will change the way some astronomers do science. More like a large physics program, Rubin Observatory will run its own experiment and provide data to the Rubin Observatory community in the form of images and astronomical catalogs. Rubin Observatory will have a dedicated wide field imager, and the telescope will cover the entire sky visible from the southern hemisphere approximately every week. By repeating the observations over and over for ten years, the Rubin Observatory will produce a very deep image of the sky, but it will also detect large numbers of astronomical objects which vary in brightness daily or on longer time scales. Rubin Observatory scientists will analyze, or &quot;mine&quot;, the LSST data rather than go to the telescope to make their own observations.

Rubin Observatory is currently in the pre-construction phase, with first light targeted for 2023. During this phase, AURA is managing for design and development of the Rubin Observatory telescope system and site facilities. Rubin Observatory will be located on Cerro Pachón in Chile, near the Gemini and SOAR telescopes. It will be operated by NOIRLab and SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory. 

At the beginning of the new millennium, the National Academy of Sciences published its report on Astronomy and Astrophysics in the coming decade. Among other high priorities, the committee responsible for the report concluded:

NOAO has worked very hard with the US community in the ensuing years in developing this System. A clear success story is the public access to non-federal large aperture telescopes through the NSF funded and NOAO managed Telescope System Instrumentation Program (TSIP). This program, accomplished with the enthusiastic support of the US non federal observatories, supplies the broad US community with some 70 nights of observing time per year.

This System goal was further reiterated by the NSF Senior Review in 2007 when it reviewed the full suite of NSF ground-based astronomy facilities. NOAO continued to work on behalf of the community to effectively shape the System and gain steady, state-of-the-art research capabilities of all apertures for open, merit based science.

A future major capability for the US system is an Extremely Large Telescope with diameter up to 30 meters. Two private consortia are currently working on such projects which may be operational before the end of the decade. These are the Thirty Meter Telescope and Giant Magellan Telescope. NOAO was working with both projects in planning for potential future involvement of the broad US community through operational support funding by the NSF.

==See also==
* Other Optical Observatories in Chile
** Europe&#x27;s Very Large Telescope &amp; La Silla Observatory
** Carnegie Institution of Washington&#x27;s Las Campanas Observatory
** The Magellan telescopes
* Other Optical Observatories in Arizona
** The Large Binocular Telescope
** The Lowell Observatory
** The MMT Observatory
** The Steward Observatory
* World Wide Observatories
** List of observatories

==References==
==External links==
* AURA
* https://www.nsf.gov/dir/index.jsp?org=MPS</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1315390" start="4" end="42" title="National Optical Astronomy Observatory" label="National Optical Astronomy Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315390" start="44" end="48" title="National Optical Astronomy Observatory" label="NOAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="58" end="71" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="120" end="131" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="132" end="139" title="Visible spectrum" label="optical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="140" end="148" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="157" end="166" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="172" end="199" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867944" start="476" end="529" title="Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy" label="Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="601" end="616" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707219" start="663" end="689" title="National Solar Observatory" label="National Solar Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q592248" start="819" end="849" title="Kitt Peak National Observatory" label="Kitt Peak National Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056113" start="880" end="919" title="Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory" label="Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q744667" start="986" end="1004" title="Gemini Observatory" label="Gemini Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q672021" start="1013" end="1038" title="Vera C. Rubin Observatory" label="Vera C. Rubin Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q99534494" start="1047" end="1054" title="NOIRLab" label="NOIRLab"/>
<link wikidata="Q99534494" start="1309" end="1316" title="NOIRLab" label="NOIRLab"/>
<link wikidata="Q188463" start="1491" end="1503" title="spectrometer" label="spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14467" start="1620" end="1636" title="La Serena, Chile" label="La Serena, Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="1720" end="1725" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010472" start="1785" end="1797" title="Elqui Valley (wine region)" label="Elqui Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944666" start="1831" end="1857" title="Victor M. Blanco Telescope" label="Victor M. Blanco Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944674" start="1882" end="1902" title="Victor Manuel Blanco" label="Victor Manuel Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="1952" end="1973" title="Charge-coupled device" label="Charge-coupled device"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343" start="2171" end="2182" title="dark energy" label="dark energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q337641" start="2454" end="2462" title="Fermi Lab" label="Fermilab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728930" start="2551" end="2569" title="Dark Energy Survey" label="Dark Energy Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="2659" end="2680" title="Large-scale structure of the universe" label="large scale structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q787525" start="2802" end="2843" title="Southern Astrophysical Research Telescope" label="Southern Astrophysical Research Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q506922" start="2934" end="2949" title="adaptive optics" label="adaptive optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="3058" end="3073" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937531" start="3166" end="3185" title="Tohono O&amp;#x27;odham" label="Tohono O&amp;#x27;odham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546489" start="3417" end="3445" title="Nicholas U. Mayall Telescope" label="Nicholas U. Mayall Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="3519" end="3530" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="3856" end="3865" title="physical cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q744667" start="4009" end="4027" title="Gemini Observatory" label="Gemini Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q901458" start="4787" end="4803" title="laser guide star" label="laser guide star"/>
<link wikidata="Q506922" start="4804" end="4819" title="adaptive optics" label="adaptive optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q210997" start="4943" end="4965" title="W. M. Keck Observatory" label="W. M. Keck Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q584300" start="5108" end="5115" title="HR 8799" label="HR 8799"/>
<link wikidata="Q99534494" start="6472" end="6479" title="NOIRLab" label="NOIRLab"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="6568" end="6596" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811679" start="6611" end="6617" title="Astronomy and Astrophysics Decadal Survey" label="report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067757" start="7767" end="7789" title="Thirty Meter Telescope" label="Thirty Meter Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q652252" start="7794" end="7818" title="Giant Magellan Telescope" label="Giant Magellan Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q265628" start="8045" end="8065" title="Very Large Telescope" label="Very Large Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q459352" start="8072" end="8092" title="La Silla Observatory" label="La Silla Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068067" start="8138" end="8162" title="Las Campanas Observatory" label="Las Campanas Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541020" start="8170" end="8189" title="Magellan telescopes" label="Magellan telescopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q845304" start="8238" end="8263" title="Large Binocular Telescope" label="Large Binocular Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q466895" start="8271" end="8289" title="Lowell Observatory" label="Lowell Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q779895" start="8297" end="8312" title="MMT Observatory" label="MMT Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120109" start="8320" end="8339" title="Steward Observatory" label="Steward Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344875" start="8370" end="8391" title="List of observatories" label="List of observatories"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534937" wikidata="Q232070" url="?curid=534937" title="Thurston County">
<text>Thurston County is the name of two counties in the United States:

* Thurston County, Nebraska
* Thurston County, Washington</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q502511" start="69" end="94" title="Thurston County, Nebraska" label="Thurston County, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q113773" start="97" end="124" title="Thurston County, Washington" label="Thurston County, Washington"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534943" wikidata="Q5407277" url="?curid=534943" title="Addu">
<text>Addu may refer to:
*Addu Atoll, a geographic atoll
*Addu City, an administrative city consisting of the inhabited islands of Addu Atoll</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q353375" start="20" end="30" title="Addu Atoll" label="Addu Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681407" start="52" end="61" title="Addu City" label="Addu City"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534946" wikidata="Q2869553" url="?curid=534946" title="Huvadhu Atoll">
<text>Huvadhu, Suvadive, Suvaidu or Suvadiva is the atoll with the most islands in the world. The atoll is located in the Indian Ocean. It is south of the Suvadiva Channel in the Republic of Maldives with a total area of 3,152 km2, of which 38.5 km2 is dry land. The atoll contains 255 islands.

It is the second largest atoll in the country, after Boduthiladhunmathi (consisting of Haa Alif, Haa Dhaalu, Shaviyani, and Noonu administrative divisions) which has smaller and fewer islands spread across a larger area.

Huvadu Atoll has been divided into two districts (administrative provinces) for administrative purposes since the 1970s. These divisions are Northern Huvadhu Atoll (Gaafu Alifu) in the north, and Southern Huvadhu Atoll (Gaafu Dhaalu).

During his journey to the Maldives, 14th century Muslim explorer Ibn Batuta stated in his journal that the Maldives was destitute of grain, except in the province of Souweid (Suvadiva or Huvadu) where they produced a cereal, a kind of Millet which was brought to Mahal.

The traditional seat of power in the Huvadhu was Thinadhoo until the division, after which Thinadhoo remained the Capital of South Huvadhu Atoll, and Villingili was instated as the capital of North Huvadhu Atoll.

The master carpenters of the iconic Male&#x27; Hukuru Miskiy were from Huvadu, Kondey island. They were Ali Maavadi Kaleyfaanu and Mahmud Maavadi Kaleyfaanu.

The best quality mats of the Maldives are woven in this atoll, in the island of Gaddū. The local grass &#x27;hau&#x27; is dyed in two colors, black and yellow.

== Guinness World Record ==
Huvadhu Atoll, located in the Maldives within the Indian Ocean, spans approximately 2,900 square kilometers (1,120 square miles) and encompasses around 255 islands within its confines. It holds the Guinness World Record for the atoll with the most number of islands in the World.

== History ==

The ancient Sanskritised name of this atoll was Suvadive. Its capital is Thinadhoo (Huvadhu Atoll)

Historically the Huvadu atoll chief based in Thinadhoo had a great measure of self-government. He even had the privilege, not granted to any other atoll chief of the Maldives, to fly his own flag in his vessels and at his residence. The flag of the Huvadu Atoll Chief was similar to the flag of Nepal in cut, with two central black triangles edged by red and white bands.

There are many Buddhist archaeological remains in Huvadū. Therefore, it is likely that this was an important atoll in Maldivian history.
None of these ancient remains have been properly investigated as yet.

Due to its strategic placement on the main sea route around southern India, Huvadhu and the other southern atolls have a long history of contact from mariners sailing the Indian Ocean through the centuries.

=== Descendants of the three dynasties: Devvadhoo, Diyamigili &amp; Isdhoo ===
Families of Devvadhoo, Dhiyamigili and Isdhoo Dynasty can be traced to Devvadu, Addu, Fuvahmulah and Tinadu. After the assassination of Muhammed Ghiya&#x27;as ud-din, Prince Abdulla son of Ghiyaasuddin was banished to Fuvahmulah. The South of Maldives was a safe haven for Abdulla being a descendant of Addu Bodu Fandiyaaru Thakurufaan.

=== Sultan Mohamed IV ( Devvadhoo Rasgefaanu ) ===
Dhevvadhoo island is located at the centre of the Huvadu atoll. Sultan Mohamed IV or Devvadhoo Rasgefaanu was the first Sultan of Devvadhoo Dynasty who was the son of Ali Mafahaiy Kilege of Devvadu and Kakuni Dio. Sultan Mohamed IV was married to Khadheeja Kan’ba, daughter of Ibrahim Shah Bandar also known as Isdhoo Bodu Velaanaa Thakurufaan. After his death the Isdhoo dynasty was proclaimed.

===Secession of the United Suvadive Republic===

In January 1959, the three southern atolls: Huvadhu, Fuvahmulah and Addu, were involved in setting up the breakaway United Suvadive Republic which survived until September 1963. The name of the secessionist state was taken from the ancient name of Huvadhoo atoll.

In some islands, like Gaddhoo, there was opposition to the secession, however through threats and coercion, the groups of people opposing the Suvadive state were forced to agree.

The republic collapsed when the island of Havaru Thinadhoo was depopulated, and all infrastructure burnt to the ground by the Maldivian military led by then Prime Minister Ibrahim Nasir in 1962, after which it was left uninhabited for four years. For the next 10 years, the seat of power was moved to Gaddhoo until Havaru Thinadhoo, since repopulated, was reinstated as the capital of Huvadhoo.

The main motivation for secession was stated to be disagreements with the centralized policies that were being enforced by Male&#x27; at the time.

== Huvadu Kandu ==

The name of the broad channel north of this atoll is locally known as Huvadu Kandu. It appeared on the old French maps as &quot;Courant de Souadou&quot;. Other names are &quot;Suvadiva Channel&quot; or &quot;One-a-half Degree Channel&quot;.

It is named after Huvadu Atoll and is the broadest channel between the atolls of Maldives.

== Language ==

The inhabitants of this large atoll speak their own distinct form of the Dhivehi language, known as Huvadu dialect (bahuruva).

Because of the isolation from the Northern Atolls, and the capital of Malé, the Huvadhu dialect is significantly different from the other variants of the Maldive language, making much use of the retroflex &#x27;Ţ&#x27; and allegedly retaining old forms of Dhivehi.

==See also==
*United Suvadive Republic
*List of sultans of the Maldives
*Isdhoo dynasty
*Dhiyamigili dynasty
*Atolls of the Maldives
*Saleem Ali

==References==
*&quot;Divehiraajjege Jōgrafīge Vanavaru&quot;. Muhammadu Ibrahim Lutfee. G.Sōsanī. Malé 1999. 
*&quot;The Islands of Maldives&quot;. Hasan A. Maniku. Novelty. Malé 1983. 
*H.C.P. Bell, &quot;The Maldive Islands, An account of the Physical Features, History, Inhabitants, Productions and Trade&quot;. Colombo 1883.
*H.C.P. Bell, &quot;The Maldive Islands; Monograph on the History, Archaeology and Epigraphy.&quot; Reprint Colombo 1940. Council for Linguistic and Historical Research. Male’ 1989 
* Xavier Romero-Frias, &quot;The Maldive Islanders, A Study of the Popular Culture of an Ancient Ocean Kingdom.&quot; 1999, 
*Skjølsvold, Arne. &quot;Archaeological Test-Excavations On The Maldive Islands.&quot; The Kon-Tiki Museum Occasional Papers, Vol. 2. Oslo 1991.
* 

== External links ==
* Map of Huvadhu</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2869553" start="0" end="7" title="Huvadhu Atoll" label="Huvadhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382090" start="149" end="165" title="Suvadiva Channel" label="Suvadiva Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="173" end="193" title="Republic of Maldives" label="Republic of Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="307" end="320" title="list of largest atolls" label="largest atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869555" start="343" end="361" title="Boduthiladhunmathi" label="Boduthiladhunmathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360912" start="377" end="385" title="Haa Alif Atoll" label="Haa Alif"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360368" start="387" end="397" title="Haa Dhaalu Atoll" label="Haa Dhaalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190334" start="399" end="408" title="Shaviyani Atoll" label="Shaviyani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406322" start="414" end="419" title="Noonu Atoll" label="Noonu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116203" start="653" end="675" title="Northern Huvadhu Atoll" label="Northern Huvadhu Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640183" start="708" end="730" title="Southern Huvadhu Atoll" label="Southern Huvadhu Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="813" end="823" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Batuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147686" start="1068" end="1077" title="Thinadhoo (Gaafu Dhaalu Atoll)" label="Thinadhoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045427" start="1169" end="1179" title="Villingili (Gaafu Alif Atoll)" label="Villingili"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385992" start="1269" end="1293" title="Malé Friday Mosque" label="Male&amp;#x27; Hukuru Miskiy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867228" start="1312" end="1318" title="Kondey" label="Kondey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="1889" end="1897" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147686" start="1950" end="1975" title="Thinadhoo (Huvadhu Atoll)" label="Thinadhoo (Huvadhu Atoll)"/>
<link wikidata="Q159741" start="2264" end="2277" title="flag of Nepal" label="flag of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="2365" end="2373" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074669" start="2468" end="2485" title="History of the Maldives" label="Maldivian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269635" start="2868" end="2879" title="Dhiyamigili dynasty" label="Dhiyamigili"/>
<link wikidata="Q6079490" start="2884" end="2898" title="Isdhoo Dynasty" label="Isdhoo Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008826" start="2916" end="2923" title="Dhevvadhoo (Gaafu Alif Atoll)" label="Devvadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681407" start="2925" end="2929" title="Addu City" label="Addu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060910" start="2931" end="2941" title="Fuvahmulah" label="Fuvahmulah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147686" start="2946" end="2952" title="Thinadhoo (Gaafu Dhaalu Atoll)" label="Tinadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932960" start="2981" end="3010" title="Muhammed Ghiya&amp;#x27;as ud-din" label="Muhammed Ghiya&amp;#x27;as ud-din"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243758" start="3012" end="3026" title="Prince Abdulla" label="Prince Abdulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060910" start="3063" end="3073" title="Fuvahmulah" label="Fuvahmulah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060910" start="3733" end="3743" title="Fuvahmulah" label="Fuvahmulah"/>
<link wikidata="Q353375" start="3748" end="3752" title="Addu Atoll" label="Addu"/>
<link wikidata="Q150069" start="3796" end="3820" title="United Suvadive Republic" label="United Suvadive Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743007" start="3967" end="3974" title="Gaddhoo" label="Gaddhoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147686" start="4167" end="4183" title="Thinadhoo (Gaafu Dhaalu Atoll)" label="Havaru Thinadhoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q32656" start="5112" end="5128" title="Dhivehi language" label="Dhivehi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q150069" start="5447" end="5471" title="United Suvadive Republic" label="United Suvadive Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567406" start="5473" end="5504" title="List of sultans of the Maldives" label="List of sultans of the Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6079490" start="5506" end="5520" title="Isdhoo dynasty" label="Isdhoo dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269635" start="5522" end="5541" title="Dhiyamigili dynasty" label="Dhiyamigili dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q757549" start="5543" end="5565" title="Atolls of the Maldives" label="Atolls of the Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403838" start="5567" end="5577" title="Saleem Ali (politician)" label="Saleem Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773704" start="6093" end="6112" title="Xavier Romero-Frias" label="Xavier Romero-Frias"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534948" wikidata="Q228248" url="?curid=534948" title="Gan">
<text>The word Gan or the initials GAN may refer to:
== Places ==
* Gan, a component of Hebrew placenames literally meaning &quot;garden&quot;

=== China ===
* Gan River (Jiangxi)
* Gan River (Inner Mongolia),
* Gan County, in Jiangxi province
* Gansu, abbreviated &quot;Gān&quot; (甘), province of China
* Jiangxi, abbreviated &quot;Gàn&quot; (赣), province of China

=== Maldives ===
* Gan (Addu Atoll)
* Gan (Gaafu Dhaalu Atoll)
* Gan (Huvadhu Atoll)
* Gan (Laamu Atoll)
* Gan International Airport

===Elsewhere===
* Gáň, a village and municipality in Galanta District, Trnava Region, south-west Slovakia
* Gan Island, an island in the Addu Atoll in the Indian Ocean that used to be an RAF airbase
* Gan, Norway, a village in Lillestrøm municipality, Norway
* Gan, Pyrénées-Atlantiques, a commune in the Pyrénées-Atlantiques département, France

== Science and technology ==
* GAN (gene)
* Gan (Martian crater)
* Gallium nitride, a popular III-V semiconductor, chemical formula GaN
* Generative adversarial network, a class of machine learning systems
* Generic Access Network, formerly known as Unlicensed Mobile Access (UMA)

== People ==
* Gan (surname), a surname in various cultures (including a list of people with the surname)
* Gamal Abdel Nasser (1918–1970), president of Egypt
* Gösta Adrian-Nilsson (1884–1965), Swedish painter, signature &quot;GAN&quot;
* Ga-Adangbe people

== Fictional characters ==
* Gan (Stephen King), in King&#x27;s Dark Tower novel series
* Gan Isurugi, in the &quot;Rival Schools&quot; video game series
* Olag Gan, in the Blake&#x27;s 7 television series and franchise

== Other ==
* GAN (cycling team), the former name of the Crédit Agricole cycling team
* Gan Chinese-speaking people
* Gan Chinese, a variety of spoken Chinese
* Gan International Airport, IATA code
* Global Apprenticeships Network, a not-for-profit association based in Geneva
* Global Arab Network, a London-based news service about the Arab world
* Grant Anticipation Note, a type of highway financing
* Great American Novel, commonly abbreviated as GAN

== See also ==
* 
* Bryan McGan (1848–1894), Australian cricketer
* Gahan
* Gahn
* Ghan (disambiguation)
* Gann (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q228248" start="9" end="12" title="Gan" label="Gan"/>
<link wikidata="Q228248" start="29" end="32" title="Gan" label="GAN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69" end="99" title="Glossary of Hebrew toponyms#Gan" label="component of Hebrew placenames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046685" start="154" end="173" title="Gan River (Jiangxi)" label="Gan River (Jiangxi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120863" start="176" end="202" title="Gan River (Inner Mongolia)" label="Gan River (Inner Mongolia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335554" start="206" end="216" title="Gan County" label="Gan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="240" end="245" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q57052" start="300" end="307" title="Jiangxi" label="Jiangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q465170" start="380" end="396" title="Gan (Addu Atoll)" label="Gan (Addu Atoll)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640183" start="399" end="423" title="Gan (Gaafu Dhaalu Atoll)" label="Gan (Gaafu Dhaalu Atoll)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911781" start="426" end="445" title="Gan (Huvadhu Atoll)" label="Gan (Huvadhu Atoll)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038674" start="448" end="465" title="Gan (Laamu Atoll)" label="Gan (Laamu Atoll)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431353" start="468" end="493" title="Gan International Airport" label="Gan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q945292" start="513" end="516" title="Gáň" label="Gáň"/>
<link wikidata="Q465170" start="603" end="613" title="Gan Island" label="Gan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520433" start="696" end="707" title="Gan, Norway" label="Gan, Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q859063" start="756" end="781" title="Gan, Pyrénées-Atlantiques" label="Gan, Pyrénées-Atlantiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032747" start="873" end="883" title="GAN (gene)" label="GAN (gene)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423517" start="886" end="906" title="Gan (Martian crater)" label="Gan (Martian crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q411713" start="909" end="924" title="Gallium nitride" label="Gallium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q25104379" start="980" end="1010" title="Generative adversarial network" label="Generative adversarial network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373822" start="1050" end="1072" title="Generic Access Network" label="Generic Access Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q109845535" start="1139" end="1152" title="Gan (surname)" label="Gan (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="1232" end="1250" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992315" start="1285" end="1305" title="Gösta Adrian-Nilsson" label="Gösta Adrian-Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q627897" start="1364" end="1381" title="Ga-Adangbe people" label="Ga-Adangbe people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435749" start="1412" end="1430" title="Gan (Stephen King)" label="Gan (Stephen King)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595691" start="1473" end="1484" title="Gan Isurugi" label="Gan Isurugi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1539" end="1547" title="Characters of Blake&amp;#x27;s 7#Olag Gan" label="Olag Gan"/>
<link wikidata="Q804314" start="1556" end="1570" title="Blake&amp;#x27;s 7" label="Blake&amp;#x27;s 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q221948" start="1618" end="1636" title="GAN (cycling team)" label="GAN (cycling team)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756345" start="1692" end="1719" title="Gan Chinese-speaking people" label="Gan Chinese-speaking people"/>
<link wikidata="Q33475" start="1722" end="1733" title="Gan Chinese" label="Gan Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431353" start="1765" end="1790" title="Gan International Airport" label="Gan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q24887783" start="1804" end="1834" title="Global Apprenticeships Network" label="Global Apprenticeships Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570124" start="1883" end="1902" title="Global Arab Network" label="Global Arab Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512876" start="1955" end="1978" title="Grant Anticipation Note" label="Grant Anticipation Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544219" start="2010" end="2030" title="Great American Novel" label="Great American Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875432" start="2081" end="2092" title="Bryan McGan" label="Bryan McGan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516902" start="2129" end="2134" title="Gahan" label="Gahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516932" start="2137" end="2141" title="Gahn" label="Gahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28336964" start="2144" end="2165" title="Ghan (disambiguation)" label="Ghan (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q348071" start="2168" end="2189" title="Gann (disambiguation)" label="Gann (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534954" wikidata="Q227282" url="?curid=534954" title="Thomas County">
<text>Thomas County is the name of several counties in the United States:

* Thomas County, Georgia
* Thomas County, Kansas
* Thomas County, Nebraska</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q498327" start="71" end="93" title="Thomas County, Georgia" label="Thomas County, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q374452" start="96" end="117" title="Thomas County, Kansas" label="Thomas County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q489711" start="120" end="143" title="Thomas County, Nebraska" label="Thomas County, Nebraska"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534957" wikidata="Q541599" url="?curid=534957" title="Dolores O'Riordan">
<text>Dolores Mary Eileen O&#x27;Riordan ( ; 6 September 1971 – 15 January 2018) was an Irish musician who achieved international fame as the lead vocalist of the rock band the Cranberries. O&#x27;Riordan was the principal songwriter of the band, and additionally performed acoustic and electric guitars. She became one of the most recognisable voices in alternative rock, and was known for her lilting mezzo-soprano voice, signature yodel, use of keening, and strong Limerick accent.

O&#x27;Riordan was born in County Limerick, Ireland, to a Catholic working-class family. She began to perform as a soloist in her church choir before leaving secondary school to join the Cranberries in 1990. The band released the number-one &quot;Everybody Else Is Doing It, So Why Can&#x27;t We?&quot; (1993), &quot;No Need to Argue&quot; (1994), &quot;To the Faithful Departed&quot; (1996), and &quot;Bury the Hatchet&quot; (1999). The Cranberries released their fifth album, &quot;Wake Up and Smell the Coffee&quot; (2001), before going on hiatus in 2003. During this time, she released two solo studio albums: &quot;Are You Listening?&quot; (2007) and &quot;No Baggage&quot; (2009). The Cranberries reunited in 2009, released &quot;Roses&quot; (2012), and went on a world tour. O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s other activities included appearing as a judge on RTÉ&#x27;s &quot;The Voice of Ireland&quot; (2013–2014) and recording material with the trio D.A.R.K. (2014). The Cranberries&#x27; seventh album, &quot;Something Else&quot; (2017), was the last to be released during her lifetime.

Throughout her life, O&#x27;Riordan suffered from depression and the pressure of her own success; she was diagnosed with bipolar disorder in 2015. She died from drowning due to alcohol intoxication in January 2018. After her death, the Cranberries released the Grammy-nominated album &quot;In the End&quot; (2019), featuring her final vocal recordings, and then disbanded. With the Cranberries, O&#x27;Riordan sold more than 40 million albums worldwide during her lifetime; that total increased to almost 50 million albums worldwide as of 2019, excluding her solo albums. She was honoured with the Ivor Novello International Achievement award, and in the months following her death, she was named &quot;The Top Female Artist of All Time&quot; on &quot;Billboard&quot;&#x27;s Alternative Songs chart.

==Early life and education==
Dolores Mary Eileen O&#x27;Riordan was born on 6 September 1971 in Ballybricken in County Limerick, Ireland, the youngest of nine children, two of whom died in infancy. Her father, Terence Patrick &quot;Terry&quot; O&#x27;Riordan (1937–2011), worked as a farm labourer until a motorbike accident in 1968 left him brain damaged. Her mother, Eileen ( Greensmith), was a school caterer. O&#x27;Riordan was raised in a devout Roman Catholic family, and was named by her mother in reference to the Lady of the Seven Dolours. 

O&#x27;Riordan was singing before she could talk. When she was five years of age, the principal of her school took her into the sixth class, sat her on the teacher&#x27;s desk, and told her to sing for the twelve-year-old students in the class. She started with traditional Irish music and playing the Irish tin whistle when she went to school. When she was seven years old, her sister accidentally burned the house down; the rural community was able to raise funds to purchase the family a new homestead. O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s formative experiences were as a liturgical soloist in the choir in a local church and as a singer at school. From the age of eight, she was sexually abused for four years by a person whom she trusted. At the age of ten, she would sing in local pubs where her uncles took her.

O&#x27;Riordan attended Laurel Hill Coláiste FCJ school in Limerick. School principal Aedín Ní Bhriain said in the &quot;Limerick Post&quot; about O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s first day at Laurel Hill Coláiste at the age of twelve that she stood up in front of classmates and announced: &quot;my name is Dolores O&#x27;Riordan and I&#x27;m going to be a rock star&quot;, then she stood on her chair and she sang &quot;Tra la la la la, Triangles&quot;. According to her school friend Catherina Egan, she was &quot;boisterous, wild, but lovely&quot;. She regularly played the spoons and the bodhrán. At the age of twelve, O&#x27;Riordan began piano lessons, and then later, achieved Grade 4 in Practical and Grade 8 in Theory. She sat every day at the piano in the main hall to play, then her classmates sat around her after having lunch to listen to her sing. At age 17, she learned to play the guitar and performed a solo gig in Laurel Hill Coláiste secondary school. That same year, she met her first boyfriend, Mike O&#x27;Mahoney.

She described having a strict daily routine through her teenage years that consisted of going to piano lessons, going to church and doing homework. O&#x27;Riordan later admitted that she had neglected her school lessons in favour of writing music and songs, although at school she became head girl. Former principal Anne Mordan said in &quot;Nova&quot; about O&#x27;Riordan that she was a &quot;delightful, unsophisticated, sensitive student, who enjoyed her time with us&quot;; she described her as &quot;a bright, kind, good-humoured girl, who loved her family, her friends, and had an easy relationship with all her teachers, both lay and FCJ sisters.&quot; During her six years at Laurel Hill Coláiste, O&#x27;Riordan won the Slógadh song contest almost every year, at several local events, and culminating in national singing competitions. In total she won 20 Slógadh medals.

Around this time, O&#x27;Riordan divided the rest of her schedule among assisting her mother, learning the accordion from her dad, and having part-time employment at clothing shops. Her mother, whom she &quot;adored&quot;, encouraged her to consider becoming a nun or get a college degree and become a music teacher; instead, she ran away from home at 18 and lived a couple of years with her boyfriend. In an interview with &quot;Vox&quot; magazine, O&#x27;Riordan clarified her reasons for leaving home: &quot;At 18 I left home because I wanted to sing. My parents wanted me to go to college and things like that. I was really poor for a year-and-a-half; I remember actually being hungry, like I&#x27;d die for a bag of chips. That&#x27;s when I joined the Cranberries&quot;.

== Career ==
=== 1989–2003: Formation of the Cranberries, early success and stardom ===

In 1989, brothers Mike (bass) and Noel (guitar) Hogan formed the Cranberries with drummer Fergal Lawler and singer Niall Quinn, in Limerick, Ireland. Less than a year later, Quinn left the band. He then told the remaining members that his girlfriend knew a girl who was looking for a band playing original material.

In mid-1990, on a Sunday afternoon, O&#x27;Riordan and Quinn came to the band&#x27;s rehearsal room, Noel Hogan later recalled that &quot;Niall came up with Dolores on that Sunday and I remember she was shy, very soft-spoken. Not the Dolores that everyone grew to know. And she comes in and we&#x27;re just kind of a gang of young guys sitting around the place. It must have been very, very intimidating for her&quot;. O&#x27;Riordan sang a couple of songs that she had written and she also did a Sinéad O&#x27;Connor song, &quot;Troy&quot;. The band was impressed and gave her a cassette with instrumentals, asking her if she could work on it. When she returned with a rough version of &quot;Linger&quot;, she was hired. Hogan told &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; that &quot;the minute she sang, you know, it was like your jaw drops at her voice. Dolores was musically far superior to me, because she had been doing it all her life&quot;.

O&#x27;Riordan was still a student at Laurel Hill Coláiste FCJ secondary school when she first joined the band. She had set her sights on the musical life and her desire to be in &quot;a band with no barriers, where I could write my own songs&quot;, she told &quot;The Guardian&quot; in 1995. At the time, she was doing her Leaving Certificate. The academic study did not hold much interest for her—although her marks in school were good. As a result, O&#x27;Riordan left school without any qualifications.

The Cranberries recorded demo tapes, including &quot;Nothing Left at All&quot;, a three-track EP released on tape by local record label Xeric Records, which sold 300 copies. The owner of Xeric Studios, Pearse Gilmore, became their manager and provided the group with studio time to complete another demo tape, which he produced. It featured early versions of &quot;Linger&quot; and &quot;Dreams&quot;, which were sent to record companies in the UK. This demo gained attention from both the UK press and record industry, and sparked a bidding war among record labels. Eventually, the group signed with Island Records. The group changed their name to &quot;the Cranberries&quot; and released a four-track EP, &quot;Uncertain&quot;.

By then, O&#x27;Riordan experienced difficult touring conditions with low income, sleeping on people&#x27;s floors and in cramped vans across Ireland and UK. Furthermore, she had to overcome her shyness at the time during the early live performances with the Cranberries, singing &quot;with her back to the audience&quot;. Lawler recalled, &quot;we just went up, and we had six songs. Dolores was turned to the side; Noel, Mike and I had our heads down&quot;. At this stage, she had spent eight years with classical piano, and had played the harmonium in her church for ten years. O&#x27;Riordan had been rapidly gaining international attention after the release of the Cranberries&#x27; first album, &quot;Everybody Else Is Doing It, So Why Can&#x27;t We?&quot;. It contained the group&#x27;s most successful singles, &quot;Dreams&quot; and &quot;Linger&quot;, which charted at No. 8 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 when she was only 22.
Early in 1994, O&#x27;Riordan injured her cruciate ligament in a ski accident in the Alps&#x27; Val-d&#x27;Isère and underwent major surgery. In September 1994, the Cranberries released &quot;Zombie&quot;, the lead single of the follow-up album, &quot;No Need To Argue&quot;. The song reached No. 1 of Triple J&#x27;s Hottest 100, which was the first time ever that a female-led band had topped Australia&#x27;s biggest song poll. She stood alone in the countdown&#x27;s history for 16 years. In terms of female-fronted acts, O&#x27;Riordan still remains one of only four women to sing on a No. 1 song on the Hottest 100 ranking [as of 2024]. She reached her commercial peak with &quot;No Need to Argue&quot;, the top-selling album worldwide in the first semester of 1995, and the world&#x27;s best selling album of the year by a European artist. The album produced the songs &quot;Ode to My Family&quot;, &quot;I Can&#x27;t Be with You&quot;, &quot;Ridiculous Thoughts&quot; and the group&#x27;s biggest international hit, &quot;Zombie&quot;, which topped singles charts in several countries. Dan Weiss of &quot;Billboard&quot; stated that the song &quot;Zombie&quot;, &quot;could crush an entire room with the combined largesse of O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s ocean-swallowing voice&quot;. By this time, within the release of the first two albums of the Cranberries with accompanying tours, O&#x27;Riordan had achieved both success and celebrity status.

Eventually, O&#x27;Riordan had disengaged from Sinéad O&#x27;Connor due to the analogy made between them in the press. O&#x27;Riordan rejected and &quot;loathed&quot; the comparison, saying &quot;[w]hat I do is so different. ... I might have been singing before she ever sang—who knows? It&#x27;s not like I&#x27;m not going to sing because somebody from up the road got there first because she was a few years older than me.&quot; Her leg injury recurred unexpectedly and led to cancellation of the three concerts scheduled in Ireland for December 1994. This resulted in a press backlash, while the audience was more understanding, as O&#x27;Riordan had mentioned that the concerts were not cancelled but postponed until June 1995.

She has been recognised as a style icon, sporting a pixie cut or buzzed hair in the 1990s, and performing barefoot, saying &quot;it just feels comfortable and honest to pull your toes along the ground&quot;. &quot;Billboard&quot;&#x27;s William Goodman described O&#x27;Riordan performing &quot;Barefoot and strutting onstage, an Irish warrior poet with a bleached blonde pixie cut, gold chain necklace, singing without a flinch, as if it were ordained&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot; mentioned that O&#x27;Riordan was responsible for a large portion of Dr. Martens boots sales in the 1990s.

After attending a concert of the Cranberries at London&#x27;s Royal Albert Hall in January 1995, author Alec Foege described O&#x27;Riordan as &quot;part Audrey Hepburn, part David Bowie&quot;. On 23 March 1995, O&#x27;Riordan appeared on the cover of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine. On 12 September 1995, O&#x27;Riordan performed &quot;Ave Maria&quot; along with Luciano Pavarotti in his Pavarotti &amp; Friends series of benefit concerts, entitled Together for the Children of Bosnia, which raised funds for War Child and the children of Bosnia, held in Modena, Italy. Princess Diana, who attended the live performance, told O&#x27;Riordan that the song brought her to tears. During the show, O&#x27;Riordan performed &quot;Linger&quot; as a duet with Simon Le Bon of Duran Duran.

The Cranberries&#x27; third album, &quot;To the Faithful Departed&quot; debuted at number two in the UK, and number four in the US, with the singles &quot;Free to Decide&quot;, &quot;When You&#x27;re Gone&quot; and &quot;Hollywood&quot;. It also featured the &quot;Billboard&quot; Modern Rock Tracks number-one single &quot;Salvation&quot;. Halfway through the Free To Decide World Tour 1996–97 promoting &quot;To the Faithful Departed&quot;, O&#x27;Riordan and the Cranberries canceled the remaining dates announcing that they would take time off in 1997. While the group claimed that &quot;exhaustion&quot; was the result of an extensive touring schedule, pressure from managers—and press intrusion, suspicions and rumours from the press indicated &quot;O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s health has deteriorated&quot;. O&#x27;Riordan publicly told &quot;Irish Examiner&quot;, &quot;I was very depressed and I was extremely anorexic on that record, and as it came out I got progressively worse&quot;. O&#x27;Riordan was the one who made the decision to take a break, although their management and record company &quot;went mental&quot;, the rest of the group supported her. Stephen Street later said that &quot;perhaps she could have tempered her behavior and been more measured, but that wasn&#x27;t her way.&quot;

On 12 November 1998, Dolores O&#x27;Riordan and Fergal Lawler presented the award for Best Song at the MTV Europe Music Awards, in Milan, Italy. On 11 December 1998, she performed live with the Cranberries at the Nobel Peace Prize Concert at Oslo Spektrum, Oslo, Norway.

With the Cranberries she released &quot;Bury the Hatchet&quot;, which showcased a maturity of the group&#x27;s sound. The album peaked at number one on both the Canadian Albums Chart, and on the European Top 100 Albums, but did not match the commercial success of the group&#x27;s first two albums. The world tour has been her biggest ever, which started in April 1999 and lasted until July 2000.
&quot;Bury the Hatchet&quot; was quickly followed by her fifth effort with the group, &quot;Wake Up and Smell the Coffee&quot;, released on 22 October 2001. On 15 December 2001, O&#x27;Riordan performed solo in the Vatican as part of the annual Vatican Christmas concert (Concerto di Natale) for Pope John Paul II. She sang &quot;Analyse&quot;, &quot;Panis angelicus&quot;, &quot;Little Drummer Boy&quot; and &quot;Silent Night&quot; with a 67-piece orchestra accompanying all artists. The show was broadcast to well over 200 million people around the world.

On 7 February 2002, O&#x27;Riordan and the Cranberries announced in Dublin that they donated all the proceeds from their single &quot;Time Is Ticking Out&quot; to the Chernobyl Children&#x27;s Project. She was accompanied at the Clarence Hotel by Ali Hewson, and its founder and executive director, Adi Roche. O&#x27;Riordan wrote and recorded the song in spring 2001 after seeing images shared with her by Hewson and Roche of children born with congenital anomalies and illnesses caused by the Chernobyl nuclear disaster of 26 April 1986. O&#x27;Riordan explained, &quot;I had just given birth to my second child, a beautiful healthy little girl. [ ... ] I had spoken with Ali on the subject before this, but I was so moved, almost to tears, that I wrote Time Is Ticking Out&quot;. On 14 December 2002 she received a second invitation to perform at the Vatican Christmas concert. O&#x27;Riordan sang &quot;Linger&quot;, &quot;Happy Xmas (War Is Over)&quot; and &quot;Adeste Fideles&quot;. Dolores was supported by the Millennium Symphony Orchestra on the three songs, directed by Renato Serio, and also by the Summertime Gospel Choir on &quot;Adeste Fideles&quot;.

In June 2003, O&#x27;Riordan met AC/DC singer Brian Johnson when the Cranberries were playing concerts with AC/DC and the Rolling Stones on the latest leg of their Licks World Tour, and they considered the idea of working together. In mid-July 2003, the two friends started collaborating on material for a project that should have been the rock opera version of Helen Of Troy, based on the Greek mythology—with &quot;rousing anthems, tender ballads and minimal dialogue&quot;. Johnson said he&#x27;s been working on it for about seven years and that the musical to which O&#x27;Riordan would lend her voice was expected to feature many artists. The $1.2 million production was initially to debut in March 2003 at the Van Wezel Performing Arts Hall in Florida. However, despite the pronouncement, the project was adjourned and Johnson expected it to be completed in late 2003 so that it could be played in London.

In 2003, the band decided to take a temporary time-out to experiment with solo projects.

=== 2003–2009: Solo career and other projects ===

O&#x27;Riordan stated she had become a prisoner of her own celebrity and did not find a balance in her life. In &quot;The Independent&quot;, O&#x27;Riordan said she needed time not only to focus on her family and health but also on her solo career. She enjoyed being treated &quot;like any ordinary person&quot; living in Canada, and then became a volunteer at her children&#x27;s school.

In 2003, O&#x27;Riordan recruited Canadian music producer Dan Brodbeck and musicians to develop new compositions for her solo project. Among them was drummer Graham Hopkins, whom O&#x27;Riordan said she &quot;loved for his energy&quot;. Also included bassist Marco Mendoza, who had been a long time friend with O&#x27;Riordan and her husband; while Mendoza&#x27;s father was a good friend of O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s father-in-law. As well as Steve DeMarchi as the main guitarist, who used to do live sessions with the Cranberries, along with his brother Denny DeMarchi who played keyboards and guitars for the band in the early 2000s. Brodbeck stated that their hiring was &quot;100 per cent based on personalities clicking and musical tastes&quot;. DeMarchi brothers&#x27; family had long been friends with Dolores O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s husband and their three children. In a Canadian newspaper, Denny DeMarchi described that she was &quot;a perfectionist on tour&quot;; occasionally during the show, she would turn to her musicians and canceled a particular song &quot;in the moment&quot;. Although the technical crew was frustrated because they had to make various changes, understanding prevailed, saying that &quot;she was emotionally not able to go there&quot;. As described by DeMarchi, &quot;[f]or her, singing wasn&#x27;t just something to deliver... it was a real experience.&quot;

On 6 March 2004, O&#x27;Riordan performed &quot;Ave Maria&quot; during the 54th International Song Festival at the Ariston Theater, Sanremo, in northern Italy. On 29 May 2004, O&#x27;Riordan performed during the first concert of the Festivalbar, in Milan, Italy. In 2004, she appeared with the Italian artist Zucchero on the album &quot;Zu &amp; Co.&quot;, with the song &quot;Pure Love&quot;. The album also featured other artists such as Sting, Sheryl Crow, Luciano Pavarotti, Miles Davis, John Lee Hooker, Macy Gray and Eric Clapton. In 2004, O&#x27;Riordan worked with composer Angelo Badalamenti of &quot;Twin Peaks&quot; fame on the &quot;Evilenko&quot; soundtrack, providing vocals on several tracks, including &quot;Angels Go to Heaven&quot;, the film&#x27;s theme song. Badalamenti later said that &quot;she&#x27;s a wonderful lyricist with an edge to her voice&quot;.

In 2005, she appeared on the Jam &amp; Spoon&#x27;s album &quot;Tripomatic Fairytales 3003&quot; as a guest vocalist on the track &quot;Mirror Lover&quot;. On 3 December 2005, O&#x27;Riordan made her third appearance at the Vatican&#x27;s annual Christmas concert, where she performed &quot;War Is Over&quot;, &quot;Linger&quot; and &quot;Adeste Fideles&quot; in duet with Italian tenor Gian Luca Terranova.

In April 2006, O&#x27;Riordan signed a contract with Ciulla Management, based in Sherman Oaks, California. Prematurely before the release of her first solo album, the former Trent Reznor and Marilyn Manson mentor Tony Ciulla became her manager. She made a cameo appearance in the Adam Sandler comedy &quot;Click&quot;, released on 23 June 2006, as a wedding singer performing an alternate version of the Cranberries&#x27; &quot;Linger&quot;, set to strings. On 9 December 2006 she would be invited at the Vatican Christmas concert which took place in Monte Carlo, as the concert which was to be held at the Vatican was canceled by the Pope Benedict XVI. She sang &quot;Angel Fire&quot; from her forthcoming solo album with an orchestra and Steve DeMarchi, also &quot;Away in a Manger&quot; and &quot;Happy Xmas (War Is Over)&quot;. Since she had no label at the time, her husband Don Burton stated that they decided to go with an indie, and therefore, not continue with UMG during her hiatus. In December 2006, Sanctuary Records signed O&#x27;Riordan for a solo record deal; of their recently signed artist, Julian Wall of Sanctuary Records noted that &quot;Dolores comes to us with an immense international CV&quot;.

The music video for &quot;Ordinary Day&quot;, directed by Caswell Coggins, was filmed in Prague, in February 2007. &quot;Are You Listening?&quot; was released in May 2007. The album entered and peaked at number 23 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Top Rock Albums ranking, and number 77 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. &quot;Ordinary Day&quot; was its first single, released in late April, and was produced by BRIT Awards winner, Martin &quot;Youth&quot; Glover, whose previous credits included the Verve, Embrace, Primal Scream, U2 and Paul McCartney. In August &quot;When We Were Young&quot; was released as the second single from the album. Colm O&#x27;Hare of &quot;Hot Press&quot; averred that O&#x27;Riordan could have chosen to exploit the underlying sonorities of the Cranberries on &quot;Are you Listening?&quot; to keep her devotees waiting until the reunion, but instead, &quot;she&#x27;s done something far more ambitious by releasing this multi-layered collection of songs that traverses styles and genres&quot;. At that time, the couple split their time between Dublin and her husband&#x27;s native Canada &quot;surrounded by bears, wolves and all that great outdoor stuff&quot;, said O&#x27;Riordan.

O&#x27;Riordan performed on many televised live performances in 2007 in support of that record, and travelled to over 22 countries in Europe, North America and South America on the 2007 O&#x27;Riordan world tour. On 21 March 2007, she performed on TV show &quot;Taratata&quot; in Paris, France. On 20 April 2007, O&#x27;Riordan made an appearance live on &quot;The Late Late Show&quot; on RTÉ in Dublin. On 16 May 2007, she appeared on Carson Daly&#x27;s late-night show, &quot;Last Call with Carson Daly&quot;, in Burbank, California, in an episode that aired on 18 May 2007. She also appeared on 17 May 2007, on NBC&#x27;s &quot;The Tonight Show with Jay Leno&quot; in Burbank, California, in an episode that aired on 19 May 2007. On 25 May 2007, O&#x27;Riordan performed during a live broadcast of Channel 7&#x27;s &quot;Sunrise&quot; in Sydney, Australia. In May 2007 she played six songs acoustically at &quot;True Music&quot; with Katie Daryl on Hdnet in Los Angeles, California, in an episode that aired on 2 September 2007. The same month she performed on the &quot;Heaven and Earth Show&quot; aired on BBC One. On 29 June 2007, O&#x27;Riordan took to the stage of Festivalbar in Catania, Italy. On 2 August 2007, Sanctuary Records UK division ceased their activity and was acquired by UMG at about $88 million. O&#x27;Riordan commented, &quot;they started off as a management company for Iron Maiden, maybe 25 years ago. But they&#x27;ve been around forever and now they&#x27;ve become a record company, and I thought, that looks grand and solid—they&#x27;re indie and they&#x27;ll be good. Jesus, six months into &quot;Are you Listening?&quot; they got bought out by Universal in the States...&quot;. On 19 November 2007, she cancelled the remainder of her European Tour (Lille, Paris, Luxembourg, Warsaw and Prague) due to illness. In December 2007, she performed in a few small American clubs, including Des Moines, Nashville, and Charlottesville, Virginia.

In 2008, O&#x27;Riordan won an EBBA Award. Every year the European Border Breakers Awards recognize the success of ten emerging artists or groups who reached audiences outside their own countries with their first internationally released album in the past year.

In January 2009, the University Philosophical Society (Trinity College, Dublin) invited the Cranberries to reunite for a concert celebrating O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s appointment as an honorary member of the Society, which led the band members to consider reuniting for a tour and a recording session. Of the event, embracing her performance with the Cranberries, O&#x27;Riordan stated that &quot;the minute we started playing it felt like we&#x27;d never stopped&quot;, pointing out that &quot;it&#x27;s a chemistry. It just fits&quot;. O&#x27;Riordan released her second album &quot;No Baggage&quot;, featuring 11 tracks, in August 2009. The first single &quot;The Journey&quot; was released on 13 July 2009, followed by a second single, &quot;Switch Off the Moment&quot;. The music video for &quot;The Journey&quot; was directed by Robin Schmidt and filmed in 16 mm on 8 May 2009, at Howth Beach Pier and at Howth Summit, Dublin, Ireland. The music video aired on 29 July 2009. O&#x27;Riordan said of &quot;No Baggage&quot; &quot;I probably haven&#x27;t worn my heart on my sleeve like this since the second album &quot;No Need to Argue&quot;&quot;. Nevertheless, &quot;No Baggage&quot; was poorly received by music critics compared to &quot;Are you Listening?&quot;, and neither album replicated the success of the Cranberries.

=== 2009–2012: Comeback and &quot;Roses&quot; ===
On 25 August 2009, while promoting her solo album &quot;No Baggage&quot; in New York City on 101.9 RXP radio, O&#x27;Riordan announced the Cranberries Reunion World Tour of 107 concerts. Following the statement, O&#x27;Riordan reported that she thought about how much she missed the band before making the decision to tour again, saying of Lawler and the two Hogan brothers that &quot;they&#x27;re a big part of my heart and soul&quot;. In October 2009, O&#x27;Riordan attended, along with actresses Tessa Thompson and Emma Bates, an event at The Westwood Theatre in Ontario, after a screening of &quot;South Dakota: A Woman&#x27;s Right to Choose&quot;, a film about teenage pregnancy and abortion. O&#x27;Riordan moderated a discussion with high school pupils; she remained neutral and allowed the girls to formulate their own opinions. O&#x27;Riordan and the Cranberries allowed their songs &quot;Dreams&quot;, &quot;Empty&quot; along with &quot;Apple Of My Eye&quot; and &quot;Stupid&quot;, to feature in the film released in the US in October 2013.

The Cranberries reformed and the tour began in North America in mid-November, followed by South America in mid-January 2010 and Europe in March 2010. The band played songs from O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s solo albums, many of The Cranberries&#x27; classics, as well as new songs. In 2010, O&#x27;Riordan told &quot;Billboard&quot; magazine that playing with Fergal Lawler, Noel, and Mike Hogan worked better dynamically with her voice. By 2010, O&#x27;Riordan suffered from vocal cord nodules which caused her doctor to prescribe six weeks of inability to perform. Consequently, concert dates were cancelled and postponed, but the recurring problem persisted until 2012.

On 1 July 2011, a concert entitled &quot;TU Warszawa&quot;—&quot;Here, Warsaw&quot; was the main event of the inauguration of Poland&#x27;s presidency of the EU council. O&#x27;Riordan performed &quot;Zombie&quot; and &quot;I Lied&quot; (English version of the Polish song &quot;Skłamałam&quot;) with the Sinfonia Varsovia Orchestra, in Warsaw, Poland. At this point in her career, to keep up with her bookings, negotiations and finances, O&#x27;Riordan began to be managed by Danny Goldberg, former Kurt Cobain and Nirvana manager. Goldberg has also managed Sonic Youth and Courtney Love&#x27;s band Hole. O&#x27;Riordan celebrated the reunion by touring with the Cranberries across Asia in July 2011, where the crowd was &quot;impressed with her wide vocal range and strong vocal control&quot;. During the six years of their hiatus, O&#x27;Riordan and Noel Hogan occasionally shared ideas. In 2011, they recorded their sixth album, &quot;Roses&quot; with longtime producer Stephen Street, released in February 2012.
On 22 March 2012, the Cranberries cancelled nine minutes before the show at the Enmore Theatre in Sydney, O&#x27;Riordan suffered from food poisoning and was unable to perform. When she recovered, the &quot;Roses Tour&quot; resumed two days later and the cancelled show was rescheduled for 26 March. In May 2012, the final two concerts of the North American tour of the Cranberries had to be postponed for a then undisclosed reason, which was later said to involve from O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s &quot;hectic touring schedule&quot;; this caused some uncertainty about the upcoming European leg of the tour. For the second leg of the Roses World Tour, O&#x27;Riordan hired a touring backing vocalist, Johanna Cranitch. During anterior tours, backup vocals were performed by the band&#x27;s backup guitarist, Steve DeMarchi. In November 2012, the extent to which her father&#x27;s 2011 death was affecting O&#x27;Riordan was made public when she admitted in &quot;Le Télégramme&quot; that she was unable to perform &quot;Ode to My Family&quot; throughout the 32 shows of the second leg of the European tour; O&#x27;Riordan said &quot;I hope to be able to sing it back one day, but for now, it&#x27;s too soon&quot;.

=== 2013–2018: The Voice of Ireland and &quot;Something Else&quot; ===

O&#x27;Riordan replaced Sharon Corr as one of the mentors on RTÉ&#x27;s &quot;The Voice of Ireland&quot; during the 2013–14 season. O&#x27;Riordan reached the final of the competition with her act Kellie Lewis, who finished in second place. In October 2013, O&#x27;Riordan and Marco Mendoza reconvened their partnership and were working on the songs for her announced third solo album scheduled for 2014, and presumably some film possibilities. Her final performance at the Vatican Christmas concert occurred in December 2013, where she performed &quot;Letting Go&quot; from &quot;Are You Listening?&quot;, &quot;Silent Night&quot; in duet with Elisa Toffoli, &quot;Away in a Manger&quot; and &quot;Happy Xmas (War Is Over)&quot;. In the autumn of 2013, as her hometown of Limerick was preparing to start its tenure as &quot;Irish City of Culture&quot; in 2014, O&#x27;Riordan was approached by the city to play a special gig. During a New Year&#x27;s Eve party under the Spire of St Mary&#x27;s Cathedral, she performed with a quartet from the Irish Chamber Orchestra, playing &quot;Linger&quot;, &quot;Zombie&quot; and one solo, &quot;The Journey&quot;.

In mid-January 2014, between shoots for &quot;The Voice&quot;, O&#x27;Riordan stated that she had written 15 songs for a solo album and she planned to go to Los Angeles to elaborate the start of the album. In April 2014, disillusioned by her experiences in the music industry, O&#x27;Riordan told Barry Egan that the record business made her &quot;extraordinarily wealthy, but sucked the blood out of her, like a particularly ferocious vampire&quot;. In mid-July 2014, O&#x27;Riordan had announced that she would not return to &quot;The Voice of Ireland&quot; for a second season due to her health condition affected by flights from Dublin to Canada during seven weeks of filming.

In April 2014, O&#x27;Riordan began recording new material with Jetlag, a collaboration with Andy Rourke of the Smiths and Olé Koretsky, a DJ and producer based in New York. They then formed a trio under the name D.A.R.K. Their first album, &quot;Science Agrees&quot;, was released in September 2016.

In late April 2017, celebrating the 25th anniversary of the band, the Cranberries released a new studio album &quot;Something Else&quot;, featuring acoustic versions of their greatest hits, and backed by the Irish Chamber Orchestra. Three new songs appear on this album: &quot;Rupture,&quot; &quot;Why&quot; and &quot;The Glory&quot; the last song written by O&#x27;Riordan and Noel Hogan, in their song-writing partnership. The album was well received by critics; reviewers have praised &quot;the return of one of Ireland&#x27;s finest songsmiths&quot;, and reacted favourably to the orchestral and acoustic reimagining. Music critic Karen Gwee has described O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s voice &quot;more measured, more labile and rich with maturity&quot;, whilst &quot;the thinness of her voice dilutes the anxious energy of &quot;Animal Instinct&quot;, one of the album&#x27;s tracks&quot;.

In May 2017, the band started the world tour as acoustic concerts, with a string quartet. Most of the time, O&#x27;Riordan sang seated on a stool. After eleven shows, O&#x27;Riordan was said to be in &quot;excruciating pain&quot;. The Cranberries published on social media the cancellation of the sold-out tour in Europe and North America, stating that O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s back problem was in the mid- to upper area of her spine and diaphragmatic movements associated with breathing and singing exacerbated the pain. During her rest, O&#x27;Riordan had been planning a new album of the Cranberries, and had written and recorded demo versions in her final years.

O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s last public performance was on 14 December 2017 in New York City, where she sang three Cranberries songs at &quot;Billboard&quot;&#x27;s Christmas party. On 15 December 2017, Eminem released his album &quot;Revival&quot; which included a large sample from the song &quot;Zombie&quot; as the hook for his rap song &quot;In Your Head&quot;.

== Artistry ==
=== Influences ===
O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s deeply religious mother had a strong influence on her musical development, introducing her to Elvis Presley at an early age. O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s Catholic education and experience playing the church organ also introduced her to classical church music genres such as Gregorian chant, which she described as having &quot;great melodies.&quot; Months before she died, O&#x27;Riordan tested the resonance and the acoustics of the Glenstal Abbey church in Ireland to sing there. O&#x27;Riordan stated that this apprenticeship by this detachment of the world in a raw and devoted setting influenced a lot of her development as an artist and as a musician.

She referred to Presley and John Lennon as particularly large influences during her early years. Other early influences include Frank Sinatra, Jim Reeves and Bing Crosby. In her teenage years, O&#x27;Riordan spent much of her time with her brothers who listened to heavy metal music, while being equally passionate about rock and Gaelic folk music.

When she had reached the age of 16, O&#x27;Riordan had started listening to the Smiths, the Cure, R.E.M., Depeche Mode, which constituted her primary musical influences. She had also been influenced by the Kinks, Magazine, Siouxsie and the Banshees, and New Order.

She credited Johnny McEvoy&#x27;s song &quot;The Old Bog Road&quot; as one of the most beautiful old Irish songs and praised the Pogues&#x27; songs. She made a reference to Ireland&#x27;s most famous poet, William Butler Yeats. O&#x27;Riordan stated of the grunge decade; &quot;creatively it was a really great time&quot;, mentioning Pearl Jam, Blind Melon and Nirvana. She wrote the song &quot;I&#x27;m Still Remembering&quot; six months after the death of Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain. In 2009, talking about her three favourite albums, O&#x27;Riordan mentioned the Smiths&#x27; album &quot;The Smiths&quot;, Depeche Mode&#x27;s album &quot;Violator&quot;, and the original soundtrack of the film &quot;The Mission&quot;. Her other musical influences include Morrissey, Led Zeppelin, also Metallica, and James Hetfield whom she met in 1995. She drew her influences from everyday life, events that occurred in the world, or her friendly and romantic relationships.

=== Songwriting and musicianship ===
O&#x27;Riordan penned her first song, called &quot;Calling&quot;, at the age of 12. She was the lead lyricist and co-composer of the band&#x27;s songs with guitarist Noel Hogan, although she wrote a lot of the song structures. In the early days of the Cranberries, Hogan gave her a sequence of chords he had composed; a week later she came back with lyrics finished of &quot;Linger&quot; and wrote &quot;Sunday&quot; shortly after. O&#x27;Riordan described in 1993 that she chose to be a singer and songwriter for the creative aspect, &quot;something new&quot;, saying that she would not have been happy singing traditional Irish music for a living. O&#x27;Riordan had a preference for solitude as an approach to writing songs. According to Hogan, the Cranberries never changed their writing process after their first encounter. Throughout their partnership, O&#x27;Riordan and Hogan never sat in a room together and wrote at the same time.
O&#x27;Riordan tended to write her ideas continuously through the day, although most of the melodies came in the night since she struggled with insomnia; and so, she had a history of sleeping pills dependence in the course of her career. She experienced writer&#x27;s block for months during one period of her life.

O&#x27;Riordan noted in &quot;Ultimate Guitar&quot; on her writing process, &quot;lyrics are very important for me to make sure that I&#x27;m portraying whatever it is I need to portray. So I sit there but the funny thing is they&#x27;ve come to me anywhere&quot;. [ ... ] &#x27;Oh, I have to go get a pen quick&#x27;. In the middle of the night when you&#x27;re trying to go to sleep and they&#x27;re going around in your head, your words, and you just get up and go out and write them down&quot;. O&#x27;Riordan was easily bored and could not rest for a week, Hogan described O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s routine working on her songs late at night or overnight: &quot;her emails were like text messages. Fifteen of them, but they&#x27;re all, like, two lines, at two o&#x27;clock in the morning.&quot; O&#x27;Riordan wrote songs about themes that have evolved over the course of her career, her experience taught her to never feel inhibited and always make an effort to try other things artistically. O&#x27;Riordan stated in &quot;The Independent&quot; that she wrote about what is getting to her at the time, she said that writing lyrics was, &quot;about the things you need to talk about, I write to get my emotions out. It&#x27;s self-therapeutic&quot;.

In the &quot;National Post&quot;, music producer Dan Brodbeck commented that on the first day at the studio after being hired, she played him a few chords and a piano medley, then left him alone with little guidance. O&#x27;Riordan came back a few hours later and accredited his work, then she took a microphone and started singing lyrics off the top of her head; Brodbeck stated: &quot;it was always spur-of-the-moment, gut reaction stuff&quot;. Gil Moore, owner of Metalworks Studios, referred to O&#x27;Riordan as &quot;a God-given talent&quot;. Moore later stated, &quot;she was the quintessential signature style artist, a very free spirit. She was the antithesis of a formula writer. She just went her own way&quot;.

=== Voice ===
O&#x27;Riordan was a mezzo-soprano, with a vocal range from B 2 to C 6. She did not sing much in the 5th octave but rather in a range of vocal comfort. She was familiar with the vocal belting of &#x27;90s alternative rock and was also devoted to her love of falsetto. Her voice was rather light without applying an uncomfortable weight, and she characteristically deployed a soft projection when she sang the lowest notes. O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s signature singing style integrated many elements, such as the lilting voice, mournful keening, glottal ornamentation and a distinctive attack on syllables. Mikael Wood of &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; commented, &quot;She had a high, airy tone that could turn ferocious without warning. She emphasized its breaks and curls, decorating the catchy melodies she wrote with florid vocal runs inherited from Celtic tradition.&quot; O&#x27;Riordan was also renowned for her yodeling techniques, embracing the sharp break of her voice. She had never compromised her strong Irish accent, even when she was criticized for that. Her singing was rooted in the Sean-nós vocal style; the University of Limerick wrote, &quot;Dolores&#x27;s voice carried strong traces of the Sean-nós (old style) Gaelic tradition of unaccompanied singing that so beautifully conveys sadness, regret and loneliness.&quot; &quot;Íosa&quot;, an outtake from the Cranberries&#x27; debut album, was the only song in which O&#x27;Riordan sang entirely in Irish-Gaelic, inspired by her path as a liturgical soloist. Around the age of 40, the timbre of her voice changed and became more mature.

&quot;Melody Maker&quot; described O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s voice as &quot;the voice of a saint trapped in a glass harp&quot;. In 2018, O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s longtime friend, former manager and record executive, Dan Waite, called her &quot;the strongest female voice in Rock for the past three decades&quot;. In a &quot;Billboard&quot; article, Dan Weiss echoed this view and wrote that her voice was &quot;at her best, one of the most impressive&quot;. Ireland&#x27;s Prime Minister Leo Varadkar said O&#x27;Riordan was &quot;the voice of a generation&quot;. Weiss praised O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s vocal ability, commenting: &quot;She knew she could multiply her phrases in harmony and clever aural sculpting, which turned relatively simple and round chord progressions like &quot;Ode to My Family&quot; into complex waterfalls of vocalization, and yet the jangling folk guitars buffering them were clearly armored by capital-R rock&quot;.

=== Vocal recordings ===

Noel Hogan described how O&#x27;Riordan tended to &quot;layer a lot of harmonies, a lot of falsetto stuff&quot; as soon as she first entered the recording studio, Xeric Studios, at the beginning of 1990. O&#x27;Riordan used a Neumann U 87 microphone for her vocal tracks, especially during the recording of the debut studio album &quot;Everybody Else Is Doing It, So Why Can&#x27;t We?&quot;. In an interview with &quot;Sound on Sound&quot;, in March 2019, Hogan and record producer Stephen Street described that &quot;spontaneity was the key&quot;; Hogan said: &quot;she would like to do maybe three or four takes&quot;. Regarding backing vocals she would go through very quickly, he said: &quot;cause she had an amazing ear for tuning&quot;, then she ended with her highest notes. She would add additional layers of vocal inflections over the existing main vocals as she went along. In &quot;South China Morning Post&quot;, Hogan described O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s voice during the recording of &quot;Linger&quot;: We&#x27;re all looking at each in the room going, &#x27;where did that come out from?&#x27; because she was so small and tiny—you didn&#x27;t expect that. And then she only grew from that point on. As the years went down, she just got better and better.&quot;

O&#x27;Riordan was recognized for her raw natural voice, Hogan corroborated this on &quot;Officialcharts&quot;, he stated: &quot;we weren&#x27;t going to start using Auto-Tune and all that shite. She would absolutely kill us&quot;, speaking of the production of the band&#x27;s latest album, &quot;In the End&quot;, created from demo vocals recorded by O&#x27;Riordan before her death. O&#x27;Riordan tended to let her breathing be heard on the albums, preferring to focus on the delivery while emphasizing expressiveness and nuance rather than being perfectionist, saying &quot;keep it natural, keep it real&quot;—adding, &quot;when it&#x27;s too clean, when people go in and try to clean up the breath to make it sound seamless, it takes away from the reality&quot;. The voice recording protocol had evolved over the years, O&#x27;Riordan was worried about &quot;oversinging and smothering the raw emotion in her delivery&quot;, as a result, she did not come to work in studios during daylight hours with Fergal Lawler and the two Hogan brothers. Lawler told David Browne in a 2019 &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; interview: &quot;Dolores would come in to do the vocals and we&#x27;d have a chat. She&#x27;d have a listen to what we&#x27;d done and then we&#x27;d head off and let her do her thing. So in the evening time, you&#x27;re almost looking out in the corridor to see if she&#x27;s coming in.&quot;

== Personal life ==
On 18 July 1994, O&#x27;Riordan married Canadian-born Don Burton, who was the former tour manager of Duran Duran. They met in the U.S. while Duran Duran and the Cranberries were on tour together. The wedding was held at Holy Cross Abbey in County Tipperary. The couple had three children. O&#x27;Riordan had a stepson from Burton&#x27;s previous relationship. In 1996, they lived at The Coach House, a medieval-style residence beside Ballyhannon Castle at Quin in County Clare, Ireland. They lived in their first home for a year while they planned their own ultra-modern house, including a recording studio and guest apartment, set on a plot in Dunquin, west County Kerry, on the Dingle Peninsula, but they spent little time there and later sold the property.

In 1998, the couple bought a stud farm, called Riversfield Stud, located in Kilmallock, County Limerick, before selling it for US$5 million in 2004. They then moved to Howth, County Dublin, where O&#x27;Riordan acquired a house in 2004, which she later sold in 2010, and spent summers in a log cabin on a property they bought in 1994, near Buckhorn, Ontario, north of Peterborough, Ontario, Canada.

Raised as a Roman Catholic, O&#x27;Riordan was an admirer of Pope John Paul II, whom she met in 2001 and 2002. She was also interested in hurling and played the sport as a child. In 2018, Limerick bridged a 45-year gap to win the 2018 All-Ireland SHC, and &quot;Dreams&quot; by The Cranberries was played at Croke Park to coincide with the festivities. The team later brought the trophy to her family home.

In 2009, O&#x27;Riordan and her family moved full-time to Buckhorn, Ontario, Canada, living in a waterfront home on Big Bald Lake.

On 25 November 2011, O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s father died at his home in Limerick after six years of fighting cancer. According to O&#x27;Riordan, he held on to celebrate his 50th wedding anniversary on 14 November.

In July 2013, O&#x27;Riordan and her family moved to the exclusive area of Abington, in the north of Dublin, and they eventually developed the idea of buying a house.

In October 2013, O&#x27;Riordan told journalist and close friend Barry Egan in the &quot;Sunday Independent&quot;&#x27;s &quot;Life&quot; magazine that she had attempted suicide by overdosing on medication, but &quot;wanted to live for her kids&quot;. O&#x27;Riordan also spoke publicly of her painful personal history. O&#x27;Riordan was sexually abused by a family friend for four years from the ages of 8 to 12. She developed depression, deep self-loathing and suicidal thoughts over the years which were worsened by her accelerating career and led to anorexia. Afterward, she said that she continued to move forward for her children and her husband. At her father&#x27;s funeral in 2011, O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s abuser introduced himself to her and apologized for his actions. O&#x27;Riordan said in 2013 &quot;I had nightmares for a year before my father&#x27;s death about meeting him. ... I didn&#x27;t see him for years and years and then I saw him at my father&#x27;s funeral. I had blocked him out of my life&quot;.

O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s family moved back to Canada in November 2013, considering they were used to the outdoors and the wilderness. Towards the end of 2013, O&#x27;Riordan returned to live in Ireland, a decision that preceded the end of her marriage.

O&#x27;Riordan and her husband Burton ended their marriage and relationship in September 2014 after 20 years together. Following her split from Burton, O&#x27;Riordan suffered from serious depression in 2014 and her mental health issues were compounded by alcohol use. O&#x27;Riordan left Canada and moved to New York City, living first in a hotel in Union Square and then at Trump Tower.

On 10 November 2014, O&#x27;Riordan was arrested and charged in connection with air rage on an Aer Lingus flight from JFK International Airport to Shannon Airport. During the flight, she grew verbally and physically abusive to the crew. When police were arresting her, she resisted, reminding them that her taxes paid their wages and shouting &quot;I&#x27;m the Queen of Limerick! I&#x27;m an icon!&quot;, headbutting one Garda officer and spitting at another. She allegedly fractured the air hostess&#x27;s foot during the incident and was medically assessed at University Hospital, escorted by Shannon Police. Following her arrest, O&#x27;Riordan spent three weeks in a psychiatric hospital. She later pleaded guilty to the charges. Eileen O&#x27;Riordan stated that her daughter was in a fragile mental state and that medical results indicated there was no alcohol or drugs detected in her daughter&#x27;s system. The judge hearing her case agreed to dismiss all charges if she apologized in writing to her victims and contributed €6,000 ($7,300) to the court poor box. Later, O&#x27;Riordan told the media that she had been stressed from living in New York hotels following the end of her 20-year marriage. Her family described Dolores as &quot;strong-minded and determined&quot;; however, discussing her mental instability and her volatile vulnerability in a 2014 interview with the &quot;Belfast Telegraph&quot;, O&#x27;Riordan explained that she &quot;carried quite a burden of pain and torment from her past&quot;.

In January 2015, O&#x27;Riordan returned to the U.S., where she bought an apartment in the East Village of New York City. Also in 2015, O&#x27;Riordan developed a relationship with the US musician Olé Koretsky, with whom she shared the last years of her life. In 2017, O&#x27;Riordan bought a new house near her hometown of Limerick.

In May 2017, O&#x27;Riordan publicly discussed her bipolar disorder, stating that she had been diagnosed in 2015. According to one writer, music was more a therapy than a commodity for O&#x27;Riordan. O&#x27;Riordan admitted that &quot;there have been times when I&#x27;ve struggled. The death of my father and mother-in-law was very hard. Looking back, I think depression, whatever the cause, is one of the worst things to go through. Then again, I&#x27;ve also had a lot of joy in my life, especially with my children. You get ups as well as downs. Sure isn&#x27;t that what life&#x27;s all about?&quot;.

O&#x27;Riordan started a suicide note in September 2017 during a period of taking lorazepam and drinking. An American psychotherapist assessed O&#x27;Riordan on 26 December 2017, suggesting an abstinence from alcohol and noting no suicidal thoughts.

O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s final social media post, looking to the future, occurred on 4 January 2018.

=== Wealth ===
In 2006, she was one of the 10 richest women in Ireland, and was reported to be the fifth-richest woman in 1999. In 2008, she was sixth on the list of the ten richest artists in Ireland; her net worth was $66 million.

== Death ==

On 15 January 2018, O&#x27;Riordan was found unresponsive in the bathroom of her London hotel room and was pronounced dead at 9:16 a.m. She was 46. An inquest at Westminster Coroner&#x27;s Court held on 6 September, ruled that she died as a result of accidental drowning in a bath following sedation by alcohol intoxication. Empty bottles were found in O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s room (five miniature bottles and a champagne bottle) as well as some prescription drugs. Toxicology tests showed that her body contained only &quot;therapeutic&quot; levels of these medications but a blood alcohol content of 330 mg/dL (0.33%).

O&#x27;Riordan lived in New York City at the time. She had travelled to London to work with Martin &quot;Youth&quot; Glover on her side-project D.A.R.K. and to meet representatives of the BMG record label about a new Cranberries album. O&#x27;Riordan arrived at the Hilton Hotel on Park Lane, Mayfair, on 14 January. At 2 a.m. on 15 January 2018, O&#x27;Riordan had a phone call with her mother. It was later that morning that she was found and pronounced dead.

The day after her death, the tabloid newspaper &quot;Santa Monica Observer&quot; spread a false story that fentanyl had been found in the room indicating that London authorities suspected suicide and a &quot;deliberate overdose.&quot; The fentanyl overdose rumour endured for months.

The cause of death was not made public for about eight months until the Westminster inquest.

=== Memorial service ===
On 21 January 2018, O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s funeral opened three days of mourning in Ireland. Funeral plans included a service reserved for extended family and close friends. A three-day funeral in her hometown, with O&#x27;Riordan lying in repose, lasted from 20 to 22 January at St Joseph&#x27;s Church. In a tribute normally reserved for heads of State, thousands streamed past her open coffin, in a four-hour public reposing inside St Joseph&#x27;s Church in the city. O&#x27;Riordan, wearing dark eyeshadow, with raven hair, was laid out in an open coffin wearing black and holding a set of pearl rosary beads. O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s songs were played, while photographs of the singer performing and one of her with Pope John Paul II were placed along the walls. Friends left a floral tribute next to the coffin, which read: &quot;The song has ended, but the memories linger on&quot;.

O&#x27;Riordan was buried on 23 January after a service at Saint Ailbe&#x27;s Roman Catholic Church, Ballybricken, County Limerick; it began with the studio recording of &quot;Ave Maria&quot; as sung by O&#x27;Riordan and Luciano Pavarotti. At the end of the service the Cranberries&#x27; song &quot;When You&#x27;re Gone&quot; was played. Among the attendees at her funeral were her mother, Eileen; her three children and their father, O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s former husband, Don Burton; her sister and brothers; all Cranberries members; O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s boyfriend Olé Koretsky; Ireland&#x27;s president, Michael D. Higgins; former rugby union player Ronan O&#x27;Gara; and Bono&#x27;s wife Ali Hewson. O&#x27;Riordan was buried alongside her father.

=== Remembrances ===
==== Recognition ====
The President of Ireland, Michael D. Higgins, was one of the first to pay his respects. The Taoiseach of Ireland, Leo Varadkar, also paid his respects to O&#x27;Riordan.
Also, in recognition of O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s influence, the Avett Brothers covered the Cranberries song &quot;Linger&quot;. Bono and Johnny Depp performed a tribute for O&#x27;Riordan ending the performance on &quot;Linger&quot;, at the National Concert Hall in Dublin, Ireland, just hours after the sudden death of O&#x27;Riordan. Bono, Sinéad O&#x27;Connor, Johnny Depp and Nick Cave gave Dolores O&#x27;Riordan a standing ovation at a birthday party for Shane MacGowan, singer of the Pogues. On the announcement of her death on 15 January 2018, O&#x27;Riordan appeared on the huge 360° screen overhanging the Madison Square Garden floor in New York City during a New York Rangers game. A photo of this appearance was published on 17 January 2018 on Madison Square Garden&#x27;s Facebook.

Among those honouring O&#x27;Riordan were the Cranberries, Olé Koretsky, Andy Rourke (former bassist of the Smiths), Stephen Street, U2, Duran Duran, Julian Lennon, Liz Phair, James Corden, Josh Groban, Roger Bennett, Hozier, Foster the People, Elijah Wood, Chris Cornell&#x27;s brother Peter, Mark Lanegan, Pearl Jam, Bryan Adams, Halsey, Kodaline, the The, Michael Stipe and R.E.M., Dave Davies of the Kinks, Adele, Garbage, Annie Lennox, Cerys Matthews, Lisa Stansfield, Michelle Branch, Dan Brodbeck, Slash, Graham Hopkins, Benjamin Kowalewicz, Vic Fuentes, actors Luke Evans and Francois Arnaud, Questlove, Kiesza, Diplo, Gao Xiaosong, Colin Parry, The Tim Parry Johnathan Ball Foundation for Peace, Ali Hewson, Adi Roche and Chernobyl Children International.
On 29 March 2018, Mayor Stephen Keary presented the book of condolences with over 16,000 signatures to O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s mother Eileen, brothers Donal, Terry and Joe, and other family members.

==== Further reaction ====
The Kinks guitarist Dave Davies, a close friend of O&#x27;Riordan, had planned to collaborate on songs together before she died; they had an idea for a song called &quot;Home&quot;—&quot;about being home again&quot;.

Just prior to her death on 15 January 2018, while she was in London for a studio mixing session with Youth on D.A.R.K.&#x27;s second album, O&#x27;Riordan left a voice message—the last one she would ever leave—at 1:12 a.m. to her longtime friend, Dan Waite, who coordinated a recording session of a &quot;Zombie&quot; cover that he had previously given O&#x27;Riordan to listen to and accredit. According to Waite, she offered &quot;to sing on it&quot; on Christmas Eve 2017. TMZ published this voice message on 5 April 2018. On 18 January 2018, the heavy metal band Bad Wolves released this cover of &quot;Zombie&quot;, which charted on multiple &quot;Billboard&quot; charts.

On 28 January 2018, the &quot;In Memoriam&quot; segment of the 60th Annual Grammy Awards honored a number of music icons, including O&#x27;Riordan.

&quot;Dreams&quot; was played in Croke Park to the 82,000-capacity crowd on 19 August 2018, after Limerick won the Liam MacCarthy Cup in the All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship for the first time in 45 years. The cup was later toured around Limerick and was brought by the team to O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s family home in Ballybricken.

On 24 April 2019, Saint Sister, a duo from Northern Ireland, performed an a cappella rendition of the song &quot;Dreams&quot; by the Cranberries at the funeral in St Anne&#x27;s Cathedral in Belfast of Lyra McKee; McKee was killed by the New IRA on 18 April 2019.

=== Aftermath ===
In mid-September 2018, bandmate Noel Hogan confirmed that the Cranberries band name would be retired after the release of their 2019 album, &quot;In the End&quot;. He stated: &quot;We don&#x27;t want to continue without Dolores, so we&#x27;re just going to leave after this&quot;.

On September 6, 2023, on the occasion of what would have been her 52nd birthday, an album of unreleased solo songs was posthumously announced that the singer recorded a few years before her death.

=== Posthumous sales ===
The Cranberries dominated Amazon&#x27;s music digital sales in the 24 hours following O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s death announcement, with sales surging on the site by 913,350% of their album &quot;Something Else&quot;. O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s solo work &quot;Are You Listening?&quot; was ranked second. The Cranberries&#x27; albums also dominated Amazon&#x27;s ranking of physical CD and vinyl sales, along with her solo album, &quot;No Baggage&quot;, seeing an increase in sales of 200,000%. Four albums of the Cranberries reached the iTunes Top 10 Albums chart, with &quot;&quot; peaking at No. 2. The band&#x27;s biggest hits, including &quot;Linger&quot;, &quot;Dreams&quot; and &quot;Zombie&quot;, ranked in the top five most-downloaded digital songs on Amazon&#x27;s list, and ranked in the top 10 of the iTunes songs chart.

== Legacy ==

O&#x27;Riordan has been referred to as &quot;one of the most distinctive voices in alternative rock history&quot;. Through her impact on the music industry, she has been described as &quot;one of the most recognisable voices in pop culture&quot;. O&#x27;Riordan also brought an &quot;inimitable&quot; and &quot;unique voice&quot; to the 1990s&#x27; music scene and to rock music. She is considered an &quot;icon of Irish pop&quot; and a &quot;1990s rock icon&quot;, characterised by a wide spectrum of vocals resources.

Recording Academy contributor Philip Merrill called O&#x27;Riordan &quot;a gifted songwriter and vocalist whose ballads helped define alt-pop in the 1990s&quot;. She was credited for her innovative style embodied by her &quot;measured vocal power, her honest, vulnerable songwriting&quot;, reinforced by her Irish accent, thus helping the Cranberries to rise &quot;into worldwide stardom&quot;. Music industry publication &quot;Billboard&quot; considered the song &quot;Linger&quot; as &quot;pure Irish poetry&quot;, while &quot;Dreams&quot;, which contains no chorus, is regarded as &quot;one of the greatest songs of all time&quot;. Amanda Petrusich wrote how she deviated from the &quot;norm&quot;, saying that most of the other rock singers at the time sounded &quot;plainly and hopelessly cool—disaffected, vaguely antagonistic and aloof&quot;, while &quot;O&#x27;Riordan sounded like a maniac&quot;. Following news of O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s death, U2 described O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s music, and vocal style by these words: &quot;out of the West came this storm of a voice—she had such strength of conviction, yet she could speak to the fragility in all of us&quot;. Hozier and Foster the People called O&#x27;Riordan &quot;a true pioneer&quot; for future generations.
According to &quot;Hot Press&quot;″ Stuart Clark, who wrote the press release for the Cranberries&#x27; first cassette EP, O&#x27;Riordan was an artist who &quot;left an indelible mark&quot;. He also referred to her as an Irish female icon. TV producer Larry Bass regarded her as &quot;not only an icon but an Irish female icon. Very few Irish women had achieved the heights that she had on a global stage&quot;. For contemporary Ireland&#x27;s singers, O&#x27;Riordan is considered a &quot;beacon for future generations of singers&quot;, stated &quot;Hot Press&quot; editorial writer Peter McGoran. Irish President Michael D Higgins praised O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s and the band&#x27;s &quot;immense influence on rock and pop music in Ireland and internationally&quot;.

At O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s funeral service, both young and old travelled from all over the world—including from Spain, China and South America—to pay their respects in person along with many Irish politicians. A place of pilgrimage, the grave of O&#x27;Riordan continues to attract devotees from around the world. O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s commitment to her roots, which was consolidated by her authenticity, attracted fascination. According to Una Mullally of &quot;The New York Times&quot;, O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s native accent positioned the Cranberries as a &quot;truly&quot; Irish band, which maintained its cultural identity and integrity, whose &quot;global success was instigated by how America embraced them&quot;, by their music videos in &quot;heavy rotation&quot;, and &quot;crucially, by American radio&quot;. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; stated that in 1995 the Cranberries were &quot;Ireland&#x27;s biggest musical export since U2&quot;. Paul Sexton of &quot;Billboard&quot; and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation have acknowledged O&#x27;Riordan and the Cranberries&#x27; influence on people, citing them as &quot;one of the biggest-selling rock bands of the &#x27;90s&quot;. Ethnomusicologist Dr. Aileen Dillane commented that &quot;countless other writers and Twitter commentators reminisced upon how the band seemed to encapsulate the &#x27;90s &quot;zeitgeist&quot; and on the profound impact they and Dolores as lead singer had on their lives and sense of who (and where) they were in the world at that time&quot;. In 2018, Hannah Tindle of &quot;Another Magazine&quot; wrote that &quot;her strength of character shone through in the songs she wrote that remain, to this day, some of the most seminal in music history&quot;.

In January 2018, the &quot;Dallas Observer&quot; listed O&#x27;Riordan alongside David Bowie, Prince and Tom Petty as iconic musicians who died between 2016 and 2018. In 2018, the &quot;South Coast Herald&quot; stated that &quot;Dolores O&#x27;Riordan and the Cranberries inspired millions&quot;. O&#x27;Riordan inspired contemporary artists around the world while having a lasting impact on various musical styles; following news of her death, Maggie Rogers said, &quot;Dolores O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s voice helped me understand my place in the world.&quot; AsiaOne argued that the Cranberries—especially O&#x27;Riordan&#x27;s voice and singing style—have influenced many Chinese musicians and have had an unprecedented lasting impact on popular music across Asia. The BBC added that O&#x27;Riordan was a major musical influence to Faye Wong, one of China&#x27;s biggest pop stars. Others influenced by O&#x27;Riordan include Florence Welch, Adele, Halsey, Heather Baron-Gracie, Michelle Branch and Avril Lavigne.

O&#x27;Riordan was regarded as a humanitarian activist advocating for children throughout the world; most of the songs of O&#x27;Riordan communicated her empathy with human suffering and reflected popular hope for peace. The Tim Parry Johnathan Ball Foundation for Peace stated that O&#x27;Riordan &quot;left a legacy through her music that speaks for so many of us and called on all of us to follow a path of peace&quot;.

On 19 February 2018, RTÉ One broadcast a 40-minute documentary entitled &quot;Dolores&quot;, including never-before-seen interviews, produced by Dave Fanning.

== Accolades ==
=== Awards and nominations ===
== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q541599" start="0" end="34" title="Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan" label="Dolores Mary Eileen O&amp;#x27;Riordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="157" end="161" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q483810" start="167" end="182" title="the Cranberries" label="the Cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="268" end="276" title="Acoustic guitar" label="acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="281" end="297" title="Electric guitar" label="electric guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="349" end="365" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240930" start="389" end="396" title="lilting" label="lilting"/>
<link wikidata="Q186506" start="397" end="410" title="mezzo-soprano" label="mezzo-soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q41923" start="428" end="433" title="Yodeling" label="yodel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894547" start="442" end="449" title="keening" label="keening"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="462" end="470" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q178283" start="507" end="522" title="County Limerick" label="County Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382258" start="727" end="776" title="Everybody Else Is Doing It, So Why Can&amp;#x27;t We?" label="Everybody Else Is Doing It, So Why Can&amp;#x27;t We?"/>
<link wikidata="Q629995" start="797" end="813" title="No Need to Argue" label="No Need to Argue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930617" start="834" end="858" title="To the Faithful Departed" label="To the Faithful Departed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006267" start="883" end="899" title="Bury the Hatchet (album)" label="Bury the Hatchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930576" start="964" end="992" title="Wake Up and Smell the Coffee" label="Wake Up and Smell the Coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953799" start="1100" end="1118" title="Are You Listening? (Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan album)" label="Are You Listening?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735264" start="1142" end="1152" title="No Baggage" label="No Baggage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932358" start="1216" end="1221" title="Roses (The Cranberries album)" label="Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277952" start="1334" end="1337" title="RTÉ Television" label="RTÉ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773025" start="1351" end="1371" title="The Voice of Ireland" label="The Voice of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657057" start="1427" end="1435" title="D.A.R.K. (band)" label="D.A.R.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q29045210" start="1487" end="1501" title="Something Else (The Cranberries album)" label="Something Else"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="1687" end="1703" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q205972" start="1743" end="1763" title="alcohol intoxication" label="alcohol intoxication"/>
<link wikidata="Q65077171" start="1827" end="1833" title="62nd Annual Grammy Awards" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60642525" start="1856" end="1866" title="In the End (album)" label="In the End"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="2164" end="2176" title="Ivor Novello Awards" label="Ivor Novello"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="2312" end="2333" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="2341" end="2358" title="Alternative Songs" label="Alternative Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4076738" start="2463" end="2475" title="Ballybricken" label="Ballybricken"/>
<link wikidata="Q178283" start="2479" end="2494" title="County Limerick" label="County Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q9687" start="2673" end="2691" title="Motorcycle accident" label="motorbike accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067924" start="2764" end="2778" title="Dinner lady" label="school caterer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2818" end="2832" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196075" start="2889" end="2914" title="Our Lady of Sorrows" label="Lady of the Seven Dolours"/>
<link wikidata="Q615403" start="3220" end="3237" title="Irish tin whistle" label="Irish tin whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="3504" end="3509" title="choir" label="choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493728" start="3690" end="3694" title="Irish pub" label="pubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499853" start="3747" end="3767" title="Laurel Hill Coláiste" label="Laurel Hill Coláiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="3782" end="3790" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549268" start="3844" end="3857" title="Limerick Post" label="Limerick Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879664" start="4290" end="4296" title="spoon (musical instrument)" label="spoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q244976" start="4305" end="4312" title="bodhrán" label="bodhrán"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777663" start="4397" end="4402" title="Royal Irish Academy of Music" label="Grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689310" start="5039" end="5048" title="head girl" label="head girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280948" start="5093" end="5097" title="Radio Nova 100FM (Ireland)" label="Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="5740" end="5749" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942329" start="6057" end="6081" title="Vox (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Vox&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="6631" end="6639" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704746" start="6918" end="6928" title="Noel Hogan" label="Noel Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193982" start="7314" end="7334" title="Sinéad O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Sinéad O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455937" start="7347" end="7351" title="Troy (song)" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734705" start="7510" end="7516" title="Linger (The Cranberries song)" label="Linger"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="7556" end="7569" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="8017" end="8029" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310228" start="8076" end="8095" title="Leaving Certificate (Ireland)" label="Leaving Certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045605" start="8313" end="8332" title="Nothing Left at All" label="Nothing Left at All"/>
<link wikidata="Q98910463" start="8648" end="8654" title="Dreams (The Cranberries song)" label="Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="8861" end="8875" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934659" start="8973" end="8982" title="Uncertain (EP)" label="Uncertain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="9533" end="9542" title="harmonium" label="harmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382258" start="9698" end="9747" title="Everybody Else Is Doing It, So Why Can&amp;#x27;t We?" label="Everybody Else Is Doing It, So Why Can&amp;#x27;t We?"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="9883" end="9912" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621623" start="9977" end="9994" title="cruciate ligament" label="cruciate ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="10020" end="10024" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q207589" start="10031" end="10047" title="Val-d&amp;#x27;Isère" label="Val-d&amp;#x27;Isère"/>
<link wikidata="Q169298" start="10127" end="10133" title="Zombie (The Cranberries song)" label="Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q629995" start="10187" end="10203" title="No Need To Argue" label="No Need To Argue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843416" start="10237" end="10264" title="Triple J Hottest 100, 1994" label="Triple J&amp;#x27;s Hottest 100"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10544" end="10563" title="Triple J Hottest 100#Hottest 100 top tens and summaries" label="Hottest 100 ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014234" start="10817" end="10833" title="Ode to My Family" label="Ode to My Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462794" start="10847" end="10871" title="I Can&amp;#x27;t Be with You" label="I Can&amp;#x27;t Be with You"/>
<link wikidata="Q165702" start="10885" end="10904" title="Ridiculous Thoughts" label="Ridiculous Thoughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="11048" end="11057" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097536" start="12171" end="12180" title="pixie cut" label="pixie cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="12327" end="12348" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="12585" end="12603" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126126" start="12679" end="12690" title="Dr. Martens" label="Dr. Martens"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="12780" end="12797" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714137" start="12822" end="12832" title="Alec Foege" label="Alec Foege"/>
<link wikidata="Q42786" start="12872" end="12886" title="Audrey Hepburn" label="Audrey Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="12893" end="12904" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331995" start="13059" end="13068" title="Ave Maria (Schubert)" label="Ave Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q37615" start="13086" end="13103" title="Luciano Pavarotti" label="Luciano Pavarotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898276" start="13111" end="13134" title="Pavarotti &amp;amp; Friends" label="Pavarotti &amp;amp; Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q27818388" start="13172" end="13207" title="Pavarotti &amp;amp; Friends for the Children of Bosnia" label="Together for the Children of Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316033" start="13232" end="13241" title="War Child (charity)" label="War Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="13293" end="13307" title="Diana, Princess of Wales" label="Princess Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734705" start="13448" end="13454" title="Linger (The Cranberries song)" label="Linger"/>
<link wikidata="Q436150" start="13476" end="13488" title="Simon Le Bon" label="Simon Le Bon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58381" start="13492" end="13503" title="Duran Duran" label="Duran Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930617" start="13547" end="13571" title="To the Faithful Departed" label="To the Faithful Departed"/>
<link wikidata="Q658085" start="13661" end="13675" title="Free to Decide" label="Free to Decide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053086" start="13689" end="13710" title="When You&amp;#x27;re Gone (The Cranberries song)" label="When You&amp;#x27;re Gone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040710" start="13727" end="13736" title="Hollywood (The Cranberries song)" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="13765" end="13805" title="Alternative Songs" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520619" start="14350" end="14364" title="Irish Examiner" label="Irish Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q182427" start="14669" end="14683" title="Stephen Street" label="Stephen Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760898" start="14915" end="14938" title="1998 MTV Europe Music Awards" label="MTV Europe Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="14943" end="14948" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632696" start="15025" end="15050" title="Nobel Peace Prize Concert" label="Nobel Peace Prize Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="15069" end="15073" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006267" start="15124" end="15140" title="Bury the Hatchet (album)" label="Bury the Hatchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418776" start="15245" end="15266" title="Canadian Albums Chart" label="Canadian Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q26366" start="15279" end="15302" title="European Top 100 Albums" label="European Top 100 Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930576" start="15573" end="15601" title="Wake Up and Smell the Coffee" label="Wake Up and Smell the Coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="15696" end="15703" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="15777" end="15794" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q371046" start="15811" end="15818" title="Analyse (The Cranberries song)" label="Analyse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244689" start="15832" end="15847" title="Panis angelicus" label="Panis angelicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q431895" start="15861" end="15879" title="The Little Drummer Boy" label="Little Drummer Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172152" start="15896" end="15908" title="Silent Night" label="Silent Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="16109" end="16115" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991419" start="16175" end="16194" title="Time Is Ticking Out" label="Time Is Ticking Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092067" start="16208" end="16241" title="Chernobyl Children International" label="Chernobyl Children&amp;#x27;s Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q13046758" start="16270" end="16284" title="Clarence Hotel" label="Clarence Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q777287" start="16288" end="16298" title="Ali Hewson" label="Ali Hewson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682618" start="16340" end="16349" title="Adi Roche" label="Adi Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="16487" end="16507" title="Birth defect" label="congenital anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="16536" end="16562" title="Chernobyl nuclear disaster" label="Chernobyl nuclear disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734705" start="16948" end="16954" title="Linger (The Cranberries song)" label="Linger"/>
<link wikidata="Q889240" start="16968" end="16992" title="Happy Xmas (War Is Over)" label="Happy Xmas (War Is Over)"/>
<link wikidata="Q356486" start="17009" end="17023" title="Adeste Fideles" label="Adeste Fideles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932799" start="17122" end="17134" title="Renato Serio" label="Renato Serio"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="17241" end="17246" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q295948" start="17254" end="17267" title="Brian Johnson" label="Brian Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="17326" end="17344" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578017" start="17372" end="17388" title="Licks World Tour" label="Licks World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q164061" start="17570" end="17583" title="Helen Of Troy" label="Helen Of Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913767" start="17925" end="17955" title="Van Wezel Performing Arts Hall" label="Van Wezel Performing Arts Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="18381" end="18396" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213196" start="18711" end="18723" title="Dan Brodbeck" label="Dan Brodbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592917" start="18811" end="18825" title="Graham Hopkins" label="Graham Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501629" start="18912" end="18925" title="Marco Mendoza" label="Marco Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612363" start="19093" end="19107" title="Steve DeMarchi" label="Steve DeMarchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259169" start="19205" end="19219" title="Denny DeMarchi" label="Denny DeMarchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692330" start="19756" end="19770" title="technical crew" label="technical crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331995" start="20092" end="20101" title="Ave Maria (Schubert)" label="Ave Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871404" start="20159" end="20174" title="Teatro Ariston" label="Ariston Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q33962" start="20176" end="20183" title="Sanremo" label="Sanremo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000984" start="20277" end="20288" title="Festivalbar" label="Festivalbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q125948" start="20353" end="20361" title="Zucchero" label="Zucchero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576231" start="20381" end="20393" title="Zu &amp;amp; Co." label="Zu &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="20484" end="20489" title="Sting (musician)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q200586" start="20491" end="20502" title="Sheryl Crow" label="Sheryl Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q37615" start="20504" end="20521" title="Luciano Pavarotti" label="Luciano Pavarotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="20523" end="20534" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44570" start="20536" end="20551" title="John Lee Hooker" label="John Lee Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q232456" start="20553" end="20562" title="Macy Gray" label="Macy Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="20567" end="20579" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q357014" start="20626" end="20644" title="Angelo Badalamenti" label="Angelo Badalamenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085" start="20654" end="20664" title="Twin Peaks" label="Twin Peaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659421" start="20689" end="20697" title="Evilenko" label="Evilenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q648256" start="20952" end="20967" title="Jam &amp;amp; Spoon" label="Jam &amp;amp; Spoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q889240" start="21214" end="21225" title="Happy Xmas (War Is Over)" label="War Is Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734705" start="21239" end="21245" title="Linger (The Cranberries song)" label="Linger"/>
<link wikidata="Q356486" start="21262" end="21276" title="O Come, All Ye Faithful" label="Adeste Fideles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015874" start="21413" end="21425" title="Sherman Oaks" label="Sherman Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q282722" start="21506" end="21518" title="Trent Reznor" label="Trent Reznor"/>
<link wikidata="Q186327" start="21523" end="21537" title="Marilyn Manson" label="Marilyn Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="21588" end="21604" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q132952" start="21612" end="21624" title="Adam Sandler" label="Adam Sandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q496654" start="21638" end="21643" title="Click (2006 film)" label="Click"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734705" start="21760" end="21766" title="Linger (The Cranberries song)" label="Linger"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="21883" end="21894" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612363" start="22072" end="22086" title="Steve DeMarchi" label="Steve DeMarchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q791656" start="22099" end="22115" title="Away in a Manger" label="Away in a Manger"/>
<link wikidata="Q889240" start="22132" end="22156" title="Happy Xmas (War Is Over)" label="Happy Xmas (War Is Over)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="22262" end="22267" title="Independent record label" label="indie"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="22302" end="22305" title="Universal Music Group" label="UMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347984" start="22343" end="22360" title="Sanctuary Records" label="Sanctuary Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885137" start="22577" end="22589" title="Ordinary Day (Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan song)" label="Ordinary Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="22640" end="22646" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953799" start="22672" end="22690" title="Are You Listening? (Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan album)" label="Are You Listening?"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="22840" end="22865" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="22958" end="22969" title="BRIT Awards" label="BRIT Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367219" start="22978" end="23009" title="Youth (musician)" label="Martin &amp;quot;Youth&amp;quot; Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q488916" start="23043" end="23052" title="the Verve" label="the Verve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335100" start="23054" end="23061" title="Embrace (English band)" label="Embrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q666697" start="23063" end="23076" title="Primal Scream" label="Primal Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="23078" end="23080" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="23085" end="23099" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308877" start="23218" end="23227" title="Hot Press" label="Hot Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="23624" end="23630" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471726" start="24026" end="24034" title="Taratata" label="Taratata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612445" start="24125" end="24143" title="The Late Late Show (Ireland)" label="The Late Late Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q329494" start="24153" end="24156" title="RTÉ" label="RTÉ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739748" start="24200" end="24211" title="Carson Daly" label="Carson Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075533" start="24242" end="24268" title="Last Call with Carson Daly" label="Last Call with Carson Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107406" start="24395" end="24425" title="The Tonight Show with Jay Leno" label="The Tonight Show with Jay Leno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641047" start="24588" end="24595" title="Sunrise (Australian TV program)" label="Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377423" start="24701" end="24712" title="Katie Daryl" label="Katie Daryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655211" start="24716" end="24721" title="Hdnet" label="Hdnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739265" start="24838" end="24859" title="Heaven and Earth Show" label="Heaven and Earth Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903" start="24952" end="24959" title="Catania" label="Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="25161" end="25172" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="25546" end="25551" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="25560" end="25570" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="25572" end="25578" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="25583" end="25589" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q39709" start="25680" end="25690" title="Des Moines, Iowa" label="Des Moines"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="25692" end="25701" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q123766" start="25707" end="25722" title="Charlottesville, Virginia" label="Charlottesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q678101" start="25766" end="25770" title="EBBA Awards" label="EBBA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26019" end="26077" title="University Philosophical Society#Honorary patrons" label="University Philosophical Society (Trinity College, Dublin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735264" start="26579" end="26589" title="No Baggage" label="No Baggage"/>
<link wikidata="Q434165" start="26881" end="26886" title="Howth" label="Howth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735264" start="27433" end="27443" title="No Baggage" label="No Baggage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949166" start="27470" end="27485" title="WFAN-FM" label="101.9 RXP radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q271500" start="27877" end="27891" title="Tessa Thompson" label="Tessa Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="27944" end="27951" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q98910463" start="28277" end="28283" title="Dreams (The Cranberries song)" label="Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="28479" end="28492" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="28522" end="28535" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="28560" end="28566" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="28741" end="28750" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q473563" start="28900" end="28918" title="vocal cord nodules" label="vocal cord nodules"/>
<link wikidata="Q308905" start="29224" end="29266" title="Presidency of the Council of the European Union" label="Poland&amp;#x27;s presidency of the EU council"/>
<link wikidata="Q169298" start="29299" end="29305" title="Zombie (The Cranberries song)" label="Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q598715" start="29403" end="29420" title="Sinfonia Varsovia" label="Sinfonia Varsovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="29435" end="29441" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="29598" end="29609" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="29614" end="29621" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="29657" end="29668" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="29673" end="29686" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="29699" end="29703" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932358" start="30038" end="30043" title="Roses (Cranberries album)" label="Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379114" start="30196" end="30210" title="Enmore Theatre" label="Enmore Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="30214" end="30220" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612363" start="30919" end="30933" title="Steve DeMarchi" label="Steve DeMarchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088647" start="31074" end="31087" title="Le Télégramme" label="Le Télégramme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014234" start="31131" end="31147" title="Ode to My Family" label="Ode to My Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q235143" start="31423" end="31434" title="Sharon Corr" label="Sharon Corr"/>
<link wikidata="Q329494" start="31460" end="31463" title="RTÉ" label="RTÉ"/>
<link wikidata="Q15526813" start="31477" end="31497" title="The Voice of Ireland (series 3)" label="The Voice of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15526813" start="31515" end="31529" title="The Voice of Ireland (series 3)" label="2013–14 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501629" start="31676" end="31689" title="Marco Mendoza" label="Marco Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953799" start="31980" end="31998" title="Are You Listening? (Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan album)" label="Are You Listening?"/>
<link wikidata="Q172152" start="32012" end="32024" title="Silent Night" label="Silent Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q166164" start="32044" end="32057" title="Elisa (Italian singer)" label="Elisa Toffoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q791656" start="32065" end="32081" title="Away in a Manger" label="Away in a Manger"/>
<link wikidata="Q889240" start="32098" end="32122" title="Happy Xmas (War Is Over)" label="Happy Xmas (War Is Over)"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="32172" end="32180" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558819" start="32371" end="32404" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Limerick" label="Spire of St Mary&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672832" start="32444" end="32467" title="Irish Chamber Orchestra" label="Irish Chamber Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734705" start="32483" end="32489" title="Linger (The Cranberries song)" label="Linger"/>
<link wikidata="Q169298" start="32503" end="32509" title="Zombie (The Cranberries song)" label="Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q527320" start="33331" end="33342" title="Andy Rourke" label="Andy Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q180598" start="33346" end="33356" title="the Smiths" label="the Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657057" start="33451" end="33459" title="D.A.R.K. (band)" label="D.A.R.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q29045210" start="33656" end="33670" title="Something Else (Cranberries album)" label="Something Else"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672832" start="33748" end="33771" title="Irish Chamber Orchestra" label="Irish Chamber Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="34502" end="34516" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q60642525" start="35058" end="35071" title="In the End (album)" label="demo versions"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="35166" end="35179" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="35223" end="35244" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="35290" end="35296" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q42565390" start="35322" end="35329" title="Revival (Eminem album)" label="Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q169298" start="35386" end="35392" title="Zombie (The Cranberries song)" label="Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q26473" start="35778" end="35793" title="Gregorian chant" label="Gregorian chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499783" start="35938" end="35952" title="Glenstal Abbey" label="Glenstal Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="36191" end="36202" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="36291" end="36304" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q362435" start="36306" end="36316" title="Jim Reeves" label="Jim Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="36321" end="36332" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="36428" end="36445" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832290" start="36493" end="36499" title="Traditional Gaelic music" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180598" start="36589" end="36599" title="the Smiths" label="the Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="36601" end="36609" title="the Cure" label="the Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="36611" end="36617" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="36619" end="36631" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q188713" start="36715" end="36724" title="the Kinks" label="the Kinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475584" start="36726" end="36734" title="Magazine (band)" label="Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="36736" end="36761" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q214990" start="36767" end="36776" title="New Order (band)" label="New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267230" start="36792" end="36805" title="Johnny McEvoy" label="Johnny McEvoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152291" start="36824" end="36840" title="The Old Bog Road" label="The Old Bog Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q48304" start="36904" end="36914" title="the Pogues" label="the Pogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="36985" end="37005" title="William Butler Yeats" label="William Butler Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="37113" end="37122" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q884163" start="37124" end="37135" title="Blind Melon" label="Blind Melon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="37140" end="37147" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="37237" end="37244" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="37254" end="37265" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q974045" start="37366" end="37388" title="The Smiths (album)" label="&amp;quot;The Smiths&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q683079" start="37422" end="37430" title="Violator (album)" label="Violator"/>
<link wikidata="Q600495" start="37484" end="37495" title="The Mission (soundtrack)" label="The Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q202246" start="37540" end="37549" title="Morrissey" label="Morrissey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="37551" end="37563" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="37570" end="37579" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q484302" start="37585" end="37599" title="James Hetfield" label="James Hetfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704746" start="37949" end="37959" title="Noel Hogan" label="Noel Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734705" start="38158" end="38164" title="Linger (The Cranberries song)" label="Linger"/>
<link wikidata="Q178927" start="38978" end="38997" title="writer&amp;#x27;s block" label="writer&amp;#x27;s block"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587057" start="39071" end="39086" title="Ultimate Guitar" label="Ultimate Guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="40068" end="40083" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812075" start="40308" end="40321" title="National Post" label="National Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560575" start="40742" end="40751" title="Gil Moore" label="Gil Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q186506" start="41054" end="41067" title="mezzo-soprano" label="mezzo-soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395595" start="41076" end="41087" title="vocal range" label="vocal range"/>
<link wikidata="Q726738" start="41093" end="41094" title="B (musical note)" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="41095" end="41096" title="octave" label="2"/>
<link wikidata="Q843813" start="41100" end="41101" title="C (musical note)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="41102" end="41103" title="octave" label="6"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="41138" end="41144" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q12298060" start="41161" end="41183" title="Tessitura" label="range of vocal comfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q816208" start="41211" end="41224" title="Belting (music)" label="vocal belting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="41238" end="41254" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q193935" start="41291" end="41299" title="falsetto" label="falsetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939202" start="41322" end="41327" title="Vocal weight" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q641169" start="41413" end="41423" title="Voice projection" label="projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q263478" start="41449" end="41454" title="Musical note" label="notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240930" start="41540" end="41547" title="lilting" label="lilting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894547" start="41564" end="41571" title="keening" label="keening"/>
<link wikidata="Q374418" start="41573" end="41580" title="Glottis" label="glottal"/>
<link wikidata="Q739589" start="41581" end="41594" title="Ornamentation (music)" label="ornamentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="41655" end="41672" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q41923" start="41946" end="41954" title="yodeling" label="yodeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q665624" start="42044" end="42056" title="Hiberno-English" label="Irish accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q771291" start="42127" end="42135" title="Sean-nós singing" label="Sean-nós"/>
<link wikidata="Q573954" start="42153" end="42175" title="University of Limerick" label="University of Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274806" start="42389" end="42396" title="outtake" label="outtake"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="42496" end="42508" title="Irish language" label="Irish-Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="42582" end="42588" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="42641" end="42653" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728820" start="43116" end="43128" title="Leo Varadkar" label="Leo Varadkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014234" start="43411" end="43427" title="Ode to My Family" label="Ode to My Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704746" start="43597" end="43607" title="Noel Hogan" label="Noel Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193935" start="43688" end="43696" title="falsetto" label="falsetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q23801106" start="43823" end="43835" title="Neumann U 87" label="Neumann U 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382258" start="43933" end="43982" title="Everybody Else Is Doing It, So Why Can&amp;#x27;t We?" label="Everybody Else Is Doing It, So Why Can&amp;#x27;t We?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290478" start="44017" end="44031" title="Sound on Sound" label="Sound on Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q182427" start="44080" end="44094" title="Stephen Street" label="Stephen Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198574" start="44491" end="44515" title="South China Morning Post" label="South China Morning Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734705" start="44597" end="44603" title="Linger (The Cranberries song)" label="Linger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072376" start="44962" end="44976" title="The Official Charts Company" label="Officialcharts"/>
<link wikidata="Q784762" start="45038" end="45047" title="Auto-Tune" label="Auto-Tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q60642525" start="45170" end="45180" title="In the End (album)" label="In the End"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113969" start="45737" end="45748" title="oversinging" label="oversinging"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231828" start="45933" end="45945" title="David Browne (journalist)" label="David Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="45962" end="45975" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q58381" start="46398" end="46409" title="Duran Duran" label="Duran Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q839896" start="46517" end="46533" title="Holy Cross Abbey" label="Holy Cross Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852161" start="46731" end="46749" title="Ballyhannon Castle" label="Ballyhannon Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022254" start="46753" end="46757" title="Quin, County Clare" label="Quin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266246" start="46942" end="46949" title="Dunquin" label="Dunquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184469" start="46956" end="46968" title="County Kerry" label="County Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127558" start="46977" end="46993" title="Dingle Peninsula" label="Dingle Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566838" start="47134" end="47144" title="Kilmallock" label="Kilmallock"/>
<link wikidata="Q434165" start="47226" end="47231" title="Howth" label="Howth"/>
<link wikidata="Q728264" start="47398" end="47415" title="Trent Lakes" label="Buckhorn, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q776930" start="47426" end="47438" title="Peterborough, Ontario" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="47519" end="47536" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q213711" start="47596" end="47603" title="hurling" label="hurling"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844668" start="47646" end="47654" title="Limerick county hurling team" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q42297064" start="47688" end="47708" title="2018 All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship" label="2018 All-Ireland SHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q98910463" start="47720" end="47726" title="Dreams (The Cranberries song)" label="Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q478225" start="47766" end="47776" title="Croke Park" label="Croke Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778300" start="47834" end="47844" title="Liam MacCarthy Cup" label="the trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495161" start="48304" end="48319" title="Northside, Dublin" label="north of Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776770" start="48463" end="48493" title="Sunday Independent (Ireland)" label="&amp;quot;Sunday Independent&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110007" start="50007" end="50019" title="Union Square (New York)" label="Union Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q868772" start="50032" end="50043" title="Trump Tower" label="Trump Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698365" start="50126" end="50134" title="air rage" label="air rage"/>
<link wikidata="Q83716" start="50141" end="50151" title="Aer Lingus" label="Aer Lingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="50164" end="50189" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="JFK International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q584102" start="50193" end="50208" title="Shannon Airport" label="Shannon Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366959" start="50468" end="50473" title="Garda Síochána" label="Garda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540305" start="51109" end="51117" title="poor box" label="poor box"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985843" start="51440" end="51457" title="Belfast Telegraph" label="Belfast Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043326" start="51661" end="51673" title="East Village, Manhattan" label="East Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="51956" end="51972" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q408265" start="52595" end="52604" title="lorazepam" label="lorazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062012" start="53272" end="53304" title="Westminster Coroner&amp;#x27;s Court" label="Westminster Coroner&amp;#x27;s Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q205972" start="53413" end="53433" title="alcohol intoxication" label="alcohol intoxication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7218" start="53574" end="53584" title="Toxicology" label="Toxicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q886470" start="53685" end="53706" title="blood alcohol content" label="blood alcohol content"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367219" start="53822" end="53853" title="Youth (musician)" label="Martin &amp;quot;Youth&amp;quot; Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q796316" start="53918" end="53921" title="BMG Rights Management" label="BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q608175" start="53996" end="54008" title="London Hilton on Park Lane" label="Hilton Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q378991" start="54012" end="54030" title="Park Lane, Mayfair" label="Park Lane, Mayfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q407541" start="54300" end="54308" title="fentanyl" label="fentanyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q14906318" start="54827" end="54842" title="lying in repose" label="lying in repose"/>
<link wikidata="Q132539" start="55197" end="55203" title="rosary" label="rosary"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="55315" end="55332" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q178283" start="55600" end="55615" title="County Limerick" label="County Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331995" start="55661" end="55670" title="Ave Maria (Schubert)" label="Ave Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q37615" start="55707" end="55724" title="Luciano Pavarotti" label="Luciano Pavarotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053086" start="55785" end="55806" title="When You&amp;#x27;re Gone (The Cranberries song)" label="When You&amp;#x27;re Gone"/>
<link wikidata="Q57276" start="56094" end="56112" title="Michael D. Higgins" label="Michael D. Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="56121" end="56132" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q733831" start="56140" end="56157" title="Ronan O&amp;#x27;Gara" label="Ronan O&amp;#x27;Gara"/>
<link wikidata="Q834621" start="56163" end="56167" title="Bono" label="Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q777287" start="56180" end="56190" title="Ali Hewson" label="Ali Hewson"/>
<link wikidata="Q57276" start="56310" end="56328" title="Michael D. Higgins" label="Michael D. Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="56376" end="56385" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728820" start="56398" end="56410" title="Leo Varadkar" label="Leo Varadkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q123320" start="56515" end="56529" title="Avett Brothers" label="Avett Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734705" start="56565" end="56571" title="Linger (The Cranberries song)" label="Linger"/>
<link wikidata="Q834621" start="56579" end="56583" title="Bono" label="Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="56588" end="56599" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971749" start="56692" end="56713" title="National Concert Hall" label="National Concert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q193982" start="56793" end="56813" title="Sinéad O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Sinéad O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192668" start="56831" end="56840" title="Nick Cave" label="Nick Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q356369" start="56912" end="56926" title="Shane MacGowan" label="Shane MacGowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48304" start="56938" end="56948" title="the Pogues" label="the Pogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="57067" end="57088" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="57121" end="57137" title="New York Rangers" label="New York Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q527320" start="57320" end="57331" title="Andy Rourke" label="Andy Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q180598" start="57351" end="57361" title="the Smiths" label="the Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q182427" start="57364" end="57378" title="Stephen Street" label="Stephen Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="57380" end="57382" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q58381" start="57384" end="57395" title="Duran Duran" label="Duran Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q357974" start="57397" end="57410" title="Julian Lennon" label="Julian Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q258761" start="57412" end="57421" title="Liz Phair" label="Liz Phair"/>
<link wikidata="Q767499" start="57423" end="57435" title="James Corden" label="James Corden"/>
<link wikidata="Q218083" start="57437" end="57448" title="Josh Groban" label="Josh Groban"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203738" start="57450" end="57463" title="Roger Bennett (journalist)" label="Roger Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233232" start="57465" end="57471" title="Hozier" label="Hozier"/>
<link wikidata="Q61113" start="57473" end="57490" title="Foster the People" label="Foster the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q483771" start="57492" end="57503" title="Elijah Wood" label="Elijah Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q270935" start="57505" end="57518" title="Chris Cornell" label="Chris Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q319277" start="57541" end="57553" title="Mark Lanegan" label="Mark Lanegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="57555" end="57564" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q482907" start="57566" end="57577" title="Bryan Adams" label="Bryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534249" start="57579" end="57585" title="Halsey (singer)" label="Halsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482563" start="57587" end="57595" title="Kodaline" label="Kodaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354463" start="57597" end="57604" title="the The" label="the The"/>
<link wikidata="Q215182" start="57606" end="57619" title="Michael Stipe" label="Michael Stipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="57624" end="57630" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q364890" start="57632" end="57643" title="Dave Davies" label="Dave Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q188713" start="57647" end="57656" title="the Kinks" label="the Kinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23215" start="57658" end="57663" title="Adele" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q485673" start="57665" end="57672" title="Garbage (band)" label="Garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q151231" start="57674" end="57686" title="Annie Lennox" label="Annie Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q291300" start="57688" end="57702" title="Cerys Matthews" label="Cerys Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q235934" start="57704" end="57719" title="Lisa Stansfield" label="Lisa Stansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q234685" start="57721" end="57736" title="Michelle Branch" label="Michelle Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213196" start="57738" end="57750" title="Dan Brodbeck" label="Dan Brodbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q34166" start="57752" end="57757" title="Slash (musician)" label="Slash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592917" start="57759" end="57773" title="Graham Hopkins" label="Graham Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q157953" start="57775" end="57794" title="Benjamin Kowalewicz" label="Benjamin Kowalewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340993" start="57796" end="57807" title="Vic Fuentes" label="Vic Fuentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q722001" start="57816" end="57826" title="Luke Evans" label="Luke Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q970787" start="57831" end="57846" title="François Arnaud (actor)" label="Francois Arnaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q263024" start="57848" end="57857" title="Questlove" label="Questlove"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730833" start="57859" end="57865" title="Kiesza" label="Kiesza"/>
<link wikidata="Q533781" start="57867" end="57872" title="Diplo" label="Diplo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521640" start="57874" end="57886" title="Gao Xiaosong" label="Gao Xiaosong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769286" start="57901" end="57950" title="The Tim Parry Johnathan Ball Foundation for Peace" label="The Tim Parry Johnathan Ball Foundation for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q777287" start="57952" end="57962" title="Ali Hewson" label="Ali Hewson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682618" start="57964" end="57973" title="Adi Roche" label="Adi Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092067" start="57978" end="58010" title="Chernobyl Children International" label="Chernobyl Children International"/>
<link wikidata="Q188713" start="58237" end="58246" title="The Kinks" label="The Kinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q364890" start="58257" end="58268" title="Dave Davies" label="Dave Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q169298" start="58760" end="58766" title="Zombie (The Cranberries song)" label="Zombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630118" start="58931" end="58934" title="TMZ" label="TMZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q48720091" start="59022" end="59032" title="Bad Wolves" label="Bad Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="59102" end="59130" title="Billboard charts" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q30303319" start="59196" end="59221" title="60th Annual Grammy Awards" label="60th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q98910463" start="59288" end="59294" title="Dreams (Cranberries song)" label="Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q478225" start="59315" end="59325" title="Croke Park" label="Croke Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778354" start="59380" end="59388" title="Limerick GAA" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778300" start="59397" end="59415" title="Liam MacCarthy Cup" label="Liam MacCarthy Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778808" start="59423" end="59462" title="All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship" label="All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q85799211" start="59637" end="59649" title="Saint Sister" label="Saint Sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="59662" end="59678" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q98910463" start="59732" end="59738" title="Dreams (The Cranberries song)" label="Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942467" start="59782" end="59806" title="St Anne&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Belfast" label="St Anne&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="59810" end="59817" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q63219332" start="59821" end="59831" title="Lyra McKee" label="Lyra McKee"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136809" start="59857" end="59864" title="New IRA" label="New IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704746" start="59934" end="59944" title="Noel Hogan" label="Noel Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60642525" start="60048" end="60058" title="In the End (album)" label="In the End"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740860" start="60433" end="60439" title="Amazon Music" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29045210" start="60599" end="60613" title="Something Else (The Cranberries album)" label="Something Else"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953799" start="60659" end="60677" title="Are You Listening? (Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan album)" label="Are You Listening?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735264" start="60834" end="60844" title="No Baggage" label="No Baggage"/>
<link wikidata="Q9593" start="60936" end="60942" title="ITunes Store" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351100" start="61767" end="61784" title="Recording Academy" label="Recording Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="62195" end="62204" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734705" start="62237" end="62243" title="Linger (The Cranberries song)" label="Linger"/>
<link wikidata="Q98910463" start="62296" end="62302" title="Dreams (The Cranberries song)" label="Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199458" start="62402" end="62418" title="Amanda Petrusich" label="Amanda Petrusich"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="62720" end="62722" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233232" start="62937" end="62943" title="Hozier" label="Hozier"/>
<link wikidata="Q61113" start="62948" end="62965" title="Foster the People" label="Foster the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308877" start="63058" end="63067" title="Hot Press" label="Hot Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q93728368" start="63075" end="63087" title="Stuart Clark (critic)" label="Stuart Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q55334267" start="63292" end="63302" title="Shinawil" label="Larry Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642423" start="64247" end="64259" title="Una Mullally" label="Una Mullally"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="64269" end="64287" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="64630" end="64643" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="64796" end="64831" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Australian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852360" start="65371" end="65387" title="Another Magazine" label="Another Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="65631" end="65642" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="65644" end="65650" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q311655" start="65655" end="65664" title="Tom Petty" label="Tom Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28769131" start="65995" end="66008" title="Maggie Rogers" label="Maggie Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806322" start="66107" end="66114" title="AsiaOne" label="AsiaOne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="66318" end="66321" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q464650" start="66381" end="66390" title="Faye Wong" label="Faye Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272493" start="66475" end="66489" title="Florence Welch" label="Florence Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q23215" start="66491" end="66496" title="Adele" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534249" start="66498" end="66504" title="Halsey (singer)" label="Halsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q56741947" start="66506" end="66526" title="Heather Baron-Gracie" label="Heather Baron-Gracie"/>
<link wikidata="Q234685" start="66528" end="66543" title="Michelle Branch" label="Michelle Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q30449" start="66548" end="66561" title="Avril Lavigne" label="Avril Lavigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096518" start="67009" end="67016" title="RTÉ One" label="RTÉ One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228751" start="67133" end="67145" title="Dave Fanning" label="Dave Fanning"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534959" wikidata="Q6629554" url="?curid=534959" title="List of multivariable calculus topics">
<text>This is a list of multivariable calculus topics. See also multivariable calculus, vector calculus, list of real analysis topics, list of calculus topics.

*Closed and exact differential forms
*Contact (mathematics)
*Contour integral
*Contour line
*Critical point (mathematics)
*Curl (mathematics)
*Current (mathematics)
*Curvature
*Curvilinear coordinates
*Del
*Differential form
*Differential operator
*Directional derivative
*Divergence
*Divergence theorem
*Double integral
*Equipotential surface
*Euler&#x27;s theorem on homogeneous functions
*Exterior derivative
*Flux
*Frenet–Serret formulas
*Gauss&#x27;s law
*Gradient
*Green&#x27;s theorem
*Green&#x27;s identities
*Harmonic function
*Helmholtz decomposition
*Hessian matrix
*Hodge star operator
*Inverse function theorem
*Irrotational vector field
*Isoperimetry
*Jacobian matrix
*Lagrange multiplier
*Lamellar vector field
*Laplacian
*Laplacian vector field
*Level set
*Line integral
* Matrix calculus
*Mixed derivatives
*Monkey saddle
*Multiple integral
*Newtonian potential
*Parametric equation
*Parametric surface
*Partial derivative
*Partial differential equation
*Potential
*Real coordinate space
*Saddle point
*Scalar field
*Solenoidal vector field
*Stokes&#x27; theorem
*Submersion
*Surface integral
*Symmetry of second derivatives
*Taylor&#x27;s theorem
*Total derivative
*Vector field
*Vector operator
*Vector potential</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2035437" start="58" end="80" title="multivariable calculus" label="multivariable calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200802" start="82" end="97" title="vector calculus" label="vector calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636132" start="99" end="127" title="list of real analysis topics" label="list of real analysis topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608708" start="129" end="152" title="list of calculus topics" label="list of calculus topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100733" start="156" end="191" title="Closed and exact differential forms" label="Closed and exact differential forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q829376" start="193" end="214" title="Contact (mathematics)" label="Contact (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q856103" start="216" end="232" title="Contour integral" label="Contour integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653802" start="234" end="246" title="Contour line" label="Contour line"/>
<link wikidata="Q577705" start="248" end="276" title="Critical point (mathematics)" label="Critical point (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q206310" start="278" end="296" title="Curl (mathematics)" label="Curl (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001145" start="298" end="319" title="Current (mathematics)" label="Current (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q214881" start="321" end="330" title="Curvature" label="Curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790208" start="332" end="355" title="Curvilinear coordinates" label="Curvilinear coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q334508" start="357" end="360" title="Del" label="Del"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047080" start="362" end="379" title="Differential form" label="Differential form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058681" start="381" end="402" title="Differential operator" label="Differential operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q383851" start="404" end="426" title="Directional derivative" label="Directional derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q189000" start="428" end="438" title="Divergence" label="Divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q338886" start="440" end="458" title="Divergence theorem" label="Divergence theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q844937" start="460" end="475" title="Double integral" label="Double integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175077" start="477" end="498" title="Equipotential surface" label="Equipotential surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132952" start="500" end="545" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s theorem on homogeneous functions" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s theorem on homogeneous functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754547" start="547" end="566" title="Exterior derivative" label="Exterior derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485344" start="568" end="572" title="Flux" label="Flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q947922" start="574" end="596" title="Frenet–Serret formulas" label="Frenet–Serret formulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q173356" start="598" end="614" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s law" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q173582" start="616" end="624" title="Gradient" label="Gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q321237" start="626" end="646" title="Green&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Green&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544810" start="648" end="671" title="Green&amp;#x27;s identities" label="Green&amp;#x27;s identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q599027" start="673" end="690" title="Harmonic function" label="Harmonic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153588" start="692" end="715" title="Helmholtz decomposition" label="Helmholtz decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q620495" start="717" end="731" title="Hessian matrix" label="Hessian matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622692" start="733" end="752" title="Hodge star operator" label="Hodge star operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q931001" start="754" end="778" title="Inverse function theorem" label="Inverse function theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588205" start="780" end="805" title="Irrotational vector field" label="Irrotational vector field"/>
<link wikidata="Q617417" start="807" end="819" title="Isoperimetry" label="Isoperimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q506041" start="821" end="836" title="Jacobian matrix" label="Jacobian matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q598870" start="838" end="857" title="Lagrange multiplier" label="Lagrange multiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156582" start="859" end="880" title="Lamellar vector field" label="Lamellar vector field"/>
<link wikidata="Q203484" start="882" end="891" title="Laplacian" label="Laplacian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25098516" start="893" end="915" title="Laplacian vector field" label="Laplacian vector field"/>
<link wikidata="Q126955" start="917" end="926" title="Level set" label="Level set"/>
<link wikidata="Q467699" start="928" end="941" title="Line integral" label="Line integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q29167" start="944" end="959" title="Matrix calculus" label="Matrix calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q186475" start="961" end="978" title="Mixed derivatives" label="Mixed derivatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q382375" start="980" end="993" title="Monkey saddle" label="Monkey saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q844937" start="995" end="1012" title="Multiple integral" label="Multiple integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4328383" start="1014" end="1033" title="Newtonian potential" label="Newtonian potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q35889" start="1035" end="1054" title="Parametric equation" label="Parametric equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071743" start="1056" end="1074" title="Parametric surface" label="Parametric surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q186475" start="1076" end="1094" title="Partial derivative" label="Partial derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q271977" start="1096" end="1125" title="Partial differential equation" label="Partial differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202245" start="1127" end="1136" title="Potential" label="Potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q15629907" start="1138" end="1159" title="Real coordinate space" label="Real coordinate space"/>
<link wikidata="Q690935" start="1161" end="1173" title="Saddle point" label="Saddle point"/>
<link wikidata="Q193460" start="1175" end="1187" title="Scalar field" label="Scalar field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265039" start="1189" end="1212" title="Solenoidal vector field" label="Solenoidal vector field"/>
<link wikidata="Q467756" start="1214" end="1234" title="Stokes&amp;#x27; theorem" label="Stokes&amp;#x27; theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420023" start="1236" end="1246" title="Submersion (mathematics)" label="Submersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q598146" start="1248" end="1264" title="Surface integral" label="Surface integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503239" start="1266" end="1296" title="Symmetry of second derivatives" label="Symmetry of second derivatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137206" start="1298" end="1319" title="Taylor&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Taylor&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q636889" start="1321" end="1337" title="Total derivative" label="Total derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q186247" start="1339" end="1351" title="Vector field" label="Vector field"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917838" start="1353" end="1368" title="Vector operator" label="Vector operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q521126" start="1370" end="1386" title="Vector potential" label="Vector potential"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534960" wikidata="Q232296" url="?curid=534960" title="Texas County">
<text>Texas County is the name of two counties in the United States:

* Texas County, Missouri
* Texas County, Oklahoma

==See also==
* List of counties in Texas</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q232296" start="0" end="12" title="Texas County" label="Texas County"/>
<link wikidata="Q477870" start="66" end="88" title="Texas County, Missouri" label="Texas County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q485017" start="91" end="113" title="Texas County, Oklahoma" label="Texas County, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q757323" start="130" end="155" title="List of counties in Texas" label="List of counties in Texas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534967" wikidata="Q1033840" url="?curid=534967" title="Canto General">
<text>Canto General is Pablo Neruda&#x27;s tenth book of poems. It was first published in Mexico in 1950, by &quot;Talleres Gráficos de la Nación&quot;. Neruda began to compose it in 1938.

&quot;Canto General&quot; (&quot;General Song&quot;) consists of 15 sections, 231 poems, and more than 15,000 lines. This work attempts to be a history or encyclopedia of the entire American Western Hemisphere, or New World, from a Hispanic American perspective.

==The XV Cantos==
*First Canto. A Lamp on Earth.
*Second Canto. The Heights of Macchu Picchu
*Third Canto. The Conquistadors
*Fourth Canto. The Liberators
*Fifth Canto. The Sand Betrayed
*Sixth Canto. America, I Do Not Invoke Your Name in Vain
*Seventh Canto. Canto General of Chile
*Eighth Canto. The Earth’s Name is Juan
*Ninth Canto. Let the Woodcutter Awaken
*Tenth Canto. The Fugitive
*Eleventh Canto. The Flower of Punitaqui
*Twelfth Canto. The Rivers of Song
*Thirteenth Canto. New Year’s Chorale for the Country in Darkness
*Fourteenth Canto. The Great Ocean
*Fifteenth Canto. I Am

==The Heights of Macchu Picchu==
&quot;&#x27;The Heights of Macchu Picchu&quot; (&quot;Las Alturas de Macchu Picchu&quot;) is Canto II of the &quot;Canto General&quot;. The twelve poems that comprise this section of the epic work have been translated into English regularly since even before its initial publication in Spanish in 1950, beginning with a 1948 translation by Hoffman Reynolds Hays in &quot;The Tiger&#x27;s Eye&quot;, a journal of arts and literature published out of New York from 1947–1949, and followed closely by a translation by Waldeen in 1950 in a pamphlet called &quot;Let the Rail Splitter Awake and Other Poems&quot; for a Marxist publishing house in New York. The first mass-marketed commercial publication of the piece did not come until 1966 with Nathanial Tarn&#x27;s translation, followed by John Felstiner&#x27;s translation alongside a book on the translation process, &quot;Translating Neruda&quot; in 1980. Following that is Jack Schmitt&#x27;s full translation of &quot;Canto General&quot;—the first to appear in English—in 1993. In recent years there have been several partial or full new translations: Stephen Kessler in 2001 for a photo/journey book on the ancient ruins (&quot;Machu Picchu&quot; edited by Barry Brukoff) and Mark Eisner&#x27;s re-translation of seven of the twelve poems (Cantos I, IV, VI, VIII, X, XI, and XII) for an anthology celebrating the centennial of Neruda&#x27;s birth in 2004, &quot;The Essential Neruda&quot;.

===Chronological bibliography===

* “Heights of Macchu Picchu,” Trans. by H. R. Hays. &quot;The Tiger’s Eye&quot;, 1.5, (1948). New York: Tiger’s Eye Publishing Co., 1947–1949. (112–122)
* &quot;Let the Rail Splitter Awake and Other Poems,&quot; 1950. Trans. Waldeen. Note by Samuel Sillen. New York: Masses &amp; Mainstream.
* “Summits of Macchu Picchu,” Trans. by Ángel Flores, in Whit Burnett, ed., &quot;105 Greatest Living Authors Present the World&#x27;s Best Stories, Humor, Drama, Biography, History, Essays, Poetry&quot; New York: Dial Press, 1950. (356–367)
* &quot;The Heights of Macchu Picchu,&quot; 1966. Trans. Nathanial Tarn. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux; London: Jonathan Cape Ltd. 
* &quot;The Heights of Macchu Picchu&quot;, trans. by Hower Zimmon, et al. Iowa City: Seamark Press, 1971.
* “The Heights of Macchu Picchu,” trans. Tom Raworth, in E. Cariacciolo-Tejo, ed., &quot;The Penguin Book of Latin American Verse&quot; Baltimore: Penguin, 1971.
* “Heights of Macchu Picchu,” trans. John Felstiner, in John Felstiner, &quot;Translating Neruda: The Way to Macchu Picchu&quot; Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1980.
* &quot;The Heights of Macchu Picchu&quot;, trans. David Young. Baldon, Oregon: Songs Before Zero Press, 1986.
* &quot;Machu Picchu&quot;, trans. Stephen Kessler. Boston: Bullfinch Press, 2001.
* several poems from &quot;The Heights of Macchu Picchu&quot;, trans. Mark Eisner in &quot;The Essential Neruda: Selected Poems&quot;. San Francisco: City Lights, 2004.
* &quot;The Heights of Macchu Picchu&quot;, trans. by Tomás Q. Morín, Port Townsend: Copper Canyon Press, 2015.

==Musical versions==
The &quot;Canto General&quot; has been set to music by several musicians.

===Aparcoa===
* &quot;Canto General – Obra poetico musical&quot; by Chilean folk band Aparcoa in collaboration with Pablo Neruda himself and with contributions by composers Sergio Ortega and Gustavo Becerra was staged on 5 December 1970 at the &quot;Teatro Municipal&quot; of Santiago de Chile. Canto General (Aparcoa album), by Chilean folk band Aparcoa, recorded various times between 1970 and 1974 and released in different countries in collaboration with narrators Mario Lorca (Chilean), Marés González (Argentinian), Gisela May (German), Humberto Duvauchelle (Chilean)

===Mikis Theodorakis===
* The best-known musical setting is by Mikis Theodorakis, a composer and politician from Greece. He completed four movements in 1973, recording these the following year. In 1975 and 1981, he expanded the work to seven and thirteen movements, respectively, recording the complete &quot;oratorio&quot; live in Munich in 1981. Vocals, in Spanish, on the incomplete 1974 recording are by Maria Farantouri and Petros Pandis.
* Canto General (Theodorakis) (1970–1981), oratorio by Mikis Theodorakis, recorded various times:
** Canto General (1974 album), studio recording following the 1974 Paris première, incomplete (4 movements)
** Canto General (1975 album), live recording from Piraeus and Athens, complete recording of the then-valid form of the oratorio (7 movements)
** Canto General (1980 album), live recording from East Berlin (7 movements)
** Canto General (1981 album), live recording from Munich, first recording of the complete oratorio (13 movements)
** Canto General (1985 album), performed by the &quot;Hamburger Sängerhaufen&quot; (9 movements)
** Canto General (1988 album), live recording from St. Paul, Minnesota (USA), first recording of the complete oratorio in the United States, conducted by Mikis Theodorakis and Stefan Sköld, soloists Mary Preus and Petros Pandis, produced by Patricia Porter and recorded by Ralph Karsten, from the July 27, 1986 performance in the O&#x27;Shaughnessy Auditorium of the College of St. Catherine (13 movements)
** Canto General (1989 album), studio recording for a ballet performance, conducted by Loukas Karytinos (13 movements) in Berlin 1989 (Wergo 2CD)
*Orquestra de nuestra Terra and Chor der EÖ under Leopold Griessler 2014 (Gramola 2CD).

===Los Jaivas===
* Of no less importance is &quot;Alturas de Machu Picchu&quot; (1982) on texts from &quot;The Heights of Macchu Picchu&quot; by the prominent Chilean rock band Los Jaivas; the rendering of &quot;Sube a Nacer Conmigo Hermano&quot; present in this album, a recording of the &quot;Canto XII&quot; from the &quot;Heights of Macchu Picchu&quot; section nearly in its entirety, is especially renowned.

===Others===
* Quilapayún Chante Neruda (1983) by Chilean Folk Band Quilapayún contains three songs based on lyrics from &quot;Canto General.&quot;
* Swedish composer Allan Pettersson&#x27;s &quot;12th Symphony&quot; (1974) uses the 3rd section (&quot;Los muertos de la plaza (28 de enero de 1946. Santiago de Chile&quot;) of the 5th Canto (&quot;La arena traicionada&quot;), in Swedish translation, as its literary basis.
* &quot;Canto General&quot; (1974), by Dutch composer Peter Schat (1935–2003).

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34189" start="17" end="36" title="Pablo Neruda" label="Pablo Neruda&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="398" end="407" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q653884" start="416" end="432" title="Hispanic America" label="Hispanic America"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1412" end="1433" title="Hoffman Reynolds Hays" label="Hoffman Reynolds Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q531380" start="1587" end="1594" title="Waldeen" label="Waldeen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4326" end="4333" title="Aparcoa" label="Aparcoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q210532" start="4413" end="4426" title="Sergio Ortega (composer)" label="Sergio Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4431" end="4446" title="Gustavo Becerra" label="Gustavo Becerra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="4516" end="4533" title="Santiago de Chile" label="Santiago de Chile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4535" end="4564" title="Canto General (Aparcoa album)" label="Canto General (Aparcoa album)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4587" end="4594" title="Aparcoa" label="Aparcoa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4709" end="4720" title="Mario Lorca" label="Mario Lorca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4732" end="4746" title="Marés González" label="Marés González"/>
<link wikidata="Q452526" start="4762" end="4772" title="Gisela May" label="Gisela May"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4783" end="4803" title="Humberto Duvauchelle" label="Humberto Duvauchelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q151976" start="4878" end="4895" title="Mikis Theodorakis" label="Mikis Theodorakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="4928" end="4934" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q234918" start="5223" end="5239" title="Maria Farantouri" label="Maria Farantouri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5244" end="5257" title="Petros Pandis" label="Petros Pandis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5261" end="5288" title="Canto General (Theodorakis)" label="Canto General (Theodorakis)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85477" start="5302" end="5310" title="oratorio" label="oratorio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5360" end="5386" title="Canto General (1974 album)" label="Canto General (1974 album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033848" start="5468" end="5494" title="Canto General (1975 album)" label="Canto General (1975 album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="5516" end="5523" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5611" end="5637" title="Canto General (1980 album)" label="Canto General (1980 album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56037" start="5659" end="5670" title="East Berlin" label="East Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5688" end="5714" title="Canto General (1981 album)" label="Canto General (1981 album)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5803" end="5829" title="Canto General (1985 album)" label="Canto General (1985 album)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5900" end="5926" title="Canto General (1988 album)" label="Canto General (1988 album)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6307" end="6333" title="Canto General (1989 album)" label="Canto General (1989 album)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6391" end="6407" title="Loukas Karytinos" label="Loukas Karytinos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6500" end="6517" title="Leopold Griessler" label="Leopold Griessler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6589" end="6612" title="Alturas de Machu Picchu" label="Alturas de Machu Picchu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6646" end="6674" title="#The Heights of Macchu Picchu" label="The Heights of Macchu Picchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870545" start="6716" end="6726" title="Los Jaivas" label="Los Jaivas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6751" end="6779" title="Sube a Nacer Conmigo Hermano" label="Sube a Nacer Conmigo Hermano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764574" start="6968" end="6992" title="Quilapayún Chante Neruda" label="Quilapayún Chante Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140278" start="7021" end="7031" title="Quilapayún" label="Quilapayún"/>
<link wikidata="Q183359" start="7120" end="7136" title="Allan Pettersson" label="Allan Pettersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034318" start="7430" end="7441" title="Peter Schat" label="Peter Schat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534968" wikidata="Q227132" url="?curid=534968" title="Teton County">
<text>Teton County is the name of several counties in the United States:

*Teton County, Idaho
*Teton County, Montana
*Teton County, Wyoming</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q491068" start="69" end="88" title="Teton County, Idaho" label="Teton County, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q496685" start="90" end="111" title="Teton County, Montana" label="Teton County, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q488912" start="113" end="134" title="Teton County, Wyoming" label="Teton County, Wyoming"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534969" wikidata="Q7625868" url="?curid=534969" title="Strzyża">
<text>Strzyza (; ) is an administrative district of the city of Gdańsk, Poland, named after a creek. It is a part of the Wrzeszcz borough. Most of it is covered by small family houses.

As part of the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland, Strzyża was a private church village of the Cistercian Monastery in Oliwa, administratively located in the Gdańsk County in the Pomeranian Voivodeship.

The Gdańsk Strzyża railway station is located in Strzyża.

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==
* Map of Strzyża</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7625868" start="0" end="7" title="Strzyża" label="Strzyza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="58" end="64" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="66" end="72" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q541765" start="115" end="123" title="Wrzeszcz" label="Wrzeszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="195" end="225" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="271" end="281" title="Cistercians" label="Cistercian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775766" start="282" end="291" title="Oliwa Abbey" label="Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447540" start="295" end="300" title="Oliwa" label="Oliwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048909" start="355" end="377" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship (1466–1772)" label="Pomeranian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16549069" start="384" end="414" title="Gdańsk Strzyża railway station" label="Gdańsk Strzyża railway station"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534970" wikidata="Q6847260" url="?curid=534970" title="Mike Hogan">
<text>Mike Hogan may refer to:

* Mike Hogan (American football) (born 1954), former NFL running back
* Mike Hogan (athlete) (born 1943), British Olympic hurdler
* Mike Hogan (The Cranberries) (born 1973), member of Irish alternative rock band The Cranberries
* Mike Hogan, member of Christian rock band David Crowder Band
* Mike Hogan (sportscaster) (born 1963), Canadian sportscaster
*Mike Hogan (Florida politician), Duval County supervisor of elections, former tax appraiser, and former state legislator

==See also==
* Michael Hogan (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6847260" start="0" end="10" title="Mike Hogan" label="Mike Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847262" start="28" end="58" title="Mike Hogan (American football)" label="Mike Hogan (American football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42287749" start="98" end="118" title="Mike Hogan (athlete)" label="Mike Hogan (athlete)"/>
<link wikidata="Q483810" start="158" end="186" title="Mike Hogan (The Cranberries)" label="Mike Hogan (The Cranberries)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232695" start="298" end="316" title="David Crowder Band" label="David Crowder Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847266" start="319" end="344" title="Mike Hogan (sportscaster)" label="Mike Hogan (sportscaster)"/>
<link wikidata="Q63463536" start="381" end="412" title="Mike Hogan (Florida politician)" label="Mike Hogan (Florida politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927867" start="518" end="548" title="Michael Hogan (disambiguation)" label="Michael Hogan (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534973" wikidata="Q2121535" url="?curid=534973" title="Qian">
<text>Qian may refer to:

*Cash (Chinese coin), a circular copper coin with a square hole in the center used from the 4th century BCE to the 20th century CE 
*Guizhou, abbreviated as &quot;Qián&quot; (黔), province of China
*Mace (unit), or Qian, one of the Chinese units of measurement, equal to 5g
*Qian (hexagram), the first hexagram of the &quot;I Ching&quot; 
*Qian (mass), a Chinese unit of weight (钱 / 錢)
*Qian (surname), a Chinese surname (钱 / 錢)
*Qian County, in Xianyang, Shaanxi, China
*Qian Mountains, mountain range in Northeast China </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8572111" start="21" end="40" title="Cash (Chinese coin)" label="Cash (Chinese coin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47097" start="153" end="160" title="Guizhou" label="Guizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373696" start="218" end="229" title="Mace (unit)" label="Mace (unit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235424" start="294" end="309" title="Qian (hexagram)" label="Qian (hexagram)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131850518" start="359" end="370" title="Qian (mass)" label="Qian (mass)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541846" start="406" end="420" title="Qian (surname)" label="Qian (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201675" start="449" end="460" title="Qian County" label="Qian County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322040" start="491" end="505" title="Qian Mountains" label="Qian Mountains"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534976" wikidata="Q247565" url="?curid=534976" title="Terrell County">
<text>Terrell County may refer to:

==Places==
* Terrell County, Georgia
* Terrell County, Texas
* Terrell County Independent School District, a public school district based in Sanderson, Texas

==Ships==
* USS &quot;Terrell County&quot; (LST-1157), a United States Navy tank landing ship in commission from 1952 to 1971</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q247565" start="0" end="14" title="Terrell County" label="Terrell County"/>
<link wikidata="Q503492" start="43" end="66" title="Terrell County, Georgia" label="Terrell County, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26898" start="69" end="90" title="Terrell County, Texas" label="Terrell County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703396" start="93" end="135" title="Terrell County Independent School District" label="Terrell County Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874678" start="201" end="242" title="USS Terrell County (LST-1157)" label="USS &amp;quot;Terrell County&amp;quot; (LST-1157)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534977" wikidata="Q1371974" url="?curid=534977" title="Short Empire">
<text>The Short Empire was a medium-range four-engined monoplane flying boat, designed and developed by Short Brothers during the 1930s to meet the requirements of the growing commercial airline sector, with a particular emphasis upon its usefulness upon the core routes that served the United Kingdom. It was developed and manufactured in parallel with the Short Sunderland maritime patrol bomber, which went on to serve in the Second World War; a further derivative that was later developed was the piggy-back Short Mayo Composite.

The development of the Short Empire had been heavily influenced by its primary customer, Imperial Airways, which had originally developed the requirements to which it was initially ordered and designed. Imperial Airways, and its successor, the British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC), along with Qantas and TEAL, operated the type in commercial service. Upon entering service, the Empire routinely flew between the British mainland and Australia and the various British colonies in Africa and Asia, typically carrying a combination of passenger and mail cargoes; Empires were also used on various other routes, such as between Bermuda and New York City.

The Empire also saw military service during the Second World War. The Royal Air Force (RAF), Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF), Royal New Zealand Air Force (RNZAF), and briefly the Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF) used the type to conduct various military operations, particularly as an airborne platform for anti-submarine patrols and for general transport duties.

==Development==
===Origins===
During the 1930s, global demand for air travel was consistently and rapidly growing. Thus, keen to grow its share of this emerging market, British airline Imperial Airways was keen to expand and sought the latest technology to do so. In particular, Imperial Airways&#x27; technical adviser, Major Robert Hobart Mayo developed a specification for a new type of aircraft to serve both passenger and freight requirements throughout the world. This specification sought an aircraft that would be capable of carrying up to 24 passengers in spacious comfort along with adequate room for airmail or freight while simultaneously being capable of a cruising speed of and a range of at least ; the capacity for an extended range of to serve the North Atlantic route was also stipulated. According to aviation author Geoffrey Norris, at the time, it was considered to be impossible to construct a land-based aeroplane of such size and weight that still possessed acceptable landing/take-off performance, thus it was determined that a flying boat would be required.

Early on, it was apparent that Short Brothers, which had previously developed and produced several large flying boats for Imperial Airways and the Royal Air Force (RAF) that had proven to be sound designs in terms of performance and safety, would be a frontrunner to fulfil the requirement. However, Shorts was hesitant to build such an aircraft, due to the necessary advances involved, straight from the drawing board without the production of a preceding prototype, and thus requested to be allowed the time to build such an aircraft; this was rejected by Imperial Airways, stating that such a delay was not permissible. In 1935, Imperial Airways announced the placement of an order for 28 flying boats of an as-of-yet undesigned type, weighing 18 tonnes each; the order was reportedly hailed as being &quot;one of the world&#x27;s boldest experiments in aviation&quot;, while sceptics referred to the decision less favourably as being a gamble.

A design team led by Arthur Gouge set about designing what would become the Empire. It was quickly determined that, in order to have sufficient clearance between the tips of the propellers and the water, the wing would need to be in a high mounted position; initially to be housed in a hump above the fuselage for sufficient height, the fuselage depth was instead increased, providing more internal volume than required but enabling a lighter and stronger integration of the cantilever wing with the fuselage. Shorts&#x27; own convention for wide planing bottomed hulls for its flying boats was overturned as the 18-tonne weight would generate excessive drag with such a configuration; following a series of water tank experiments, a new type of planing bottom with a reduced beam deemed suitable. The basic aerodynamic design was derived from the smaller Short Scion Senior floatplane, which served in all but name as a half-scale prototype for the Empire and for its sibling, the military-orientated Short Sunderland.

At the time of development, the British aircraft industry had never attempted to construct an aeroplane of this size and complexity before; accordingly, many new techniques were devised to overcome problems encountered, particularly during its construction process. Shorts had to develop its own machinery to produce the necessary T-shaped Hiduminium alloy lengths that comprised the main spar. A specialised and patented flap arrangement, known as Gouge flaps after their creator, was employed on the Empire to increase wing area with only a small increase in drag and without heavy disrupting airflow over the top of the aerofoil; in operation, the lift coefficient of the wing could be increased by 30 percent, reducing the landing speed by 12 per cent, without employing any trimming to adjust.

===Initial production===

On 4 July 1936, the first Empire flying boat to be built, G-ADHL, named &quot;Canopus&quot;, conducted its maiden flight, flown by Shorts&#x27; chief test pilot, John Lankester Parker. Early flights of the type were relatively trouble-free, Parker declaring his satisfaction with the aircraft&#x27;s performance; the new styling of the planing bottom used also quickly proved its value. On 17 September 1936, G-ADHL first flew on behalf of Imperial Airways, piloted by Major H G Brackley, Imperial Airways&#x27; air superintendent; the final delivery and proving flight of the aircraft to Marseilles, France took place on 22 October 1936. The first series of the Short Empires, the &quot;S.23&quot;, could carry five crew, 17 passengers, and 4,480 lb (2,035 kg) of cargo at a maximum speed of 174 knots (320 km/h) and was powered by four Bristol Pegasus Xc radial engines.

The second Empire and the first of the long-range models to be produced, G-ADHM, named &quot;Caledonia&quot;, performed her first flight on 15 September 1936 and was delivered to Imperial Airways on 4 December 1936. From September 1936 onwards, the Empire was produced at a rate of one aircraft per month; typically, each aircraft&#x27;s delivery date occurred only a few days after having performed its maiden flight, the hand-over sometimes happened immediately following the first flight. The Empire was officially known as the C-class by Imperial Airways and each aircraft operated by them was given a name beginning with a C.

On 26 February 1938, the final three Empires of the initial order placed by Imperial Airways – &quot;Coorong&quot;, &quot;Coogee&quot; and &quot;Corio&quot; – were diverted from the Imperial Airways order and were delivered instead to the Anglo-Australian Qantas Empire Airways. In late 1937, due to Imperial Airways&#x27; satisfaction with its operational experience with the aircraft of the initial batch, the company placed a follow-on order for another 11 Empires; combined with the original order of 28 this had the distinction of being the largest single order to have ever been placed for a British civil aircraft at that time. While the first three aircraft of the additional order were of the typical S.23 class, intended for Qantas Empire Airways, the rest were manufactured to a differing design, designated as the &quot;S.30&quot;. A total of 42 Empires were built, all at Short&#x27;s Rochester factory.

===Further development===
The &quot;S.30&quot; series was outfitted with four Bristol Perseus XIIc sleeve valve engines in the place of the Pegasus engines; the Perseus engines were more efficient but provided a lower power output of , but the decrease in developed thrust was effectively compensated for via the adoption of smaller diameter nacelles which had resulted in a substantial reduction in drag. It also had a strengthened airframe and used heavier gauge sheeting on the fuselage and wings; while these changes allowed the takeoff weight to be increased to with a corresponding range of , the S.30 had broadly the same performance as the preceding S.23 flying boats.

The first of the S.30 flying boats to be laid out and completed was G-AFCT, named &quot;Champion&quot;. In December 1938, the second S.30 aircraft G-AFCU, named &quot;Cabot&quot; became the first aircraft of the series to conduct the first successful takeoff. The last three aircraft of this order – &quot;Captain Cook&quot;, &quot;Clare&quot; and &quot;Aotearoa&quot; – were renamed and re-registered for use by TEAL. In 1939, a final S.30 flying boat, G-AFKZ, was ordered and delivered to Imperial Airways in late March 1940.

A total of four flying S.30 series flying boats – &quot;Cabot&quot;, &quot;Caribou&quot;, &quot;Clyde&quot; and &quot;Connemara&quot; – were equipped with in-flight refuelling equipment and extra fuel tanks in order that they could be used to provide a regular transatlantic airmail service. The concept was for the aircraft to take off at lower weights and, once airborne, take on extra fuel to reach an all up weight of , giving the aircraft a range of over . The extra fuel reduced the payload to against the of the standard aeroplane. The refuelling was performed by three converted Handley Page Harrow bombers, one operating out of Ireland and two out of Newfoundland.

In 1939, Imperial Airways placed a further follow-on order for a modified model of the S.30, designated as the &quot;S.33&quot;. This series had the same basic construction as its immediate predecessors, the new Pegasus XI engine, a development of the powerplant used by the original S.23 series, was adopted instead. Out of these three final aircraft, only two – &quot;Clifton&quot; and &quot;Cleopatra&quot; – would be completed and delivered to the newly formed British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC).

A substantial larger development of the Empire flying boat, effectively a new aircraft, was the &quot;S.26&quot;, designated as the G-class. The aircraft had similar appearance to the standard Empire, but was in fact roughly about 15 percent larger in all dimensions, as well as differing in its use of the more powerful Bristol Hercules radial engine. It adopted an improved hull design, featuring a wing span of and a length of . It was intended to be used for year-round services on the north Atlantic route. Only a small number were built, and these were quickly impressed into military service during the Second World War.

==Design==

The Short Empire flying boat was a relatively clean-looking high-wing monoplane, initially powered by an arrangement of four wing-mounted Bristol Pegasus Xc radial engines which drove de Havilland-built variable-pitch propellers. The engines were each enclosed within NACA cowls and mounted ahead of the leading edge of the wings. This allowed portions of the leading edge adjacent to the engines to be hinged forwards and used as platforms from which to maintain the engines.

The Pegasus Xc engines could each produce on takeoff, decreasing to at an altitude of 3,500 ft. Alternative engines were installed upon various models of the aircraft, of both greater and lower power outputs depending upon the model&#x27;s role and purpose. Initial production aircraft were designed for a gross weight; however, by 1939, many aircraft had been strengthened for an increased gross weight of . Overall, its useful load included of fuel (weighing ), of oil, assorted onboard equipment (weighing ), along with the payload itself and a crew complement of five (weighing ). The S.23 series achieved a top speed of at an altitude of along with a cruising speed of and a minimum flying speed of .

The wings had a flush-riveted Alclad covering and featured both Frise-type ailerons and the internally-developed Gouge flaps, the latter of which were actuated by an electric motor connected via a gearing system and screw jacks, allowing the flaps to be lowered in 60 seconds and raised within 90 seconds. Large cylindrical 325-gallon fuel tanks were accommodated within the wings, set in between the inner and outer engines, and were fitted as standard; on long-range variants of the aircraft, additional fuel tanks were present in the wings, up to a total of three containing 280 gallons, 325 gallons, and 175 gallons in each wing. Elements of the leading edge of the wing, set upon either side of the engine nacelles, could be folded down to act as servicing platforms for both the engines and the floats, the latter of which were carried upon tandem struts fixed onto the main spar and featured shock absorbers in order to eliminate undue torsional loads being transmitted to the wings by the sudden impact of waves while travelling at speed.

The hull, which had adopted a radically new shape, employed mainly traditional construction methods at Shorts. The structure used a combination of Z-shaped stringers and I-shaped girders to form triangular sections that ran along the chines located at the point where the fuselage sides met with the planing underside. As a measure to simplify manufacturing and to increase the available internal volume, only a simple curvature sweeping the sides of the hull into the chines was employed; on previous Shorts-built flying boats, a more complex S-shaped curvature and a sudden reduction in beam just above the chines had been employed instead.
The deep hull accommodated a total of two decks, the upper deck forming a lengthy compartment divided into sections to accommodate of freight and mail along with a storage space and a ship&#x27;s clerk&#x27;s office. This office contained controls such as electrical fuseboxes and circuit switches, ventilation controls, and fuelcocks. The lower deck contained a large marine compartment containing an anchor, a pair of drogues, a mooring bollard, and a boat hook, along with a step ladder to the cockpit; aft of the mooring compartment was the forward passenger saloon, followed by a central corridor flanked by the toilets and galley, a mid-ship cabin, a spacious promenade cabin, and finally an aft-cabin. The cabins could be alternatively outfitted with comfortable seating or bunks for sleeper services. Near the rear of the aircraft, a further compartment for the purpose of containing freight and mail was present which extended into the after fuselage.

The flying crew was seated in a spacious cockpit, also referred to as the bridge; the captain and co-pilot were seated side-by-side while the radio operator sat behind the captain, facing rearwards. The flight deck was relatively well equipped for the era, including features such as an autopilot; the flying instrumentation included a Hughes turn indicator, compass, and variometer, a Sperry Corporation artificial horizon and heading indicator, a Kollsman sensitive altimeter, a Marconi radio direction finder, a Smiths chronometer, and an attitude indicator. The radio operator was furnished with Marconi shock-proof radio sets for receiving and transmitting across the radio spectrum; the retractable loop antenna could be repositioned for visual or aural homing.

While designed as civil aircraft, examples of the type would not only see military service but be specifically refitted for this purpose. In 1941, two Empire flying boats – &quot;Clio&quot; and &quot;Cordelia&quot; returned to Shorts&#x27; Belfast facility, where they were modified with the addition of gun turrets in dorsal and rear positions and air to surface vessel (ASV) radar equipment installed on the top and sides of the fuselage. They were used by Coastal Command. More extensive military use was made of the Empire&#x27;s sibling design, the Short Sunderland.

==Operational history==
On 8 February 1937, one of the Empire flying boats, &quot;Castor&quot;, conducted the first regular flight, flying from Calshot, Hampshire, England to Alexandria, Egypt. This flight, which covered a distance of roughly non-stop, showed that Britain could move military material to its overseas bases by air. On 18 February 1937, &quot;Caledonia&quot;, the first of the Empires built, flew the same Calshot-Alexandria route; it was able to traverse the route non-stop at an average speed of 170 mph.

On 5 July 1937, the first crossing of the Atlantic by an Empire flying boat was conducted. On an experimental basis, &quot;Caledonia&quot;, piloted by Captain W N Cummings, flew a route from Foynes on the River Shannon, Ireland west to Botwood on the Bay of Exploits, Newfoundland. On the same day, an American Sikorsky S-42 flying boat flew the opposite direction. &quot;Caledonia&quot; took just over 15 hours (including a period spend searching for a landing spot), flying at an altitude of to cover —an average speed of about . On its return flight, conducted on 22 July 1937, &quot;Caledonia&quot; flew the same route in the opposite direction in a time of 12 hours; in comparison to the competing Sikorsky S-42, the Empire was able to traverse the overall route faster.

Several more survey flights of the Atlantic were made by &quot;Caledonia&quot; and &quot;Cambria&quot;. In August 1937, &quot;Cambria&quot; conducted the east–west flight in 14 hrs 24 min. In 1937, &quot;Cavalier&quot; was shipped to Bermuda and, after reassembly, started a service between there and New York City on 25 May 1937.

The Short Empire was designed to operate along the Imperial Airways routes to South Africa and Australia, where no leg was much over . After the design of the Empire had been finalised and production had commenced, it was recognised that, with some pressure from the United States, it would be desirable to offer a similar service across the Atlantic. The range of the S.23 was less than that of the equivalent American-built counterpart in the form of the Sikorsky S-42, and as such it could not provide a true transatlantic service. Two boats (&quot;Caledonia&quot; and &quot;Cambria&quot;) were lightened and furnished with long-range tanks; both aircraft were used in experimental in-flight refuelling trials in order for them to conduct the journey; these modifications came at the cost of being able to carry fewer passengers and less cargo.
In an attempt to manage the Atlantic crossing, an alternative &#x27;piggy-back&#x27; approach was trialled. This concept had been strongly advocated for by Imperial Airways&#x27; technical adviser, Major Robert Hobart Mayo, as a means of significantly increasing both range and payload, and had been well received by both the airline and the British Air Ministry, the latter of which placed an order with Shorts. Using the S.21 design (based on the S.23) as the carrier, a smaller four-engined floatplane, the Short S.20, was mounted upon its back; the most obvious difference between the S.21 and regular S.23 aeroplanes was the additional superstructure to carry the floatplane. Only a single example was built of the S.21 carrier aircraft, named &quot;Maia&quot;, and of the S.20, named &quot;Mercury&quot;. Together, they were known as the Short Mayo Composite.

On 21 July 1938, a successful mid-air launch of &quot;Mercury&quot; was executed off the west coast of Ireland while carrying a 600 lb payload of mixed cargo and mail; it arrived at Montreal, Canada, 22 hrs 22 min later, having achieved an average speed of . In further flights, the Empire-Mercury combination went on to set a number of long-distance records; one such flight was conducted on 6 October 1938, flying from Dundee, Scotland to Orange River, South Africa, covering in 42 hrs 5 min. However, in spite of the demonstrated merits and workability of the concept, the outbreak of the Second World War resulted in the effective termination of all development work. During wartime, there was interest in the concept using alternative land-based aircraft to deliver Hawker Hurricane fighter aircraft for aerial protection over the mid-Atlantic.

After Italy entered the Second World War in June 1940, it became impossible for mail to be safely flown between Britain and Egypt (and thus onto Australia) via the Mediterranean. Accordingly, a new &quot;Horseshoe Route&quot; was established that ran from Auckland/Sydney via Cairo (following the old &quot;Eastern Route&quot;) to Durban, South Africa, and thence by sea to Britain. This was restricted after the loss of Singapore in February 1942 to being between Durban and Calcutta, India.

Wartime experience in operating the type at overload weights resulted in the realisation that the Empires could take off at considerably higher weights than the conservative maxima provided by Shorts and, although the last Empire crossings to America were made in 1940 (by &quot;Clare&quot; and &quot;Clyde&quot;), many more flights were made on the long, demanding and vital over-water Lisbon-Bathurst flights.

==Variants==

42 &quot;C Class&quot; Short Empire flying boats were built, including 31 S.23s, nine S.30s and two S.33s.
* S.23 Mk I : powered by four Bristol Pegasus Xc poppet valve radial engines. 27 built.
* S.23 Mk II Bermuda : powered by four Bristol Pegasus Xc poppet valve radial engines. 2 built.
* S.23 Mk III Atlantic : powered by four Bristol Pegasus Xc poppet valve radial engines. two built.
* S.23M : two converted from impressed S.23 Mk I, with an ASV radar, armed with two Boulton Paul gun turrets and depth charges.
* S.30 Mk I : powered by four Bristol Perseus XIIc sleeve valve radial engines. One built.
* S.30 Mk I (Cathay) : powered by four Bristol Pegasus Xc poppet valve radial engines. One built.
* S.30 Mk II New Zealand : powered by four Bristol Perseus XIIc sleeve valve radial engines. One built.
* S.30 Mk III Atlantic : powered by four Bristol Perseus XIIc sleeve valve radial engines. Four built.
* S.30 Mk IV New Zealand : powered by four Bristol Perseus XIIc sleeve valve radial engines. Two built.
* S.30M : two converted from impressed S.30 Mk III Atlantic for ASV trials and transport duties.
* S.33 : powered by four Bristol Pegasus Xc poppet valve radial engines. Two completed, third example scrapped when 75% complete.

Many S.23, S.30 &amp; S.33 were re-engined during the war with Bristol Pegasus XXII poppet valve radial engines.

==Accidents and incidents==
Most accidents involving the aircraft occurred during landing and were generally attributed to pilot error.
For pilots trained on smaller less sophisticated aircraft judgement of height was difficult due to the high cockpit of the Empire, as well as the concept of using flaps to manage speed. With time improved familiarity reduced the accident rate. Once in service the structure was found to be weak in places, especially on the planing bottoms, which led to later models employing thicker gauge skins on the hull and wings.

;24 March 1937: G-ADVA &quot;Capricornus&quot; of Imperial Airways crashed in the Beaujolais mountains in Central France, during the inaugural Southampton to Alexandria scheduled service.
;27 November 1938:G-AETV &quot;Calpurnia&quot; of Imperial Airways crashed on landing on Lake Habbaniya, Iraq with the loss of four lives.
;21 January 1939:G-ADUU &quot;Cavalier&quot; of Imperial Airways ditched in the Atlantic Ocean due to carburettor icing affecting all four engines. The aircraft subsequently sank with the loss of three lives. Ten survivors were rescued by the American tanker .
;14 March 1939: G-ADVB &quot;Corsair&quot; (under Capt E.S. Alcock, brother of John Alcock) foundered during a forced landing on the Dungu River. After 10 months&#x27; salvage work, and one failed take-off attempt, it was flown off the river on 6 January 1940.
;1 May 1939: G-ADVD &quot;Challenger&quot; of Imperial Airways crashed on landing in Mozambique Harbour with the loss of two lives.
;February 1941:G-AFCX &quot;Clyde&quot; of BOAC was wrecked in a gale at Lisbon, Portugal.
;29 December 1941:G-ADUX &quot;Cassiopeia&quot; of BOAC crashed after striking debris on takeoff from Sabang, Indonesia, killing four.
;30 January 1942:G-AEUH &quot;Corio&quot; of BOAC was shot down by seven Japanese fighter aircraft and crashed off West Timor, killing 13 of the 18 people on board. The aircraft was owned by BOAC, but was operated by Qantas.
;28 February 1942: G-AETZ &quot;Circe&quot; of Qantas was shot down south of Java by Mitsubishi G4M &quot;Betty&quot; aircraft of the Imperial Japanese Navy with the loss of all on board.
;22 April 1943:G-AEUB (VH-ADU) crashed off Port Moresby, with 18 survivors.

==List of aircraft==



==Operators==

===Civil operators===
* Qantas
* TEAL
* Imperial Airways
* BOAC

===Military operators===
* Royal Australian Air Force
** No. 11 Squadron RAAF
** No. 13 Squadron RAAF
** No. 20 Squadron RAAF
** No. 33 Squadron RAAF
** No. 41 Squadron RAAF
* Royal Air Force
** No. 119 Squadron RAF

==Specifications (Short S.23)==
==See also==

==Notes==
==References==
* &quot;BOAC at War&quot; – Part 2 – Aeroplane Monthly – August 1975.
* 
* 
* 
* Knott, Richard, &#x27;Flying Boats of the Empire&#x27;, Robert Hale, 2011.
* Norris, Geoffrey. &quot;The Short Empire Boats&quot; (Aircraft in Profile Number 84). Leatherhead, Surrey, UK: Profile Publications Ltd., 1966.
* 
* Sims, Phillip, &quot;Adventurous Empires&quot;. Airlife Publishing, 2000. 
* 
==External links==

* Short C-Class Empire Boats – British Aircraft of World War II
* Century of Flight entry
** ATLANTIC ROUTINE &quot;Flight&quot; 1937 – contemporary article on Sikorksy S42 and Empire &quot;Caledonia&quot; operating across Atlantic
* LIFE photos by Margaret Bourke-White of CAVALIER and its competitor the Bermuda Clipper New York area 1937
* LIFE photos by Margaret Bourke-White of CALEDONIA with a Beech Staggerwing near Central Park New York City July 1937
* LIFE colour photos by Dmitri Kessel of CLARE at the La Guardia Marine Terminal New York City, during a series of mail/courier flights it, and CLYDE, operated to New York via Newfoundland during the Battle of Britain, 1940
* The Short Sunderland Flying Boat Describes the development of the Empire though to Sunderland through flying boats.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1371974" start="4" end="16" title="Short Empire" label="Short Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q627537" start="49" end="58" title="monoplane" label="monoplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153376" start="59" end="70" title="flying boat" label="flying boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656412" start="98" end="112" title="Short Brothers" label="Short Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="281" end="295" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q617547" start="352" end="368" title="Short Sunderland" label="Short Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="423" end="439" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646130" start="495" end="505" title="Piggyback (transportation)" label="piggy-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279953" start="506" end="526" title="Short Mayo Composite" label="Short Mayo Composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q591797" start="618" end="634" title="Imperial Airways" label="Imperial Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q846885" start="773" end="809" title="British Overseas Airways Corporation" label="British Overseas Airways Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="829" end="835" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669921" start="840" end="844" title="Tasman Empire Airways Limited" label="TEAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="969" end="978" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1015" end="1021" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="1026" end="1030" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="1160" end="1167" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1172" end="1185" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1258" end="1273" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="1281" end="1307" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q542164" start="1316" end="1343" title="Royal New Zealand Air Force" label="Royal New Zealand Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="1369" end="1393" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q591797" start="1739" end="1755" title="Imperial Airways" label="Imperial Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621307" start="2165" end="2172" title="airmail" label="airmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063640" start="2224" end="2238" title="cruising speed" label="cruising speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="2325" end="2333" title="Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="2786" end="2801" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q205451" start="3766" end="3775" title="propeller" label="propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q17227" start="4063" end="4073" title="cantilever" label="cantilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376482" start="4364" end="4368" title="Beam (nautical)" label="beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q15677907" start="4444" end="4462" title="Short Scion Senior" label="Short Scion Senior"/>
<link wikidata="Q617547" start="4590" end="4606" title="Short Sunderland" label="Short Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752921" start="4949" end="4959" title="Hiduminium" label="Hiduminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="4960" end="4965" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303116" start="4998" end="5002" title="Spar (aeronautics)" label="spar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407944" start="5031" end="5035" title="Flap (aeronautics)" label="flap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588180" start="5058" end="5068" title="Gouge flap" label="Gouge flap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698744" start="5232" end="5240" title="airfoil" label="aerofoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q581516" start="5388" end="5396" title="Trim tab" label="trimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="5542" end="5555" title="maiden flight" label="maiden flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244022" start="5597" end="5618" title="John Lankester Parker" label="John Lankester Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="6024" end="6034" title="Marseilles" label="Marseilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="6036" end="6042" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q917964" start="6273" end="6288" title="Bristol Pegasus" label="Bristol Pegasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q214098" start="6292" end="6305" title="radial engine" label="radial engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q24089724" start="7036" end="7055" title="Coorong, South Australia" label="&amp;quot;Coorong&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915712" start="7057" end="7075" title="Coogee, New South Wales" label="&amp;quot;Coogee&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170698" start="7080" end="7097" title="Corio, Victoria" label="&amp;quot;Corio&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="7197" end="7218" title="Qantas Empire Airways" label="Qantas Empire Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q507517" start="7839" end="7848" title="Rochester, Kent" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644972" start="7937" end="7957" title="Bristol Perseus" label="Bristol Perseus XIIc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753786" start="7958" end="7970" title="sleeve valve" label="sleeve valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669921" start="8950" end="8954" title="Tasman Empire Airways Limited" label="TEAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575066" start="9653" end="9672" title="Handley Page H.P.54 Harrow" label="Handley Page Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q38610" start="9726" end="9738" title="Dominion of Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q846885" start="10206" end="10242" title="British Overseas Airways Corporation" label="British Overseas Airways Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661234" start="10354" end="10358" title="Short S.26" label="S.26"/>
<link wikidata="Q912540" start="10573" end="10589" title="Bristol Hercules" label="Bristol Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q214098" start="10590" end="10603" title="radial engine" label="radial engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q627537" start="10963" end="10972" title="monoplane" label="monoplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q917964" start="11031" end="11049" title="Bristol Pegasus" label="Bristol Pegasus Xc"/>
<link wikidata="Q214098" start="11050" end="11063" title="radial engine" label="radial engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244423" start="11077" end="11089" title="de Havilland Propellers" label="de Havilland"/>
<link wikidata="Q445623" start="11096" end="11120" title="Variable-pitch propeller (aeronautics)" label="variable-pitch propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q212500" start="12100" end="12105" title="rivet" label="rivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713190" start="12108" end="12114" title="Alclad" label="Alclad"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="12153" end="12160" title="aileron" label="aileron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588180" start="12191" end="12201" title="Gouge flap" label="Gouge flap"/>
<link wikidata="Q44167" start="12253" end="12258" title="motor" label="motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q143873" start="12275" end="12279" title="gear" label="gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q15118690" start="12294" end="12305" title="screw jacks" label="screw jacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754137" start="12728" end="12740" title="leading edge" label="leading edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q693340" start="12879" end="12884" title="Float (nautical)" label="float"/>
<link wikidata="Q211251" start="12977" end="12991" title="shock absorber" label="shock absorber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662372" start="13282" end="13291" title="longeron" label="stringers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371480" start="13305" end="13311" title="girder" label="girder"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007619" start="13360" end="13365" title="Chine (aeronautics)" label="chine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182221" start="14036" end="14045" title="Fuse (electrical)" label="fuseboxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q584049" start="14068" end="14079" title="Ventilation (architecture)" label="ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171802" start="14094" end="14102" title="Petcock" label="fuelcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q168432" start="14171" end="14177" title="anchor" label="anchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138390" start="14189" end="14195" title="drogue" label="drogue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14200" end="14215" title="Bollard#Maritime bollards" label="mooring bollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339908" start="14223" end="14232" title="boat hook" label="boat hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857" start="14386" end="14392" title="toilet" label="toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q497741" start="14398" end="14404" title="Galley (kitchen)" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q194156" start="14772" end="14779" title="cockpit" label="cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q846929" start="14805" end="14811" title="Bridge (nautical)" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q220858" start="15018" end="15027" title="autopilot" label="autopilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q196253" start="15067" end="15073" title="Hughes Aircraft Company" label="Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="15090" end="15097" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q675186" start="15103" end="15113" title="variometer" label="variometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q784567" start="15117" end="15135" title="Sperry Corporation" label="Sperry Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q277694" start="15136" end="15154" title="artificial horizon" label="artificial horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q841258" start="15159" end="15176" title="heading indicator" label="heading indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q90607" start="15180" end="15188" title="Paul Kollsman" label="Kollsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q216197" start="15199" end="15208" title="altimeter" label="altimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989830" start="15212" end="15219" title="Marconi Company" label="Marconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367488" start="15220" end="15242" title="radio direction finder" label="radio direction finder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295406" start="15246" end="15252" title="Smiths Group" label="Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q376" start="15253" end="15264" title="Clock" label="chronometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q277694" start="15273" end="15291" title="attitude indicator" label="attitude indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="15351" end="15356" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q902174" start="15404" end="15418" title="radio spectrum" label="radio spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q381015" start="15436" end="15448" title="loop antenna" label="loop antenna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15804" end="15814" title="Gun turret#Aircraft" label="gun turret"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15849" end="15870" title="List of World War II British naval radar#ASV II" label="air to surface vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q617547" start="16054" end="16070" title="Short Sunderland" label="Short Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023961" start="16217" end="16224" title="Calshot" label="Calshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="16226" end="16235" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="16248" end="16258" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="16260" end="16265" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="16639" end="16647" title="Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q671401" start="16788" end="16794" title="Foynes" label="Foynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192820" start="16802" end="16815" title="River Shannon" label="River Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="16817" end="16824" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911880" start="16833" end="16840" title="Botwood" label="Botwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874196" start="16848" end="16863" title="Bay of Exploits" label="Bay of Exploits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="16865" end="16877" title="Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887138" start="16908" end="16921" title="Sikorsky S-42" label="Sikorsky S-42"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="17608" end="17615" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="17675" end="17688" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887138" start="18163" end="18176" title="Sikorsky S-42" label="Sikorsky S-42"/>
<link wikidata="Q732410" start="18218" end="18231" title="Transatlantic flight" label="transatlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q142804" start="18391" end="18411" title="Aerial refueling" label="in-flight refuelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="18904" end="18916" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279953" start="19064" end="19074" title="Short S.20" label="Short S.20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279953" start="19398" end="19418" title="Short Mayo Composite" label="Short Mayo Composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="19603" end="19611" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="19613" end="19619" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="19842" end="19848" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="19850" end="19858" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q181475" start="19862" end="19874" title="Orange River" label="Orange River"/>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="20192" end="20208" title="Hawker Hurricane" label="Hawker Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5906085" start="20476" end="20491" title="Horseshoe Route" label="Horseshoe Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="20548" end="20553" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="20603" end="20609" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="20693" end="20702" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="20748" end="20756" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="21153" end="21159" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17523" start="21160" end="21168" title="Bathurst Airport (New Brunswick)" label="Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q917964" start="21330" end="21345" title="Bristol Pegasus" label="Bristol Pegasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224368" start="21349" end="21361" title="poppet valve" label="poppet valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q214098" start="21362" end="21375" title="radial engine" label="radial engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q823360" start="21668" end="21680" title="Boulton Paul Aircraft" label="Boulton Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644972" start="21742" end="21757" title="Bristol Perseus" label="Bristol Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753786" start="21763" end="21775" title="sleeve valve" label="sleeve valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q591797" start="23161" end="23177" title="Imperial Airways" label="Imperial Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179060" start="23193" end="23203" title="Beaujolais (province)" label="Beaujolais"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="23225" end="23231" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="23254" end="23265" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="23269" end="23279" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q591797" start="23349" end="23365" title="Imperial Airways" label="Imperial Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539972" start="23388" end="23402" title="Lake Habbaniya" label="Lake Habbaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564468" start="23503" end="23532" title="1939 Imperial Airways flying boat ditching" label="ditched in the Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="23540" end="23551" title="carburettor" label="carburettor"/>
<link wikidata="Q435971" start="23778" end="23789" title="John Alcock (RAF officer)" label="John Alcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783049" start="23832" end="23843" title="Dungu River (Democratic Republic of the Congo)" label="Dungu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q846885" start="24135" end="24139" title="British Overseas Airways Corporation" label="BOAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="24165" end="24171" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565106" start="24372" end="24416" title="1942 Qantas Short Empire shootdown" label="shot down by seven Japanese fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q862471" start="24433" end="24443" title="West Timor" label="West Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="24535" end="24541" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="24590" end="24596" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="24620" end="24624" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q697583" start="24628" end="24660" title="Mitsubishi G4M" label="Mitsubishi G4M &amp;quot;Betty&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="24677" end="24699" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="24871" end="24877" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669921" start="24880" end="24884" title="Tasman Empire Airways Limited" label="TEAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q591797" start="24887" end="24903" title="Imperial Airways" label="Imperial Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q846885" start="24906" end="24910" title="BOAC" label="BOAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="24939" end="24965" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042885" start="24969" end="24989" title="No. 11 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 11 Squadron RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064216" start="24993" end="25013" title="No. 13 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 13 Squadron RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043143" start="25017" end="25037" title="No. 20 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 20 Squadron RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043401" start="25041" end="25061" title="No. 33 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 33 Squadron RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043487" start="25065" end="25085" title="No. 41 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 41 Squadron RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="25088" end="25103" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064214" start="25107" end="25127" title="No. 119 Squadron RAF" label="No. 119 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676958" start="26089" end="26102" title="Dmitri Kessel" label="Dmitri Kessel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534992" wikidata="Q895052" url="?curid=534992" title="Boulder River">
<text>Boulder River may refer to:

*The Boulder River (southwestern Montana), a tributary of the Jefferson River in Jefferson County, southwestern Montana in the United States
*The Boulder River (Sweet Grass County, Montana), a tributary of the Yellowstone River in Sweet Grass County, south central Montana in the United States
*The Boulder River (Washington), a tributary of the North Fork Stillaguamish River in Washington (U.S. state) in the United States
*The Boulder River, New Zealand, a small river in the north of the South Island of New Zealand
*The Boulder River (Minnesota), a river of Minnesota

== See also ==
* Boulder (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q895052" start="0" end="13" title="Boulder River" label="Boulder River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949594" start="34" end="70" title="Boulder River (southwestern Montana)" label="Boulder River (southwestern Montana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q895050" start="175" end="218" title="Boulder River (Sweet Grass County, Montana)" label="Boulder River (Sweet Grass County, Montana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949592" start="328" end="354" title="Boulder River (Washington)" label="Boulder River (Washington)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949591" start="459" end="485" title="Boulder River, New Zealand" label="Boulder River, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949590" start="554" end="579" title="Boulder River (Minnesota)" label="Boulder River (Minnesota)"/>
<link wikidata="Q251066" start="620" end="644" title="Boulder (disambiguation)" label="Boulder (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534994" wikidata="Q247732" url="?curid=534994" title="Tazewell County">
<text>Tazewell County is the name of two counties in the United States:

* Tazewell County, Illinois
* Tazewell County, Virginia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q494560" start="69" end="94" title="Tazewell County, Illinois" label="Tazewell County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q506197" start="97" end="122" title="Tazewell County, Virginia" label="Tazewell County, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="534995" wikidata="Q518900" url="?curid=534995" title="X.Org Server">
<text>X.Org Server is the free and open-source implementation of the X Window System (X11) display server stewarded by the X.Org Foundation.

Implementations of the client-side X Window System protocol exist in the form of &quot;X11 libraries&quot;, which serve as helpful APIs for communicating with the X server. Two such major X libraries exist for X11. The first of these libraries was Xlib, the original C language X11 API, but another C language X library, XCB, was created later in 2001. Other smaller X libraries exist, both as interfaces for Xlib and XCB in other languages, and as smaller standalone X libraries.

The services with which the X.Org Foundation supports X Server include the packaging of the releases; certification (for a fee); evaluation of improvements to the code; developing the web site, and handling the distribution of monetary donations. The releases are coded, documented, and packaged by global developers.

==Software architecture==

The X.Org Server implements the server side of the X Window System core protocol version 11 (X11) and extensions to it, e.g. RandR.

Version 1.16.0 integrates support for systemd-based launching and management which improved boot performance and reliability.

=== Device Independent X (DIX)===
The Device Independent X (DIX) is the part of the X.Org Server that interacts with clients and implements software rendering. The main loop and the event delivery are part of the DIX.

An X server has a tremendous amount of functionality that must be implemented to support the X core protocol. This includes code tables, glyph rasterization and caching, XLFDs, and the core rendering API which draws graphics primitives.

=== Device Dependent X (DDX)===
The Device Dependent X (DDX) is the part of the x-server that interacts with the hardware. In the X.Org Server source code, each directory under &quot;hw&quot; corresponds to one DDX. Hardware comprises graphics cards as well as mouse and keyboards. Each driver is hardware specific and implemented as a separate loadable module.

==== 2D graphics driver====
For historical reasons the X.Org Server still contains graphics device drivers supporting some form of 2D rendering acceleration. In the past, mode-setting was done by an X-server graphics device driver specific to some video controller hardware (&quot;e.g.&quot;, a GPU). To this mode-setting functionality, additional support for 2D acceleration was added when such became available with various GPUs. The mode-setting functionality was moved into the DRM and is being exposed through a DRM mode-setting interface, the new approach being called &quot;kernel mode-setting&quot; (KMS). But the 2D rendering acceleration remained.

In Debian the 2D graphics drivers for the X.Org Server are packaged individually and called &quot;xserver-xorg-video-*&quot;. After installation the 2D graphics driver-file is found under codice_1. The package xserver-xorg-video-nouveau installs codice_2 with a size of 215 KiB, the proprietary Nvidia GeForce driver installs an 8 MiB-sized file called codice_3 and Radeon Software installs codice_4 with a size of about 25MiB.

The available free and open-source graphics device drivers are being developed inside of the Mesa 3D-project. While these can be recompiled as required, the development of the proprietary DDX 2D graphics drivers is greatly eased when the X.Org Server keeps a stable API/ABI across multiple of its versions.

With version 1.17 a generic method for mode-setting was mainlined. The codice_5 package, the Debian-package being called codice_6, was retired, and the generic modesetting DDX it contained was moved into the server package to become the KMS-enabled default DDX, supporting the vast majority of AMD, Intel and NVidia GPUs.

On April 7, 2016 AMD employee Michel Dänzer released codice_7 version 7.7.0 and codice_8 version 1.1.0, the latter including support for their Polaris microarchitecture.

===== Acceleration architectures=====
There are (at least) XAA (XFree86 Acceleration Architecture), EXA, UXA and SNA.
In the X Window System, XFree86 Acceleration Architecture (XAA) is a driver architecture to make a video card&#x27;s 2D hardware acceleration available to the X server. It was written by Harm Hanemaayer in 1996 and first released in XFree86 version 3.3. It was completely rewritten for XFree86 4.0. It was removed again from X.Org Server 1.13.

Most drivers implement acceleration using the XAA module. XAA is on by default, though acceleration of individual functions can be switched off as needed in the server configuration file (codice_9 or codice_10).

The driver for the ARK chipset was the original development platform for XAA.

In X.Org Server release 6.9/7.0, EXA was released as a replacement for XAA, as XAA supplies almost no speed advantage for current video cards. EXA is regarded as an intermediate step to converting the entire X server to using OpenGL.

===== Glamor=====
Glamor is a generic, hardware independent, 2D acceleration driver for the X server that translates the X render primitives into OpenGL operations, taking advantage of any existing 3D OpenGL drivers. In this way, it is functionally similar to Quartz Extreme and QuartzGL (2D performance acceleration) for Apple Quartz Compositor.

The ultimate goal of GLAMOR is to obsolete and replace all the DDX 2D graphics device drivers and acceleration architectures, thereby avoiding the need to write X 2D specific drivers for every supported graphic chipset. Glamor requires a 3D driver with support for shaders.

Glamor performance tuning was accepted for Google Summer of Code 2014. Glamor supports Xephyr and DRI3, and can boost some operations by 700–800%. Since its mainlining into version 1.16 of the X.Org Server, development on Glamor was continued and patches for the 1.17 release were published.

===== Virtualization=====
There is a distinct and special DDX for instances of the X.Org Server which run on a guest system inside of a virtualized environment: xf86-video-qxl, a driver for the &quot;QXL video device&quot;. SPICE makes use of this driver though it works without it as well.

In the Debian repositories it is called xserver-xorg-video-qxl, cf. https://packages.debian.org/buster/xserver-xorg-video-qxl

==== Input stack====
Under Debian, drivers related to input are found under codice_11. Such drivers are named e.g. codice_12, codice_13, codice_14 or codice_15.

With version 1.16, the X.Org Server obtained support for the libinput library in form of a wrapper called codice_16. At the XDC 2015 in Toronto, libratbag was introduced as a generic library to support configurable mice. codice_17 is the input module for the X.Org server to handle classic joysticks and gamepads, which is not meant for playing games under X, but to control the cursor with a joystick or gamepad.

====Other DDX components====
; XWayland
: XWayland is a series of patches over the X.Org server codebase that implement an X server running upon the Wayland protocol. The patches are developed and maintained by the Wayland developers for compatibility with X11 applications during the transition to Wayland, and were mainlined in version 1.16 of the X.Org Server in 2014. When a user runs an X application from within Weston, it calls upon XWayland to service the request.
; XQuartz
: XQuartz is a series of patches from Apple Inc. to integrate support for the X11 protocol into their Quartz Compositor, in a similar way to how XWayland integrates X11 into Wayland compositors.
; Xspice
: Xspice is a device driver for the X.Org Server. It supports the QXL framebuffer device and includes a wrapper script which makes it possible to launch an X.Org Server whose display is exported via the SPICE protocol. This enables use of SPICE in a remote desktop environment, without requiring KVM virtualization.
; Xephyr
: Xephyr is an X-on-X implementation. Since version 1.16.0, Xephyr serves as the primary development environment for the new 2D acceleration subsystem (Glamor), permitting rapid development and testing on a single machine.
; RandR
: RandR (&quot;resize and rotate&quot;) is a communications protocol written as an extension to the X11 protocol. XRandR provides the ability to resize, rotate and reflect the root window of a screen. RandR is responsible for setting the screen refresh rate. It allows for the control of multiple monitors.

===IPC===
The X.Org Server, and any x-client, each run as distinct processes. On Unix/Linux, a process knows nothing about any other processes. For it to communicate with another process, it is completely and utterly reliant on the kernel to moderate the communication via available inter-process communication (IPC) mechanisms.
Unix domain sockets are used to communicate with processes running on the same machine. Special socket function calls are part of the System Call Interface. Although Internet domain sockets can be used locally, Unix domain sockets are more efficient, since they do not have the protocol overhead (checksums, byte orders, etc.).

X.Org Server does not use D-Bus.

Sockets are the most common interprocess communication (IPC) method between the processes of the X server and its various X clients. It provides the Application Programming Interface (API) for communication in the TCP/IP domain and also locally only in the UNIX domain. There are several other APIs described in the X Transport Interface, for instance TLI (Transport Layer Interface). Other options for IPC between for the X client-server, require X Window system extensions, for instance the MIT Shared Memory Extension (MIT-SHM).

===Multiseat configuration===
Multi-seat refers to an assembly of a single computer with multiple &quot;seats&quot;, allowing multiple users to sit down at the computer, log in, and use the computer at the same time independently. The computer has multiple keyboards, mice, and monitors attached to it, each &quot;seat&quot; having one keyboard, one mouse and one monitor assigned to it. A &quot;seat&quot; consists of all hardware devices assigned to a specific workplace. It consists of at least one graphics device (graphics card or just an output and the attached monitor) and a keyboard and a mouse. It can also include video cameras, sound cards and more.

Due to limitation of the VT system in the Linux kernel and of the X core protocol (in particular, how X defines the relation between the root window and an output of the graphics card), multi-seat does not work out-of-the-box for the usual Linux distribution but necessitates a special configuration.

There are these methods to configure a multi-seat assembly:
* multiple Xephyr servers over a host xorg-server
* multiple instances of an xorg-server
** one graphics card per seat
** a single graphics card for all seats

The utilized command-line options of the xorg-server are:
* codice_18 Restrict device resets (output) to the device at bus-id. The bus-id string has the form bustype:bus:device:function (e.g., &#x27;PCI:1:0:0&#x27;). At present, only isolation of PCI devices is supported; i.e., this option is ignored if bustype is anything other than &#x27;PCI&#x27;.
* codice_19 the default for e.g. Debian 9 Stretch is 7, i.e. by pressing ++ the user can switch to the VT running the xorg-server.

Only the user on the first monitor has the use of vt consoles and can use ++x to select them. The other users have a GDM login screen and can use xorg-server normally, but have no vt&#x27;s.

Even though a single user can utilize multiple monitors connected to the different ports of a single graphics card (cf. RandR), the method which is based on multiple instances of the xorg-server seems to require multiple PCI graphics cards.

It is possible to configure multi-seat employing only one graphics card, but due to limitations of the X protocol this necessitates the usage of X Display Manager Control Protocol XDMCP.

There is also Xdmx (Distributed Multihead X).

==Adoption==
; Unix and Linux
: The X.Org Server runs on many free-software Unix-like operating systems, including being adopted for use by most Linux distributions and BSD variants. It is also the X server for the Solaris operating system. X.Org is also available in the repositories of Minix 3.
; Windows
: Cygwin/X, Cygwin&#x27;s implementation of the X server for Microsoft Windows, uses the X.Org Server, as do VcXsrv (Visual C++ X-server) and Xming. SSH clients such as PuTTY allow launching of X applications through X11 forwarding on the condition that it is enabled on both the server and client.
; OS X / macOS
: OS X versions prior to Mac OS X Leopard (10.5) shipped with an XFree86-based server, but 10.5&#x27;s X server adopted the X.Org codebase. Starting with OS X Mountain Lion, (10.8) X11 is not bundled in OS X; instead, it has to be installed from, for example, the open source XQuartz project. As of version 2.7.4, X11.app/XQuartz does not expose support for high-resolution Retina displays to X11 apps, which run in pixel-doubled mode on high-resolution displays.
; OpenVMS
: Current versions of the DECwindows X11 server for OpenVMS are based on X.org Server.

==History==
The modern X.Org Foundation came into being in 2004 when the body that oversaw X standards and published the official reference implementation joined forces with former XFree86 developers. X11R6.7.0, the first version of the X.Org Server, was forked from XFree86 4.4 RC2. The immediate reason for the fork was a disagreement with the new license for the final release version of XFree86 4.4, but several disagreements among the contributors surfaced prior to the split. Many of the previous XFree86 developers have joined the X.Org Server project.

In 2005, a great effort was put in the modularization of the X.Org server source code, resulting in a dual release by the end of the year. The X11R7.0.0 release added a new modular build system based on the GNU Autotools, while X11R6.9.0 kept the old imake build system, both releases sharing the same codebase. Since then the X11R6.9 branch is maintained frozen and all the ongoing development is done to the modular branch. The new build system also brought the use of dlloader standard dynamic linker to load plugins and drivers, deprecating the old own method. As a consequence of the modularization, the X11 binaries were moving out of their own codice_20 subdirectory tree and into the global codice_21 tree on many Unix systems.

In June 2006, another effort was done to move the X.Org server source codebase from CVS to git. Both efforts had the long-term goal of bringing new developers to the project. In the words of Alan Coopersmith:

In the 7.1 release, the KDrive framework (a small implementation of X written by Keith Packard, which was not based on XFree86 that X.Org developers used as a testing ground for new ideas, such as EXA) was integrated into the main codebase of X.Org server.

In 2008, the new DRI2, based on the kernel mode-setting (KMS) driver, replaced DRI. This change also set a major milestone in the X.Org server architecture, as the drivers were moved out from the server and user space (UMS) to the kernel space.

In 2013, the initial versions of DRI3 and Present extensions were written and coded by Keith Packard to provide a faster and tearing-free 2D rendering. By the end of the year the implementation of GLX was rewritten by Adam Jackson at Red Hat.

===Releases===


==See also==
* Reference implementation part of a standard release package
* X window manager a package that is deliberately kept separate from the X server package
* X video extension
* evdev
* xorg.conf
* XQuartz - An X server for macOS
*Xming - An X server for Windows
* Xenocara
==References==
==External links==
* VcXsrv - a fully updated X server for Windows
* VcXsrv - Sourceforge old repository for Windows</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q518900" start="0" end="12" title="X.Org Server" label="X.Org Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="20" end="40" title="Free and open-source software" label="free and open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="63" end="78" title="X Window System" label="X Window System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190017" start="85" end="99" title="display server" label="display server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778572" start="117" end="133" title="X.Org Foundation" label="X.Org Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="171" end="186" title="X Window System" label="X Window System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579570" start="384" end="388" title="Xlib" label="Xlib"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557445" start="457" end="460" title="XCB" label="XCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579570" start="545" end="549" title="Xlib" label="Xlib"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557445" start="554" end="557" title="XCB" label="XCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482740" start="924" end="933" title="developer (software)" label="developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553751" start="1015" end="1044" title="X Window System core protocol" label="X Window System core protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q286124" start="1135" end="1142" title="systemd" label="systemd"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042791" start="1613" end="1618" title="X logical font description" label="XLFDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550143" start="2215" end="2227" title="mode-setting" label="mode-setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308" start="2292" end="2308" title="video controller" label="video controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="2339" end="2342" title="Graphics processing unit" label="GPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227479" start="2526" end="2529" title="Direct Rendering Manager" label="DRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715973" start="2706" end="2712" title="Debian" label="Debian"/>
<link wikidata="Q825762" start="2998" end="3019" title="Nvidia GeForce driver" label="Nvidia GeForce driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q114837011" start="3069" end="3084" title="Radeon Software" label="Radeon Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q722408" start="3146" end="3189" title="free and open-source graphics device driver" label="free and open-source graphics device driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778544" start="3225" end="3232" title="Mesa 3D" label="Mesa 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714248" start="3906" end="3913" title="Polaris (microarchitecture)" label="Polaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q918246" start="4034" end="4037" title="EXA" label="EXA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876166" start="4039" end="4042" title="UMA Acceleration Architecture" label="UXA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16941310" start="4047" end="4050" title="SNA (computer graphics)" label="SNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="4059" end="4074" title="X Window System" label="X Window System"/>
<link wikidata="Q600158" start="4172" end="4193" title="hardware acceleration" label="hardware acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4239" end="4254" title="Harm Hanemaayer" label="Harm Hanemaayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q742255" start="4285" end="4292" title="XFree86" label="XFree86"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4629" end="4640" title="ARK chipset" label="ARK chipset"/>
<link wikidata="Q918246" start="4722" end="4725" title="EXA" label="EXA"/>
<link wikidata="Q178570" start="4915" end="4921" title="OpenGL" label="OpenGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q178570" start="5070" end="5076" title="OpenGL" label="OpenGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591372" start="5252" end="5269" title="Quartz Compositor" label="Quartz Compositor"/>
<link wikidata="Q633182" start="5537" end="5543" title="shader" label="shader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324301" start="5590" end="5611" title="Google Summer of Code" label="Google Summer of Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043774" start="5634" end="5640" title="Xephyr" label="Xephyr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5645" end="5649" title="Direct Rendering Infrastructure#DRI3" label="DRI3"/>
<link wikidata="Q270471" start="5976" end="5999" title="Virtualization" label="virtualized environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557101" start="6064" end="6069" title="Simple Protocol for Independent Computing Environments" label="SPICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q14561" start="6482" end="6490" title="libinput" label="libinput"/>
<link wikidata="Q14561" start="6985" end="6992" title="Wayland (display server protocol)" label="Wayland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14561" start="7254" end="7260" title="Wayland (display server protocol)" label="Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="7357" end="7367" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1591372" start="7421" end="7438" title="Quartz Compositor" label="Quartz Compositor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14561" start="7493" end="7511" title="Wayland compositor" label="Wayland compositor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557101" start="7726" end="7731" title="SPICE (protocol)" label="SPICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q377539" start="7819" end="7822" title="Kernel-based Virtual Machine" label="KVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043774" start="7850" end="7856" title="Xephyr" label="Xephyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="8124" end="8147" title="communications protocol" label="communications protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553751" start="8179" end="8182" title="X Window System core protocol" label="X11"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366588" start="8255" end="8266" title="root window" label="root window"/>
<link wikidata="Q751436" start="8670" end="8697" title="inter-process communication" label="inter-process communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044498" start="8716" end="8734" title="Unix domain socket" label="Unix domain socket"/>
<link wikidata="Q632343" start="8882" end="8905" title="Network socket" label="Internet domain sockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="8994" end="9002" title="Communications protocol" label="protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q218341" start="9013" end="9021" title="checksum" label="checksum"/>
<link wikidata="Q768923" start="9071" end="9076" title="D-Bus" label="D-Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043434" start="9572" end="9609" title="MIT-SHM" label="MIT Shared Memory Extension (MIT-SHM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043774" start="10648" end="10654" title="Xephyr" label="Xephyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460961" start="11399" end="11402" title="GNOME Display Manager" label="GDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q191012" start="11695" end="11698" title="Conventional PCI" label="PCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q653475" start="11861" end="11895" title="X Display Manager Control Protocol" label="X Display Manager Control Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601286" start="11918" end="11922" title="Xdmx" label="Xdmx"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="12027" end="12036" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q131669" start="12096" end="12114" title="Linux distribution" label="Linux distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="12120" end="12123" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q14646" start="12166" end="12173" title="Solaris (operating system)" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q187906" start="12239" end="12246" title="MINIX" label="Minix 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746180" start="12260" end="12268" title="Cygwin/X" label="Cygwin/X"/>
<link wikidata="Q216192" start="12270" end="12276" title="Cygwin" label="Cygwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="12319" end="12336" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q847296" start="12375" end="12385" title="Visual C++" label="Visual C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637408" start="12400" end="12405" title="Xming" label="Xming"/>
<link wikidata="Q841685" start="12427" end="12432" title="PuTTY" label="PuTTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="12574" end="12578" title="OS X" label="OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q222996" start="12597" end="12613" title="Mac OS X Leopard" label="Mac OS X Leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q63734" start="12726" end="12744" title="OS X Mountain Lion" label="OS X Mountain Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q617214" start="12848" end="12855" title="XQuartz" label="XQuartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q574890" start="12946" end="12960" title="Retina display" label="Retina display"/>
<link wikidata="Q479882" start="13098" end="13105" title="OpenVMS" label="OpenVMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778572" start="13157" end="13173" title="X.Org Foundation" label="X.Org Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q742255" start="13315" end="13322" title="XFree86" label="XFree86"/>
<link wikidata="Q332903" start="13389" end="13393" title="Fork (software development)" label="fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q925228" start="13902" end="13915" title="GNU Autotools" label="GNU Autotools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940713" start="13946" end="13951" title="imake" label="imake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916124" start="14184" end="14198" title="dynamic linker" label="dynamic linker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="14417" end="14421" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q467252" start="14516" end="14519" title="Concurrent Versions System" label="CVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q186055" start="14523" end="14526" title="Git (software)" label="git"/>
<link wikidata="Q92972" start="14723" end="14736" title="Keith Packard" label="Keith Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q742255" start="14761" end="14768" title="XFree86" label="XFree86"/>
<link wikidata="Q918246" start="14839" end="14842" title="EXA" label="EXA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550143" start="14936" end="14955" title="kernel mode-setting" label="kernel mode-setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142183" start="15107" end="15117" title="user space" label="user space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142183" start="15131" end="15143" title="kernel space" label="kernel space"/>
<link wikidata="Q827841" start="15271" end="15278" title="Screen tearing" label="tearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q604536" start="15343" end="15346" title="GLX" label="GLX"/>
<link wikidata="Q485593" start="15380" end="15387" title="Red Hat" label="Red Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136722" start="15422" end="15446" title="Reference implementation" label="Reference implementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q857566" start="15484" end="15500" title="X window manager" label="X window manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390685" start="15574" end="15591" title="X video extension" label="X video extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331572" start="15594" end="15599" title="evdev" label="evdev"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008299" start="15602" end="15611" title="xorg.conf" label="xorg.conf"/>
<link wikidata="Q617214" start="15614" end="15621" title="XQuartz" label="XQuartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637408" start="15647" end="15652" title="Xming" label="Xming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570874" start="15681" end="15689" title="Xenocara" label="Xenocara"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535000" wikidata="Q2262280" url="?curid=535000" title="Seanad Éireann (Irish Free State)">
<text>Seanad Éireann (; &quot;Senate of Ireland&quot;) was the upper house of the Oireachtas (parliament) of the Irish Free State from 1922 to 1936. It has also been known simply as the Senate, First Seanad, Free State Senate or Free State Seanad. The Seanad was established under the 1922 Constitution of the Irish Free State. A number of constitutional amendments were made to change the manner of its election and its powers. It was eventually abolished in 1936 when it attempted to obstruct constitutional reforms favoured by the government. It sat, like its modern successor, in Leinster House.

==Powers==
The Seanad was subordinate to Dáil Éireann (the lower house) and could delay but not veto decisions of that house. Nonetheless, the Free State Senate had more power than its successor, the modern Seanad Éireann, which can only delay normal legislation for 90 days. As originally adopted the constitution provided that the Free State Seanad had power to delay a money bill for 21 days (three weeks) and delay any other bill for 270 days (approximately nine months)—with the potential for a further 9 months&#x27; delay if the Seanad voted to suspend a bill just passed into law in order to initiate a referendum on it. In 1928, this second period was extended so that the Seanad could delay a non-money bill for 20 months.

==Composition and election==
The 1922 Constitution provided for a Seanad of 60 members directly elected. Members would serve 12-year terms, with one-quarter of the house elected every three years. The members would be elected under the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote in a single, nationwide, 15-seat contest. However, the body&#x27;s initial membership would be appointed by Dáil Éireann (the lower house) and the President of the Executive Council.

After the 1925 Seanad election, a direct election, the constitution was amended, so that further elections to the Seanad occurred by a method of indirect election. Therefore, in the five elections to the Seanad to occur before its abolition, three different systems were used.

The 1925 Seanad election was notable in that 19 were elected in a single contest using STV. This was the largest district magnitude used under STV anywhere in the world until 1995. The next time an Irish election used the whole country as a single district was for the 1945 presidential election.

Seanad membership was initially restricted to those who were over 35. Constitutional amendments made in 1928 reduced the minimum age to 30 and the term of office from 12 years to 9 years.

Seanad Éireann, established by the Constitution of Ireland in 1937 is considered to be a successor of the Free State Seanad. Each Seanad elected under the 1937 Constitution is numbered, beginning with the 2nd Seanad elected in 1938. The entire period of the Seanad of the Irish Free State was considered to have been the First Seanad.

===1922 election===

Half the initial membership of the Seanad were appointed by the President of the Executive Council (prime minister), W. T. Cosgrave; the other half were elected by the Dáil under the single transferable vote. The first 15 elected by the Dáil were assigned a term of nine years, the other 15 a term of three years. Cosgrave&#x27;s nominees were divided by lot, 15 to serve for twelve years and 15 for six years. The President agreed to use his appointments in 1922 to grant extra representation to the Protestant minority in the state, most of whom were former Southern Unionists, to promote inclusiveness in the new Free State.

As a result, of the sixty members of the first Seanad, as well as 36 Catholics, there were 20 Protestants, 3 Quakers and 1 Jew. It contained 7 peers, a dowager countess (Ellen, Countess of Desart, who was Jewish), 5 baronets and several knights. &quot;The New York Times&quot; remarked that the first senate was &quot;representative of all classes&quot;, though it has also been described as, &quot;the most curious political grouping in the history of the Irish state&quot;. Members included W. B. Yeats, Oliver St. John Gogarty, General Sir Bryan Mahon and Jennie Wyse Power.

Also included was the Earl of Kerry, heir to the 5th Marquess of Lansdowne. Lord Kerry succeeded his father in the peerage in June 1927, thus becoming the 6th Marquess of Lansdowne in his own right. This gave the new Lord Lansdowne an hereditary seat in the British House of Lords. Thus he had the unique distinction for a time of being a member of both the Oireachtas in Dublin and the British Parliament at Westminster.

The opponents of the Anglo-Irish Treaty also opposed the new Seanad, and 37 of the senators&#x27; homes were burnt to the ground. Others were intimidated, kidnapped or almost assassinated. Nevertheless, the first Seanad greatly influenced the guiding principles and legislative foundations of the new state.

The first (chairman) was Lord Glenavy. Lord Glenavy had formerly served as the Lord Chief Justice of Ireland from 1916 to 1918 and had served as Lord Chancellor of Ireland from 1918 to 1921.

George Sigerson served as chairman briefly from 11 to 12 December 1922 before the election of Lord Glenavy.

===1925 election===

The 15 original 3-year seats came up for election in 1925, as did four other seats which had been filled temporarily by co-option. The 19 retiring members were automatically eligible for re-election; another 19 candidates were nominated by the Seanad (by the single transferable vote from a list of 29); the Dáil nominated 38 candidates (from a list of 57, again by the single transferable vote). The 76 candidates were then put to the public electorate on 17 September 1925, but without partisan campaigning, turnout was less than a quarter of the 1,345,000 potential voters. The count took two weeks. Only 8 of the former senators were re-elected, with particularly poor results for the Gaelic League and Douglas Hyde.

===Subsequent elections===
After the amendment of the constitution in 1928, future members of the Seanad were to be elected from a single constituency consisting of the combined membership of the outgoing Seanad and the Dáil, and the system was changed so that a third (20 seats) rather than a quarter (15 seats) of the Seanad would be replaced at each election. The elections were still held by secret ballot and under the single transferable vote. Elections took place under the new system in 1928, 1931, and 1934 before the Seanad was abolished in 1936.

The system for nominating candidates was also changed. After 1928, it was provided that the number of nominees would be equal to twice the number of seats to be filled and that half would be elected by the Dáil and the other half by the Seanad. Both houses used the single transferable vote for this purpose. The right of outgoing senators to nominate themselves was removed.

===By-elections===
The constitution originally provided that premature vacancies would be filled by a vote of the Seanad. However, a candidate elected in this way would serve only until the next senatorial election, when the seat would come up for election along with the others scheduled to be filled. In 1929, the system was changed so that vacancies were filled by members of both houses voting together.

===Abolition===
The Free State Seanad was abolished entirely by the Constitution (Amendment No. 24) Act 1936 after it delayed some Government proposals for constitutional changes. Éamon de Valera had seen its delay of his proposals as illegitimate, although the continuing opposition majority had been a result of his own earlier boycott of the Free State Oireachtas (combined with the provision for the Seanad&#x27;s self-election). The abolition was highly controversial at the time and the last chairman Thomas Westropp Bennett played a key role. It opposed its own abolition, but this decision was over-ridden by the Dáil. De Valera later created a new Senate in the 1937 Constitution of Ireland.

==Direct democracy role==
As adopted, the Free State constitution contained a number of provisions for direct democracy, which included a special role for the Seanad. Most importantly it was provided that the Seanad could, if three-fifths of its members agreed, demand a binding referendum on any bill. This was to allow the Seanad to appeal to voters directly if there was a disagreement between the two houses and if the Dáil attempted to override the Seanad. However, this power was taken from the Seanad in 1928 without having been put to use. It was in compensation for this loss that the Seanad&#x27;s powers of delay were increased in the same year.

Before it was removed, the Seanad&#x27;s right to demand a referendum was contained in Article 47, which provided for voters to veto legislation directly in certain circumstances. The article provided that once a bill had been approved by both houses of the Oireachtas (or just by the Dáil, if it had over-ridden the Seanad), its enactment into law could be suspended if, within seven days, either a majority of the Seanad or three-fifths of all members of the Dáil so requested.

There would then be a further period of ninety days within which either 5% of all registered voters or 60% of the Seanad could demand a referendum on the bill. The referendum would be decided by a majority of votes cast and if rejected the bill would not become law. Article 47 did not apply to money bills or bills declared by both houses to be &quot;necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety&quot;. In 1928, Article 47 was repealed in its entirety, along with Article 48 which provided for an initiative process.

A similar power given to the Free State Seanad by Article 47 is granted to the modern Seanad by the 1937 Constitution of Ireland. Under the current constitution, a simple majority of senators (with the agreement of one-third of the Dáil) can request that the President of Ireland refer a bill to the people. The president can thus refuse to sign it until it has been approved either in an ordinary referendum or by the Dáil after it has reassembled after a general election. This power has never been used because the modern Seanad is designed in such a way as to have a permanent government majority.

==List of constitutional amendments==
During the Irish Free State there were at least 12 constitutional amendments relating to the Seanad. The value n where the amending act had the short title &quot;Constitution (Amendment No. n) Act &quot;year&quot;&quot;
==Notable members==

*Thomas Westropp Bennett
*Kathleen Browne
*Kathleen Clarke
*Eileen Costello
*Ellen Cuffe, Countess of Desart
*Sir Thomas Esmonde, 11th Baronet
*James Campbell, 1st Baron Glenavy
*Oliver St. John Gogarty
*Alice Stopford Green
*Henry Guinness
*Sir William Hickie
*Douglas Hyde
*Thomas Johnson
*Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 6th Marquess of Lansdowne
*Edward MacLysaght
*Sir Bryan Mahon
*Maurice George Moore
*Sir Horace Plunkett
*George Sigerson
*Jennie Wyse Power
*Windham Wyndham-Quin, 4th Earl of Dunraven and Mount-Earl
*W. B. Yeats
==See also==
*History of the Republic of Ireland
*Parliament of Southern Ireland
*:Category:Members of Seanad Éireann by term

==References==
===Sources===

===Citations===
==External links==
*Members of the 1922 Seanad</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2262280" start="0" end="14" title="Seanad Éireann (Irish Free State)" label="Seanad Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570643" start="24" end="30" title="Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="57" end="68" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016884" start="76" end="86" title="Oireachtas (Irish Free State)" label="Oireachtas"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="107" end="123" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262280" start="180" end="186" title="Seanad Éireann (Irish Free State)" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262280" start="188" end="200" title="Seanad Éireann (Irish Free State)" label="First Seanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262280" start="202" end="219" title="Seanad Éireann (Irish Free State)" label="Free State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262280" start="223" end="240" title="Seanad Éireann (Irish Free State)" label="Free State Seanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515419" start="284" end="320" title="Constitution of the Irish Free State" label="Constitution of the Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q247595" start="578" end="592" title="Leinster House" label="Leinster House"/>
<link wikidata="Q990440" start="636" end="648" title="Dáil Éireann (Irish Free State)" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="802" end="816" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Seanad Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857741" start="967" end="977" title="money bill" label="money bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="1575" end="1602" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="1619" end="1643" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q990440" start="1752" end="1764" title="Dáil Éireann (Irish Free State)" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376681" start="1791" end="1825" title="President of the Executive Council of the Irish Free State" label="President of the Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070768" start="1838" end="1858" title="1925 Seanad election" label="1925 Seanad election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071720" start="2375" end="2401" title="1945 Irish presidential election" label="1945 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="2593" end="2607" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Seanad Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="2628" end="2651" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814332" start="2798" end="2808" title="2nd Seanad" label="2nd Seanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376681" start="3014" end="3048" title="President of the Executive Council of the Irish Free State" label="President of the Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q465770" start="3067" end="3081" title="W. T. Cosgrave" label="W. T. Cosgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="3133" end="3157" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="3451" end="3461" title="Anglicanism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071313" start="3503" end="3528" title="Irish Unionist Alliance" label="former Southern Unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3648" end="3657" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="3673" end="3684" title="Protestantism" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="3688" end="3695" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="3702" end="3705" title="Jews" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q21488839" start="3722" end="3727" title="Peerages in the United Kingdom" label="peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633173" start="3731" end="3738" title="dowager" label="dowager"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364801" start="3749" end="3774" title="Ellen Cuffe, Countess of Desart" label="Ellen, Countess of Desart"/>
<link wikidata="Q282019" start="3795" end="3802" title="baronet" label="baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="3816" end="3823" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="3831" end="3849" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="4072" end="4083" title="W. B. Yeats" label="W. B. Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388518" start="4085" end="4108" title="Oliver St. John Gogarty" label="Oliver St. John Gogarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531654" start="4110" end="4117" title="General (United Kingdom)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081060" start="4122" end="4133" title="Bryan Mahon" label="Bryan Mahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442806" start="4138" end="4155" title="Jennie Wyse Power" label="Jennie Wyse Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784987" start="4180" end="4193" title="Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 6th Marquess of Lansdowne" label="Earl of Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q337386" start="4207" end="4232" title="Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 5th Marquess of Lansdowne" label="5th Marquess of Lansdowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q51280089" start="4273" end="4280" title="peerage" label="peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q673873" start="4317" end="4338" title="Marquess of Lansdowne" label="Marquess of Lansdowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="4424" end="4438" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016884" start="4516" end="4526" title="Oireachtas (Irish Free State)" label="Oireachtas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="4545" end="4563" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="4567" end="4578" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q541191" start="4602" end="4620" title="Anglo-Irish Treaty" label="Anglo-Irish Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680124" start="4915" end="4927" title="James Campbell, 1st Baron Glenavy" label="Lord Glenavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679071" start="4969" end="4998" title="Lord Chief Justice of Ireland" label="Lord Chief Justice of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846056" start="5035" end="5061" title="Lord Chancellor of Ireland" label="Lord Chancellor of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544551" start="5082" end="5097" title="George Sigerson" label="George Sigerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="5471" end="5495" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q875645" start="5901" end="5914" title="Gaelic League" label="Gaelic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q237951" start="5919" end="5931" title="Douglas Hyde" label="Douglas Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q337987" start="6330" end="6343" title="secret ballot" label="secret ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="6358" end="6382" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q28196177" start="7346" end="7386" title="Constitution (Amendment No. 24) Act 1936" label="Constitution (Amendment No. 24) Act 1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q173347" start="7458" end="7473" title="Éamon de Valera" label="Éamon de Valera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259804" start="7785" end="7808" title="Thomas Westropp Bennett" label="Thomas Westropp Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="7931" end="7941" title="Seanad Éireann" label="new Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="7954" end="7977" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="8083" end="8099" title="direct democracy" label="direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="8259" end="8269" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q660064" start="9651" end="9661" title="Popular initiative" label="initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="9777" end="9800" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q213702" start="9931" end="9951" title="President of Ireland" label="President of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100850" start="10061" end="10080" title="ordinary referendum" label="ordinary referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q118210315" start="10457" end="10468" title="short title" label="short title"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259804" start="10555" end="10578" title="Thomas Westropp Bennett" label="Thomas Westropp Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376666" start="10580" end="10595" title="Kathleen Browne" label="Kathleen Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736270" start="10597" end="10612" title="Kathleen Clarke" label="Kathleen Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349344" start="10614" end="10629" title="Eileen Costello" label="Eileen Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364801" start="10631" end="10662" title="Ellen Cuffe, Countess of Desart" label="Ellen Cuffe, Countess of Desart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529116" start="10664" end="10696" title="Sir Thomas Esmonde, 11th Baronet" label="Sir Thomas Esmonde, 11th Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680124" start="10698" end="10731" title="James Campbell, 1st Baron Glenavy" label="James Campbell, 1st Baron Glenavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388518" start="10733" end="10756" title="Oliver St. John Gogarty" label="Oliver St. John Gogarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726110" start="10758" end="10778" title="Alice Stopford Green" label="Alice Stopford Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995716" start="10780" end="10794" title="Henry Guinness" label="Henry Guinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005460" start="10796" end="10814" title="William Hickie" label="Sir William Hickie"/>
<link wikidata="Q237951" start="10816" end="10828" title="Douglas Hyde" label="Douglas Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160445" start="10830" end="10844" title="Thomas Johnson (Irish politician)" label="Thomas Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784987" start="10846" end="10896" title="Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 6th Marquess of Lansdowne" label="Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 6th Marquess of Lansdowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344293" start="10898" end="10915" title="Edward MacLysaght" label="Edward MacLysaght"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081060" start="10917" end="10932" title="Bryan Mahon" label="Sir Bryan Mahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793137" start="10934" end="10954" title="Maurice George Moore" label="Maurice George Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140471" start="10956" end="10975" title="Sir Horace Plunkett" label="Sir Horace Plunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544551" start="10977" end="10992" title="George Sigerson" label="George Sigerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442806" start="10994" end="11011" title="Jennie Wyse Power" label="Jennie Wyse Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q12056754" start="11013" end="11070" title="Windham Wyndham-Quin, 4th Earl of Dunraven and Mount-Earl" label="Windham Wyndham-Quin, 4th Earl of Dunraven and Mount-Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="11072" end="11083" title="W. B. Yeats" label="W. B. Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403781" start="11098" end="11132" title="History of the Republic of Ireland" label="History of the Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053647" start="11134" end="11164" title="Parliament of Southern Ireland" label="Parliament of Southern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11166" end="11209" title=":Category:Members of Seanad Éireann by term" label=":Category:Members of Seanad Éireann by term"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535002" wikidata="Q4632612" url="?curid=535002" title="27th Volhynian Infantry Division">
<text>27th Volhynian Infantry Division () was a World War II Polish Home Army formed in the Volhynia region in 1944. It was created on January 15, 1944, from smaller partisan self-defence units during the Volhynia massacre and was patterned after the prewar Polish 27th Infantry Division.

== History ==
The 27th Volhynian Infantry Division of the Home Army (AK) was the first large Polish military unit to openly engage in combat with the Germans as part of Operation Tempest. Volhynia, even before the war, was a region with the smallest percentage of Polish population, further decimated by Soviet deportations, German terror, and the genocide carried out by Ukrainian nationalists since 1943. Considering the dire situation, the local AK command, led primarily by commander Colonel Kazimierz Bąbiński &quot;Luboń&quot; and chief of staff Captain Tadeusz Klimowski &quot;Ostoja&quot;, decided to concentrate all forces in one region, east of the Bug River, and form a single large corps.

Bąbiński issued the mobilization order on January 15, 1944, and headed to Kupychiv, where his headquarters was to be located. Most local Polish units refused to comply with the order, not wanting to leave the Polish population without any defense against the still marauding UPA units. Consequently, the division-strength unit was formed mainly from the Kowel and Łuck inspectorates. And numbered about 6,500 people in January 1944. After mobilization in March 1944, the division became one of the largest partisan units in Central Europe with 7300 soldiers, officers and NCOs.

The division initially aided local self-defence units during the massacres of Poles in Volhynia and fought against the Ukrainian Insurgent Army. It also fought German anti-partisan units and regular Wehrmacht troops. The unit commander, Colonel Babiński strictly prohibited any repressions against women and children. Despite this and despite the orders by the Polish government not to harm civilians, some Polish partisans retaliated against the massacre of Poles by burning down Ukrainian villages and killing ethnic Ukrainians whom they encountered on Volhynian roads.

In 1944 the division fought several major battles near Włodzimierz Wołyński (February 23), Hołoby (March 9) and Zasmyki (March 17). During the latter two battles the division cooperated with local Soviet partisan groups and the advancing Red Army. After reaching the frontline and contacting the Soviets, Colonel Jan Kiwerski &quot;Oliwa&quot; was asked to combine the unit with the Red Army as a regular unit of the Soviet-backed Polish army. He declined and returned to partisan fighting. The division was surrounded by the Germans near Kowel on April 2.

After receiving a promise of Soviet help, the unit fought surrounded for two weeks. When no help arrived, the unit started to break through in the direction of Włodawa. As a result of heavy fighting, it lost between 10% and 50% of its personnel.

The division returned northwards and was surrounded by the end of May. Elements of the division broke through the Pripyat river and reached the Soviet lines. The officers were arrested by the NKVD and sent to Russia while most of the soldiers were conscripted into the First Polish Army of General Zygmunt Berling.

The division&#x27;s remnants withdrew westwards, crossed the Bug river on June 7 to the Parczew Forest near Lublin. It joined other Home Army units and took part in the liberation of Kock, Lubartów, and the village Firlej on July 21.

After the Red Army reached the area they took over the captured territory. Most of the divisions officers, NCOs and ordinary soldiers were arrested by the NKVD and were interred in gulags. Only a small part joined the Red Army or the Soviet-controlled Polish People&#x27;s Army.

== Commanders ==
* Colonel Kazimierz Damian Bąbiński &quot;Luboń&quot; - January 15 - February 11
* Lieutenant Colonel Jan Wojciech Kiwerski &quot;Oliwa&quot; - February 11 - April 18
* Major Jan Szatowski &quot;Kowal&quot; - April 18 - May 3
* Major Tadeusz Sztumberk-Rychter &quot;Żegota&quot; - May 3 - July 16
* Colonel Jan Kotowicz &quot;Twardy&quot; - July 16 - July 25

== See also ==
* Operation Tempest
* Defense of Przebraże
* Monument to the Volhynia 27th Home Army Infantry Division

==References==
== Bibliography ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4632612" start="0" end="32" title="27th Volhynian Infantry Division" label="27th Volhynian Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="55" end="61" title="Poland" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="62" end="71" title="Home Army" label="Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530" start="86" end="94" title="Volhynia" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q695020" start="199" end="216" title="massacres of Poles in Volhynia" label="Volhynia massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815585" start="252" end="281" title="Polish 27th Infantry Division" label="Polish 27th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="342" end="351" title="Home Army" label="Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q422376" start="453" end="470" title="Operation Tempest" label="Operation Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q695020" start="632" end="678" title="Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia" label="genocide carried out by Ukrainian nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="780" end="798" title="Kazimierz Bąbiński" label="Kazimierz Bąbiński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="844" end="861" title="Tadeusz Klimowski" label="Tadeusz Klimowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065576" start="1060" end="1068" title="Kupychiv" label="Kupychiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="1510" end="1524" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="1558" end="1562" title="Non-commissioned officer" label="NCOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q737212" start="1684" end="1708" title="Ukrainian Insurgent Army" label="Ukrainian Insurgent Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="1764" end="1773" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q33544" start="2193" end="2213" title="Volodymyr-Volynskyi" label="Włodzimierz Wołyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q313830" start="2335" end="2350" title="Soviet partisans" label="Soviet partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="2376" end="2384" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q751076" start="2856" end="2863" title="Włodawa" label="Włodawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q157042" start="3057" end="3070" title="Pripyat (river)" label="Pripyat river"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="3135" end="3139" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659023" start="3212" end="3229" title="First Polish Army (1944–45)" label="First Polish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q245320" start="3241" end="3256" title="Zygmunt Berling" label="Zygmunt Berling"/>
<link wikidata="Q156237" start="3320" end="3329" title="Bug (river)" label="Bug river"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343396" start="3347" end="3354" title="Parczew" label="Parczew"/>
<link wikidata="Q37333" start="3367" end="3373" title="Lublin" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q991819" start="3442" end="3446" title="Kock" label="Kock"/>
<link wikidata="Q283885" start="3448" end="3456" title="Lubartów" label="Lubartów"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="3675" end="3680" title="gulag" label="gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143263" start="3746" end="3771" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q422376" start="4168" end="4185" title="Operation Tempest" label="Operation Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065606" start="4188" end="4208" title="Defense of Przebraże" label="Defense of Przebraże"/>
<link wikidata="Q11823091" start="4211" end="4268" title="Monument to the Volhynia 27th Home Army Infantry Division" label="Monument to the Volhynia 27th Home Army Infantry Division"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535003" wikidata="Q1382258" url="?curid=535003" title="Everybody Else Is Doing It, So Why Can't We?">
<text>Everybody Else Is Doing It, So Why Can&#x27;t We? is the debut studio album by Irish alternative rock band the Cranberries. Released on 1 March 1993 through Island Records after four EPs, it is both the band&#x27;s first full-length album and major label release. The album was written entirely by the band&#x27;s lead singer Dolores O&#x27;Riordan and guitarist Noel Hogan and contains the band&#x27;s highest charting US single, &quot;Linger&quot;. The album reached number one on the UK and the Irish albums charts. It spent a total of 86 weeks on the UK chart. On 24 June 1994, it became the fifth album in rock history to reach number one more than a year after release. At the end of 1995, it ranked as the 50th best selling album in Australia. It reached number 18 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 albums chart and stayed on this chart for 136 weeks; the album sold six million copies worldwide.

On 7 March 2018, the band&#x27;s three remaining members announced they were releasing a special 25th anniversary newly remastered anniversary edition of the album, with previously unreleased material as well as other bonus material from the era of the album. However, it was delayed until late 2018, following the death of O&#x27;Riordan.

==Track listing==
===Original release===
===2002 release===
The 2002 re-release included additional tracks.
===Super Deluxe (2018)===
====Disc two====


====Disc three====
====Disc four====


==Personnel==
The album&#x27;s liner notes credit the following personnel:

The Cranberries
*Dolores O&#x27;Riordan – vocals, acoustic guitar
*Noel Hogan – guitar, backing vocals
*Mike Hogan – bass guitar
*Fergal Lawler – drums, percussion

Additional musicians
*Mike Mahoney – backing vocals and additional sounds (on &quot;Dreams&quot;)

Production
*Stephen Street – production, engineering
*Aidan McGovern – additional engineering (1–5, 7–12)

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===



===Year-end charts===

==Certifications==



== Notes ==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="85" end="101" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q483810" start="107" end="122" title="the Cranberries" label="the Cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="157" end="171" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="183" end="186" title="Extended play" label="EPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q541599" start="326" end="348" title="Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan" label="Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704746" start="363" end="373" title="Noel Hogan" label="Noel Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734705" start="437" end="443" title="Linger (The Cranberries song)" label="Linger"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="782" end="807" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q541599" start="1533" end="1555" title="Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan" label="Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704746" start="1583" end="1593" title="Noel Hogan" label="Noel Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182427" start="1792" end="1806" title="Stephen Street" label="Stephen Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="1809" end="1819" title="Record producer" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="1821" end="1832" title="Audio engineer" label="engineering"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535005" wikidata="Q226350" url="?curid=535005" title="Taylor County">
<text>Taylor County may refer to the following counties in the United States:

*Taylor County, Florida
*Taylor County, Georgia
*Taylor County, Iowa
*Taylor County, Kentucky
*Taylor County, Texas
*Taylor County, West Virginia
*Taylor County, Wisconsin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q503064" start="74" end="96" title="Taylor County, Florida" label="Taylor County, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q505299" start="98" end="120" title="Taylor County, Georgia" label="Taylor County, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q176068" start="122" end="141" title="Taylor County, Iowa" label="Taylor County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q473605" start="143" end="166" title="Taylor County, Kentucky" label="Taylor County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q490287" start="168" end="188" title="Taylor County, Texas" label="Taylor County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q511095" start="190" end="218" title="Taylor County, West Virginia" label="Taylor County, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q505638" start="220" end="244" title="Taylor County, Wisconsin" label="Taylor County, Wisconsin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535006" wikidata="Q407568" url="?curid=535006" title="HEI">
<text>HEI may refer to:
== Companies and organizations==
* HEI Hospitality, an American hotel owner and operator
* Hawaiian Electric Industries, the largest supplier of electricity in the state of Hawaii
* Health Effects Institute, a non-profit focused on the health effects of air pollution
* HEICO, HEI is the stock symbol for HEICO Corporation

== In education ==
* Higher education institution
* Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies (French: &quot;&quot;), in Geneva, Switzerland
* Hautes études d&#x27;ingénieur, an engineering school in Lille, France

==In language==
* He (letter), the fifth letter of many Semitic alphabets
* Heiltsuk-Oowekyala language, spoken in Canada

== Places ==
* Heilongjiang, a province of China
* Hei District, Chiba, a former administrative unit of Japan
* Hei Glacier, in Antarctica
* Hei River, in China
* Heide–Büsum Airport, in Schleswig-Holstein, Germany
* Heighington railway station, in England

==In science and technology==
* Healthy Eating Index, a measure of diet quality
* High-efficiency incandescent, a type of incandescent light bulb
* High energy ignition, an automotive ignition system
* High explosive incendiary, a type of ammunition
* Hot-carrier injection, a principle in the function of solid-state electronic devices
* Human-environment interaction, or Environmental sociology

==Other uses==
* &quot;Hei&quot; (album), 2015 album by Norwegian duo Marcus &amp; Martinus
* Hei (&quot;Darker than Black&quot;), protagonist of the 2007 anime
* Qi, in traditional Chinese culture, a principle forming part of any living thing (Cantonese: &quot;hei&quot;)

==See also==
* Hiei (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q407568" start="0" end="3" title="HEI" label="HEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629433" start="53" end="68" title="HEI Hospitality" label="HEI Hospitality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684524" start="109" end="137" title="Hawaiian Electric Industries" label="Hawaiian Electric Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690524" start="200" end="224" title="Health Effects Institute" label="Health Effects Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629432" start="288" end="293" title="HEICO" label="HEICO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="363" end="379" title="Higher education" label="Higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q691686" start="394" end="453" title="Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies" label="Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128626" start="503" end="533" title="Hautes études d&amp;#x27;ingénieur" label="Hautes études d&amp;#x27;ingénieur"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525321" start="593" end="604" title="He (letter)" label="He (letter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699507" start="651" end="678" title="Heiltsuk-Oowekyala language" label="Heiltsuk-Oowekyala language"/>
<link wikidata="Q19206" start="713" end="725" title="Heilongjiang" label="Heilongjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688731" start="749" end="768" title="Hei District, Chiba" label="Hei District, Chiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5698527" start="810" end="821" title="Hei Glacier" label="Hei Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048648" start="839" end="848" title="Hei River" label="Hei River"/>
<link wikidata="Q556109" start="861" end="880" title="Heide–Büsum Airport" label="Heide–Büsum Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q934808" start="915" end="942" title="Heighington railway station" label="Heighington railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059800" start="988" end="1008" title="Healthy Eating Index" label="Healthy Eating Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q47616" start="1078" end="1101" title="incandescent light bulb" label="incandescent light bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627909" start="1104" end="1124" title="High energy ignition" label="High energy ignition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337998" start="1158" end="1183" title="High explosive incendiary" label="High explosive incendiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445876" start="1208" end="1229" title="Hot-carrier injection" label="Hot-carrier injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167019" start="1329" end="1352" title="Environmental sociology" label="Environmental sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q19373927" start="1371" end="1394" title="Hei (album)" label="&amp;quot;Hei&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577697" start="1448" end="1483" title="Hei (Darker than Black)" label="Hei (&amp;quot;Darker than Black&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q202742" start="1517" end="1519" title="Qi" label="Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q349942" start="1643" end="1664" title="Hiei (disambiguation)" label="Hiei (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535019" wikidata="Q895050" url="?curid=535019" title="Boulder River (Sweet Grass County, Montana)">
<text>The Boulder River is a tributary of the Yellowstone River, approximately 60 mi (96 km) long, in south central Montana in the United States. It is one of two rivers named the Boulder River in Montana.

It rises in the Gallatin National Forest in the Absaroka Range in southern Park County. It flows north through mountainous canyons, a cataract under a natural bridge, and northwest in a widening valley past McLeod. It joins the Yellowstone at Big Timber. The landscape of the Boulder River and river valley has merited the filming of two movies: &quot;A River Runs Through It&quot; and &quot;The Horse Whisperer&quot;.

==Discharges==
==Tourism==
The river is a popular destination for fly fishing. Other attractions in the valley include several church camps, a guest ranch, and several USFS campgrounds. The Forest Service also maintains several guard stations, trailheads, and picnic areas in the valley.

==Variant names==
The Boulder River has also been known as: Rivers a Cross, Rivers across, and Rivers-across. And, to distinguish it from the other Boulder River in Montana, it is sometimes called the &quot;East Boulder River&quot; (as it is east of the other) or the &quot;Boulder Fork of the Yellowstone,&quot; parallel with the Clark&#x27;s Fork of the Yellowstone as differentiated from the Clark&#x27;s Fork River of Western Montana.

==Climate==
The Placer Basin SNOTEL weather station is situated near the source of the East Boulder River, at an elevation of 8830 feet (2691 m).
==See also==
*List of rivers of Montana
*Montana Stream Access Law

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q895050" start="4" end="17" title="Boulder River (Sweet Grass County, Montana)" label="Boulder River"/>
<link wikidata="Q374772" start="40" end="57" title="Yellowstone River" label="Yellowstone River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="110" end="117" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="125" end="138" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q895052" start="174" end="187" title="Boulder River (disambiguation)" label="Boulder River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751739" start="217" end="241" title="Gallatin National Forest" label="Gallatin National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q331762" start="249" end="263" title="Absaroka Range" label="Absaroka Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q496644" start="276" end="287" title="Park County, Montana" label="Park County"/>
<link wikidata="Q150784" start="324" end="330" title="canyon" label="canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q859439" start="444" end="454" title="Big Timber, Montana" label="Big Timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q581906" start="547" end="582" title="A River Runs Through It (film)" label="&amp;quot;A River Runs Through It&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127424" start="593" end="612" title="The Horse Whisperer (film)" label="The Horse Whisperer"/>
<link wikidata="Q898886" start="687" end="698" title="fly fishing" label="fly fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615133" start="764" end="775" title="guest ranch" label="guest ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="789" end="793" title="United States Forest Service" label="USFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q832778" start="794" end="804" title="campground" label="campground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="811" end="825" title="United States Forest Service" label="Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832815" start="865" end="874" title="trailhead" label="trailhead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1366" end="1378" title="Placer Basin" label="Placer Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391873" start="1379" end="1385" title="SNOTEL" label="SNOTEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q895050" start="1437" end="1455" title="Boulder River (Sweet Grass County, Montana)" label="East Boulder River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975982" start="1510" end="1535" title="List of rivers of Montana" label="List of rivers of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904333" start="1537" end="1562" title="Montana Stream Access Law" label="Montana Stream Access Law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535020" wikidata="Q2279957" url="?curid=535020" title="Short S.8 Calcutta">
<text>The Short Calcutta or S.8 was a civilian biplane airliner flying boat made by Short Brothers.

==Design and development==
The Calcutta biplane flying boat originated from an Imperial Airways requirement to service the Mediterranean legs of its services to and from India. Derived from the Short Singapore military flying boat, the Calcutta was noteworthy for being the first British stressed skin, metal-hulled flying boat but was preceded by the German Zeppelin-Lindau Rs.IV. It was equipped with three Bristol Jupiter engines mounted between the wings. The two pilots flew the plane from an open cockpit while the radio operator shared the main cabin with 15 passengers.

==Operational history==
The S.8 Calcutta made its first flight on 14 February 1928, having been launched the previous day and left at its mooring overnight to assess the hull for signs of leakage. Shorts&#x27; Chief Test Pilot, John Lankester Parker was at the controls, with Major Herbert G. Brackley of Imperial Airways as co-pilot. On 15 March 1928, this aircraft (registered as &quot;G-EBVG&quot;) was delivered by Parker and Brackley to the Marine Aircraft Experimental Establishment, Felixstowe, for its airworthiness and sea handling checks; these were successfully completed on 27 July of the same year and the aircraft was flown back to Shorts on the same day. &quot;G-EBVG&quot; was handed over to Imperial Airways on 9 August 1928.

The S.8 Calcutta was introduced in 1928 and was used by Imperial Airways flying the Mediterranean-to-Karachi leg of the Britain-to-India route.

A total of seven aircraft were built. A military version of the Calcutta, originally known as the &quot;Calcutta (Service type)&quot;, was built as the Short Rangoon. In 1924, a Calcutta was purchased by the French Breguet Company from which they developed a military version for the French Navy known as the Breguet S.8/2, which was similar to the Rangoon version. Four aircraft were built under licence by Breguet at Le Havre. Breguet later developed an improved version, the Breguet 521 Bizerte.

On 1 August 1928, Parker, accompanied by Oswald Short, flew &quot;G-EBVG&quot; to Westminster, setting it down on the Thames between Vauxhall and Lambeth Bridges; it was moored off the Albert Embankment for three days for inspection by Members of Parliament (including the then Chancellor of the Exchequer, Winston Churchill), members of the House of Lords and others.

==Accidents and incidents==

The &quot;City of Rome&quot; (registration G-AADN) made a forced landing in high winds and poor weather in the Ligurian Sea off La Spezia, Italy, during a scheduled passenger flight from Naples International Airport in Naples, Italy, to Genoa Cristoforo Colombo Airport outside Genoa, Italy, on 26 October 1929. It sank during efforts to tow it to shore, killing all seven people on board.

The &quot;City of Khartoum&quot; (G-AASJ) suffered a catastrophic failure of all three engines shortly before the end of its flight between Crete and Alexandria, Egypt, just after nightfall on 31 December 1935. The pilot was the only survivor; nine passengers and three crew were killed either by the impact with water or by drowning when the aircraft was overwhelmed by heavy waves. An inquiry by the British Air Ministry found that the carburettors had been altered in a way which increased fuel consumption, resulting in the aircraft running out of fuel.

==Operators==
*Imperial Airways

==Specifications==


==See also==
==Notes==
==Bibliography==
* 
* &quot;The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Aircraft (Part Work 1982-1985)&quot;. London: Orbis Publishing, 1985.
*

==External links==

*Short &quot;Calcutta&quot;, Flight, 3 October 1930</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2279957" start="4" end="18" title="Short S.8 Calcutta" label="Short Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279957" start="22" end="25" title="Short S.8 Calcutta" label="S.8"/>
<link wikidata="Q223818" start="41" end="48" title="biplane" label="biplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q210932" start="49" end="57" title="airliner" label="airliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153376" start="58" end="69" title="flying boat" label="flying boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656412" start="78" end="92" title="Short Brothers" label="Short Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q591797" start="174" end="190" title="Imperial Airways" label="Imperial Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q911837" start="289" end="304" title="Short Singapore" label="Short Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623464" start="383" end="396" title="stressed skin" label="stressed skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245929" start="454" end="475" title="Zeppelin-Lindau Rs.IV" label="Zeppelin-Lindau Rs.IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q61418" start="504" end="519" title="Bristol Jupiter" label="Bristol Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318390" start="616" end="630" title="radio operator" label="radio operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q730242" start="890" end="900" title="Test pilot" label="Test Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244022" start="902" end="923" title="John Lankester Parker" label="John Lankester Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="950" end="955" title="Major (rank)" label="Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q23582848" start="956" end="975" title="Herbert G. Brackley" label="Herbert G. Brackley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764007" start="1120" end="1162" title="Marine Aircraft Experimental Establishment" label="Marine Aircraft Experimental Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946885" start="1184" end="1197" title="Certificate of Airworthiness" label="airworthiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1502" end="1515" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="1519" end="1526" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1538" end="1545" title="UK" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1549" end="1554" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3912762" start="1715" end="1728" title="Short Rangoon" label="Short Rangoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811388" start="1733" end="1737" title="1924 in aviation" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1771" end="1777" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q176035" start="1778" end="1793" title="Breguet Aviation" label="Breguet Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q905340" start="2041" end="2060" title="Breguet 521" label="Breguet 521 Bizerte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108163" start="2104" end="2116" title="Oswald Short" label="Oswald Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="2145" end="2156" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="2181" end="2187" title="Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142134" start="2196" end="2204" title="Vauxhall Bridge" label="Vauxhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130666" start="2209" end="2216" title="Lambeth Bridge" label="Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831157" start="2248" end="2265" title="Albert Embankment" label="Albert Embankment"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="2299" end="2320" title="Members of Parliament" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="2341" end="2368" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="2370" end="2387" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="2405" end="2419" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q42820" start="2573" end="2585" title="Ligurian Sea" label="Ligurian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8611" start="2590" end="2599" title="La Spezia" label="La Spezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2601" end="2606" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q849383" start="2649" end="2677" title="Naples International Airport" label="Naples International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="2681" end="2687" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431383" start="2699" end="2731" title="Genoa Cristoforo Colombo Airport" label="Genoa Cristoforo Colombo Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="2740" end="2745" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="2993" end="2998" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="3003" end="3013" title="Alexandria, Egypt" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="3015" end="3020" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="3291" end="3303" title="carburetor" label="carburettors"/>
<link wikidata="Q591797" start="3427" end="3443" title="Imperial Airways" label="Imperial Airways"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535027" wikidata="Q52781" url="?curid=535027" title="Chessel">
<text>Chessel () is a municipality in the canton of Vaud in Switzerland, located in the district of Aigle.

==History==
Chessel is first mentioned in 1364 as &quot;Chessey&quot;.

==Geography==
Chessel has an area, , of . Of this area, or 61.6% is used for agricultural purposes, while or 20.7% is forested. Of the rest of the land, or 10.9% is settled (buildings or roads), or 6.2% is either rivers or lakes.

Of the built up area, housing and buildings made up 3.9% and transportation infrastructure made up 2.8%. while parks, green belts and sports fields made up 3.6%. Out of the forested land, 19.6% of the total land area is heavily forested and 1.1% is covered with orchards or small clusters of trees. Of the agricultural land, 54.1% is used for growing crops and 5.9% is pastures, while 1.7% is used for orchards or vine crops. All the water in the municipality is flowing water.

The municipality is located in the Aigle district, on the right bank of the Rhone river.

==Coat of arms==
The blazon of the municipal coat of arms was originally &quot;D&#x27;or à la fasce ondée d&#x27;azur&quot;, symbolizing the Rhône which runs through Chessel. In 1926, the communal authorities placed a crescent in the higher part of the flag: this represented the old &quot;Café de la Turquie&quot; (Café of Turkey) and was removed in 1958. The Council of State of the Canton of Vaud has accepted a request in 2004 to place the crescent back on the flag.

==Demographics==
Chessel has a population () of . , 7.6% of the population are resident foreign nationals. Over the last 10 years (1999–2009 ) the population has changed at a rate of 12.4%. It has changed at a rate of 5.2% due to migration and at a rate of 8.2% due to births and deaths.

Most of the population () speaks French (285 or 90.8%), with English being second most common (7 or 2.2%) and Portuguese being third (5 or 1.6%). There are 2 people who speak German, 3 people who speak Italian.

Of the population in the municipality 99 or about 31.5% were born in Chessel and lived there in 2000. There were 119 or 37.9% who were born in the same canton, while 41 or 13.1% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 54 or 17.2% were born outside of Switzerland. In there were 2 live births to Swiss citizens and 3 births to non-Swiss citizens, and in same time span there were 4 deaths of Swiss citizens. Ignoring immigration and emigration, the population of Swiss citizens decreased by 2 while the foreign population increased by 3. There . At the same time, there was 1 non-Swiss man who emigrated from Switzerland to another country and 1 non-Swiss woman who immigrated from another country to Switzerland. The total Swiss population change in 2008 (from all sources, including moves across municipal borders) was an increase of 2 and the non-Swiss population decreased by 7 people. This represents a population growth rate of -1.4%.

The age distribution, , in Chessel is; 45 children or 13.1% of the population are between 0 and 9 years old and 52 teenagers or 15.1% are between 10 and 19. Of the adult population, 31 people or 9.0% of the population are between 20 and 29 years old. 45 people or 13.1% are between 30 and 39, 54 people or 15.7% are between 40 and 49, and 55 people or 16.0% are between 50 and 59. The senior population distribution is 29 people or 8.4% of the population are between 60 and 69 years old, 23 people or 6.7% are between 70 and 79,there are 9 people or 2.6% who are 80 and 89, and there is 1 person who is 90 and older.

, there were 130 people who were single and never married in the municipality. There were 160 married individuals, 11 widows or widowers and 13 individuals who are divorced.

, there were 111 private households in the municipality, and an average of 2.7 persons per household. There were 25 households that consist of only one person and 11 households with five or more people. Out of a total of 116 households that answered this question, 21.6% were households made up of just one person. Of the rest of the households, there are 27 married couples without children, 54 married couples with children There were 2 single parents with a child or children. There were 3 households that were made up of unrelated people and 5 households that were made up of some sort of institution or another collective housing.

 there were 72 single-family homes (or 74.2% of the total) out of a total of 97 inhabited buildings. There were 9 multi-family buildings (9.3%), along with 14 multi-purpose buildings that were mostly used for housing (14.4%) and 2 other use buildings (commercial or industrial) that also had some housing (2.1%). Of the single-family homes 6 were built before 1919, while 22 were built between 1990 and 2000. The greatest number of single-family homes (19) were built between 1981 and 1990. The most multi-family homes (4) were built before 1919 and the next most (2) were built between 1919 and 1945.

 there were 119 apartments in the municipality. The most common apartment size was 4 rooms of which there were 37. There were 2 single-room apartments and 54 apartments with five or more rooms. Of these apartments, a total of 103 apartments (86.6% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 14 apartments (11.8%) were seasonally occupied and 2 apartments (1.7%) were empty. , the construction rate of new housing units was 0 new units per 1000 residents. The vacancy rate for the municipality, , was 0%.

The historical population is given in the following chart:
==Politics==
In the 2007 federal election the most popular party was the SVP which received 29.63% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the FDP (20.88%), the SP (15.3%) and the Green Party (15.08%). In the federal election, a total of 132 votes were cast, and the voter turnout was 55.9%.

==Economy==
, Chessel had an unemployment rate of 3.9%. , there were 58 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 13 businesses involved in this sector. 3 people were employed in the secondary sector and there was 1 business in this sector. 25 people were employed in the tertiary sector, with 13 businesses in this sector. There were 144 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which females made up 39.6% of the workforce.

 the total number of full-time equivalent jobs was 66. The number of jobs in the primary sector was 44, all of which were in agriculture. The number of jobs in the secondary sector was 2, all of which were in construction. The number of jobs in the tertiary sector was 20. In the tertiary sector; 2 or 10.0% were in wholesale or retail sales or the repair of motor vehicles, 7 or 35.0% were in a hotel or restaurant, 1 was in the information industry, 3 or 15.0% were technical professionals or scientists, 1 was in education.

, there were 22 workers who commuted into the municipality and 97 workers who commuted away. The municipality is a net exporter of workers, with about 4.4 workers leaving the municipality for every one entering. Of the working population, 6.3% used public transportation to get to work, and 63.2% used a private car.

==Religion==
From the , 73 or 23.2% were Roman Catholic, while 195 or 62.1% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church. Of the rest of the population, there were 12 individuals (or about 3.82% of the population) who belonged to another Christian church. There were 13 (or about 4.14% of the population) who were Islamic. There were 2 individuals who were Buddhist. 19 (or about 6.05% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist.

==Education==

In Chessel about 111 or (35.4%) of the population have completed non-mandatory upper secondary education, and 29 or (9.2%) have completed additional higher education (either university or a &quot;Fachhochschule&quot;). Of the 29 who completed tertiary schooling, 79.3% were Swiss men, 17.2% were Swiss women.

, there were 7 students in Chessel who came from another municipality, while 69 residents attended schools outside the municipality.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q52781" start="0" end="7" title="Chessel" label="Chessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q70208" start="16" end="28" title="Municipalities of Switzerland" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="46" end="50" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="54" end="65" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q647923" start="82" end="99" title="Aigle (district)" label="district of Aigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="960" end="965" title="Rhone" label="Rhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="995" end="1001" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="1019" end="1031" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1768" end="1774" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1796" end="1803" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="1845" end="1855" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1910" end="1916" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="1937" end="1944" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2859" end="2881" title="Population growth#Population growth rate" label="population growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q666315" start="5514" end="5535" title="2007 Swiss federal election" label="2007 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q385258" start="5567" end="5570" title="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="SVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q202638" start="5651" end="5654" title="FDP.The Liberals" label="FDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q303745" start="5669" end="5671" title="Social Democratic Party of Switzerland" label="SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q659739" start="5688" end="5699" title="Green Party of Switzerland" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="5775" end="5788" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="5896" end="5919" title="Primary sector of the economy" label="primary economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="5999" end="6015" title="Secondary sector of the economy" label="secondary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="6088" end="6103" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="6292" end="6312" title="full-time equivalent" label="full-time equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7158" end="7172" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q338309" start="7209" end="7230" title="Swiss Reformed Church" label="Swiss Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="7424" end="7429" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="7467" end="7475" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="7542" end="7550" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="7554" end="7561" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7658" end="7683" title="Education in Switzerland#Secondary" label="upper secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q688134" start="7753" end="7763" title="List of universities in Switzerland" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365560" start="7775" end="7789" title="Fachhochschule" label="Fachhochschule"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535029" wikidata="Q4880964" url="?curid=535029" title="Behold a Pale Horse">
<text>Behold a Pale Horse may refer to:

* &quot;Behold a pale horse&quot;, a phrase taken from the biblical Book of Revelation
* &quot;Behold a Pale Horse&quot; (film), a 1964 film directed by Fred Zinnemann
* &quot;Behold a Pale Horse&quot;, a 1991 book by Milton William Cooper
* &quot;Behold! A Pale Horse&quot;, a 2009 album by The Ghost and the Grace
* &quot;Behold, a Pale Horse&quot;, a 2013 album by Ebony Bones
* &quot;Behold a Pale Horse&quot;, a song from the &quot;Halo 3 Original Soundtrack&quot;
* &quot;Behold a Pale Horse&quot;, a song by Angels &amp; Airwaves from the album &quot;&quot;
* &quot;Behold a Pale Horse&quot;, a song by Boogiemonsters from the album &quot;God Sound&quot;
* &quot;Behold! a Pale Horse&quot;, a song by JPEGMAFIA from the album The Ghost-Pop Tape
* &quot;Behold a Pale Horse&quot;, a song by $uicideboy$

== See also ==
* Pale horse (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4880964" start="0" end="19" title="Behold a Pale Horse" label="Behold a Pale Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="103" end="121" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q763351" start="124" end="162" title="Behold a Pale Horse (film)" label="&amp;quot;Behold a Pale Horse&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="211" end="230" title="Milton William Cooper#Behold a Pale Horse" label="Behold a Pale Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880960" start="283" end="303" title="Behold! A Pale Horse" label="Behold! A Pale Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q24037360" start="359" end="379" title="Behold, a Pale Horse" label="Behold, a Pale Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q456866" start="403" end="414" title="Ebony Bones" label="Ebony Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280218" start="472" end="498" title="Halo 3 Original Soundtrack" label="Halo 3 Original Soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942889" start="645" end="659" title="Boogiemonsters" label="Boogiemonsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575964" start="681" end="690" title="God Sound" label="God Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q50415953" start="743" end="752" title="JPEGMafia" label="JPEGMAFIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q85770394" start="768" end="786" title="JPEGMafia discography" label="The Ghost-Pop Tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q30196568" start="832" end="843" title="Suicideboys" label="$uicideboy$"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232012" start="862" end="889" title="Pale horse (disambiguation)" label="Pale horse (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535033" wikidata="Q57099" url="?curid=535033" title="Corbeyrier">
<text>Corbeyrier is a municipality in Switzerland in the canton of Vaud, located in the district of Aigle. It became a municipality in 1718.

==History==
Corbeyrier is first mentioned in 1261 as &quot;de Cubiriaco&quot;.

==Geography==

Corbeyrier has an area, , of . Of this area, or 36.2% is used for agricultural purposes, while or 54.4% is forested. Of the rest of the land, or 2.3% is settled (buildings or roads), or 0.3% is either rivers or lakes and or 6.9% is unproductive land.

Of the built up area, housing and buildings made up 1.0% and transportation infrastructure made up 1.2%. Out of the forested land, 47.0% of the total land area is heavily forested and 2.9% is covered with orchards or small clusters of trees. Of the agricultural land, 0.0% is used for growing crops and 5.0% is pastures and 30.8% is used for alpine pastures. All the water in the municipality is in lakes. Of the unproductive areas, 4.6% is unproductive vegetation and 2.2% is too rocky for vegetation.

The municipality is located in the Aigle district, on the right bank of Rhone river. The municipality stretches from the upper end of the vineyard of Yvorne to the alpine pastures of the Eau-Froide and Petit-Hongrin valleys. It consists of the village of Corbeyrier and the hamlets of Boveau, Luan, Le Crettex and Vers Cort.

==Coat of arms==
The blazon of the municipal coat of arms is &quot;Or, a Wolf Head Sable, langued Gules.&quot;

==Demographics==
Corbeyrier has a population () of . , 8.0% of the population are resident foreign nationals. Over the last 10 years (1999–2009 ) the population has changed at a rate of 8.6%. It has changed at a rate of 29.4% due to migration and at a rate of -20.2% due to births and deaths.

Most of the population () speaks French (323 or 93.1%), with German being second most common (13 or 3.7%) and Italian being third (4 or 1.2%).

Of the population in the municipality 90 or about 25.9% were born in Corbeyrier and lived there in 2000. There were 134 or 38.6% who were born in the same canton, while 63 or 18.2% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 41 or 11.8% were born outside of Switzerland. In

 there was 1 live birth to Swiss citizens and were 8 deaths of Swiss citizens and 1 non-Swiss citizen death. Ignoring immigration and emigration, the population of Swiss citizens decreased by 7 while the foreign population decreased by 1. There was 1 non-Swiss man and 1 non-Swiss woman who emigrated from Switzerland to another country. The total Swiss population change in 2008 (from all sources, including moves across municipal borders) was an increase of 3 and the non-Swiss population increased by 3 people. This represents a population growth rate of 1.6%.

The age distribution, , in Corbeyrier is; 27 children or 7.2% of the population are between 0 and 9 years old and 42 teenagers or 11.2% are between 10 and 19. Of the adult population, 32 people or 8.5% of the population are between 20 and 29 years old. 56 people or 14.9% are between 30 and 39, 38 people or 10.1% are between 40 and 49, and 36 people or 9.6% are between 50 and 59. The senior population distribution is 60 people or 16.0% of the population are between 60 and 69 years old, 62 people or 16.5% are between 70 and 79,there are 22 people or 5.9% who are 80 and 89, and there is 1 person who is 90 and older.

, there were 106 people who were single and never married in the municipality. There were 167 married individuals, 41 widows or widowers and 33 individuals who are divorced.

, there were 148 private households in the municipality, and an average of 2. persons per household. There were 57 households that consist of only one person and 5 households with five or more people. Out of a total of 154 households that answered this question, 37.0% were households made up of just one person. Of the rest of the households, there are 55 married couples without children, 33 married couples with children There was one single parent with a child or children. There were 2 households that were made up of unrelated people and 6 households that were made up of some sort of institution or another collective housing.

 there were 155 single family homes (or 71.8% of the total) out of a total of 216 inhabited buildings. There were 26 multi-family buildings (12.0%), along with 22 multi-purpose buildings that were mostly used for housing (10.2%) and 13 other use buildings (commercial or industrial) that also had some housing (6.0%). Of the single family homes 49 were built before 1919, while 9 were built between 1990 and 2000. The most multi-family homes (13) were built before 1919 and the next most (4) were built between 1981 and 1990.

 there were 257 apartments in the municipality. The most common apartment size was 3 rooms of which there were 70. There were 20 single room apartments and 71 apartments with five or more rooms. Of these apartments, a total of 142 apartments (55.3% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 91 apartments (35.4%) were seasonally occupied and 24 apartments (9.3%) were empty. , the construction rate of new housing units was 2.7 new units per 1000 residents. The vacancy rate for the municipality, , was 0%.

The historical population is given in the following chart:
==Politics==
In the 2007 federal election the most popular party was the SVP which received 37.77% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the SP (12.51%), the Green Party (12.09%) and the FDP (11.96%). In the federal election, a total of 139 votes were cast, and the voter turnout was 49.6%.

==Economy==
, Corbeyrier had an unemployment rate of 3.8%. , there were 20 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 3 businesses involved in this sector. 19 people were employed in the secondary sector and there were 3 businesses in this sector. 107 people were employed in the tertiary sector, with 7 businesses in this sector. There were 148 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which females made up 47.3% of the workforce.

 the total number of full-time equivalent jobs was 114. The number of jobs in the primary sector was 14, of which 6 were in agriculture and 8 were in forestry or lumber production. The number of jobs in the secondary sector was 18 of which 4 or (22.2%) were in manufacturing and 14 (77.8%) were in construction. The number of jobs in the tertiary sector was 82. In the tertiary sector; 5 or 6.1% were in a hotel or restaurant, 21 or 25.6% were in education and 53 or 64.6% were in health care.

, there were 78 workers who commuted into the municipality and 78 workers who commuted away. The municipality is a net exporter of workers, with about 1.0 workers leaving the municipality for every one entering. Of the working population, 6.1% used public transportation to get to work, and 64.2% used a private car.

==Religion==
From the , 70 or 20.2% were Roman Catholic, while 212 or 61.1% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church. Of the rest of the population, there was 1 individual who belongs to the Christian Catholic Church, and there were 7 individuals (or about 2.02% of the population) who belonged to another Christian church. There were 2 individuals who were Hindu. 43 (or about 12.39% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist, and 12 individuals (or about 3.46% of the population) did not answer the question.

==Education==
In Corbeyrier about 124 or (35.7%) of the population have completed non-mandatory upper secondary education, and 42 or (12.1%) have completed additional higher education (either university or a &quot;Fachhochschule&quot;). Of the 42 who completed tertiary schooling, 50.0% were Swiss men, 19.0% were Swiss women, 16.7% were non-Swiss men and 14.3% were non-Swiss women.

In the 2009/2010 school year there were a total of 23 students in the Corbeyrier school district. In the Vaud cantonal school system, two years of non-obligatory pre-school are provided by the political districts. During the school year, the district provided pre-school care for a total of 205 children of which 96 children (46.8%) received subsidized pre-school care. There were 19 students in the primary school program, which lasts four years. The obligatory lower secondary school program lasts for six years and there were 4 students in those schools.

, there were 4 students in Corbeyrier who came from another municipality, while 28 residents attended schools outside the municipality.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57099" start="0" end="10" title="Corbeyrier" label="Corbeyrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q70208" start="16" end="28" title="Municipalities of Switzerland" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="32" end="43" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="61" end="65" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q647923" start="82" end="99" title="district of Aigle" label="district of Aigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="1059" end="1064" title="Rhone" label="Rhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q22715" start="1125" end="1133" title="vineyard" label="vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="1261" end="1268" title="hamlet (place)" label="hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="1334" end="1340" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="1358" end="1370" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1752" end="1758" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1780" end="1786" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="1829" end="1836" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2671" end="2693" title="Population growth#Population growth rate" label="population growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q666315" start="5255" end="5276" title="2007 Swiss federal election" label="2007 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q385258" start="5308" end="5311" title="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="SVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q303745" start="5392" end="5394" title="Social Democratic Party of Switzerland" label="SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q659739" start="5409" end="5420" title="Green Party of Switzerland" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q202638" start="5438" end="5441" title="FDP.The Liberals" label="FDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="5517" end="5530" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="5641" end="5664" title="Primary sector of the economy" label="primary economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="5744" end="5760" title="Secondary sector of the economy" label="secondary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="5837" end="5852" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="6040" end="6060" title="full-time equivalent" label="full-time equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6873" end="6887" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q338309" start="6924" end="6945" title="Swiss Reformed Church" label="Swiss Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q671244" start="7020" end="7045" title="Christian Catholic Church of Switzerland" label="Christian Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="7187" end="7192" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="7260" end="7268" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="7272" end="7279" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7461" end="7486" title="Education in Switzerland#Secondary" label="upper secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q688134" start="7557" end="7567" title="List of universities in Switzerland" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365560" start="7579" end="7593" title="Fachhochschule" label="Fachhochschule"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535034" wikidata="Q7554291" url="?curid=535034" title="Software engineering demographics">
<text>Software engineers make up a significant portion of the global workforce. As of 2022, there are an estimated 26.9 million professional software engineers worldwide, up from 21 million in 2016.

== By country ==
=== United States ===
In 2023, there were an estimated 1.6 million professional software developers in North America. There are 166 million people employed in the US workforce, making software developers 0.96% of the total workforce.
==== Summary ====

==== Software engineers vs. traditional engineers ====
The following two tables compare the number of software engineers (611,900 in 2002) versus the number of traditional engineers (1,157,020 in 2002).

There are another 1,500,000 people in system analysis, system administration, and computer support, many of whom might be called software engineers. Many systems analysts manage software development teams, and as analysis is an important software engineering role, many of them may be considered software engineers in the near future. This means that the number of software engineers may actually be much higher.

It is important to note that the number of software engineers declined by 5 to 10 percent from 2000 to 2002.

==== Computer managers vs. construction and engineering managers ====
Computer and information system managers (264,790) manage software projects, as well as computer operations. Similarly, Construction and engineering managers (413,750) oversee engineering projects, manufacturing plants, and construction sites. Computer management is 64% the size of construction and engineering management.
==== Software engineering educators vs. engineering educators ====

Most people working in the field of computer science, whether making software systems (software engineering) or studying the theoretical and mathematical facts of software systems (computer science), acquire degrees in computer science. The data shows that the combined number of chemistry and physics educators (29,610) nearly equals the number of engineering educators (29,310). It is estimated that roughly half of computer science educators emphasize the practical (software engineering), and the other half emphasize the theoretical (computer science). This means that software engineering education is 56% the size of traditional engineering education. There are more computer science educators than chemistry and physics educators combined, or engineering educators.

==== Other software and engineering roles ====

==== Relation to IT demographics ====
Software engineers are part of the much larger software, hardware, application, and operations community. In 2000 in the U.S., there were about 680,000 software engineers and about 10,000,000 IT workers.

There are no numbers on testers in the BLS data.

=== India ===
There has been a healthy growth in the number of India&#x27;s IT professionals over the past few years. From a base of 6,800 knowledge workers in 198586, the number increased to 522,000 software and services professionals by the end of 200102. It is estimated that out of these 528,000 knowledge workers, almost 170,000 are working in the IT software and services export industry; nearly 106,000 are working in the IT enabled services and over 230,000 in user organizations.

=== Australia ===
In May 2024, the Australian government reported that 169,300 Australians are employed as software and applications programmers, 17% of who are women. The role grew annually by 8,300 workers.

== See also ==
* Software engineering
* List of software engineering topics
* Software engineering economics
* Software engineering professionalism

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="0" end="18" title="Software engineers" label="Software engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570919" start="56" end="72" title="global workforce" label="global workforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554291" start="109" end="121" title="Software engineering demographics" label="26.9 million"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554291" start="173" end="183" title="Software engineering demographics" label="21 million"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663698" start="706" end="721" title="system analysis" label="system analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q327353" start="723" end="744" title="System administrator" label="system administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928428" start="2759" end="2762" title="Bureau of Labor Statistics" label="BLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2833" end="2838" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914017" start="2909" end="2925" title="knowledge worker" label="knowledge worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="3487" end="3507" title="Software engineering" label="Software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112734" start="3510" end="3545" title="List of software engineering topics" label="List of software engineering topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="3548" end="3578" title="Software engineering economics" label="Software engineering economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554293" start="3581" end="3617" title="Software engineering professionalism" label="Software engineering professionalism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535035" wikidata="Q69522" url="?curid=535035" title="Gryon">
<text>Gryon () is a municipality of the canton of Vaud in Switzerland, located in the district of Aigle. The entire village of Gryon and the Taveyanne area are designated as part of the Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites.

== Geography==
The municipality is located in the Aigle district, on a narrow terrace at an elevation of between the Gryonne and Avançon canyons. The commune is composed of multiple settlements, which include the Gryon village, Barboleuse, Alpe des Chaux, Taveyanne, and Peuffeyre. In the western part behind the forests lies the alpine pasture of Taveyanne. The highest point of the commune reaches 2&#x27;620 m a.s.l. on the slopes of mountain Culan, which is part of the Diablerets massif. The lowest point is located at an altitude of 680 m at Peuffeyre next to the river Avançon d&#x27;Anzeinde.

Gryon&#x27;s neighbouring communes are Bex, Ollon, and very partially Ormont-Dessus. The eastern and northern borders were established with Bex back in 1676.

Gryon has an area, , of . Of this area, or 28.3% is used for agricultural purposes, while or 52.2% is forested. Of the rest of the land, or 11.2% is settled (buildings or roads), or 0.5% is either rivers or lakes and or 7.8% is unproductive land.

Of the built up area, housing and buildings made up 7.9% and transportation infrastructure made up 2.9%. Out of the forested land, 42.1% of the total land area is heavily forested and 4.2% is covered with orchards or small clusters of trees. Of the agricultural land, 0.0% is used for growing crops and 7.0% is pastures and 21.3% is used for alpine pastures. All the water in the municipality is flowing water. Of the unproductive areas, 4.3% is unproductive vegetation and 3.5% is too rocky for vegetation.

==History==
Gryon is first mentioned in 1189 as &quot;Griuns&quot;. The old records dating until 1867 recite &quot;Grion&quot; as the commune&#x27;s name.

Before 1189 the territory of Gryon was part of the Bex region but following the generous donation of Peter von Gruins the territory would progressively become the property of the Abbey of Saint-Maurice.

During the Bernese reign (1484-1789), Gryon gained a special status by remaining under the jurisdiction of the Abbey of Saint-Maurice while also having a General Council in Gryon (court of justice was based in Gryon while appeals had to be made at the bottom of the valley in Salaz). Until the Reformation (around 1539), Gryon was part of Bex&#x27;s parish, which itself was part of the diocese of Sion.

After the old regime&#x27;s fall, Gryon became part of the newly formed canton of Leman (1798-1803), which was consequently renamed Vaud after the Act of Mediation. In 1798, the commune was attributed to the Aigle district, which remains part of today.

Towards the second half of the 19th century, the region became more open by constructing novel infrastructure. A motorable road was inaugurated in 1857, while the rack railway (Bex-Gryon-Villars-Chesières (BGVC)) opened in 1900. In 1895 an electric factory of Peuffeyre was constructed.

In parallel, the poet Juste Olivier passed the later stages of his life in Gryon (1871-1876) where he wrote the famous song &quot;Mi-été de Taveyeane&quot;, which was first sung in 1869. In 1875, he published his work &quot;Sentiers de Montagne&quot;, leaving a lasting mark on the history of Gryon through his contributions to the commune. In the meantime, people from Lausanne and Geneva increasingly come to pass summer in Gryon. The first known holiday chalet was constructed in 1860. From 1900s winter tourism became increasingly popular with the apparition of skis. In 1942, the two railway lines, BGVC and Villars-Bretaye fused to form a new train track Bex-Villars-Bretaye (BVB). In 1956, the gondola lift linking Gryon to les Chaux was realised, which was soon followed by a construction boom in the ski area. From the 1970s, a tourist complex was developed in the Alpe des Chaux. 

The bridge over Gryonne (originally constructed in 1901) which provided a direct link with Villars-sur-Ollon was reconstructed in 1980.

==Coat of arms==
The blazon of the municipal coat of arms is &quot;Gules, under a Cross Bottony Argent two Axes of the same handled Or in saltire.&quot;

==Demographics==

Gryon has a population () of . , 27.9% of the population are resident foreign nationals. Over the last 10 years (2009–2019) the population has changed at a rate of 13.3%.

Most of the population () speaks French (870 or 87.6%), with German being second most common (40 or 4.0%) and English being third (32 or 3.2%). There are 19 people who speak Italian.

Of the population in the municipality 280 or about 28.2% were born in Gryon and lived there in 2000. There were 310 or 31.2% who were born in the same canton, while 170 or 17.1% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 225 or 22.7% were born outside of Switzerland.

In there were 4 live births to Swiss citizens and 4 births to non-Swiss citizens, and in same time span there were 6 deaths of Swiss citizens. Ignoring immigration and emigration, the population of Swiss citizens decreased by 2 while the foreign population increased by 4. There were 2 Swiss men who emigrated from Switzerland and 5 Swiss women who immigrated back to Switzerland. At the same time, there were 9 non-Swiss men and 9 non-Swiss women who immigrated from another country to Switzerland. The total Swiss population change in 2008 (from all sources, including moves across municipal borders) was a decrease of 15 and the non-Swiss population increased by 30 people. This represents a population growth rate of 1.3%.

The age distribution, , in Gryon is; 132 children or 11.2% of the population are between 0 and 9 years old and 117 teenagers or 9.9% are between 10 and 19. Of the adult population, 113 people or 9.6% of the population are between 20 and 29 years old. 167 people or 14.2% are between 30 and 39, 183 people or 15.5% are between 40 and 49, and 144 people or 12.2% are between 50 and 59. The senior population distribution is 178 people or 15.1% of the population are between 60 and 69 years old, 86 people or 7.3% are between 70 and 79,there are 49 people or 4.2% who are 80 and 89, and there are 11 people or 0.9% who are 90 and older.

, there were 358 people who were single and never married in the municipality. There were 511 married individuals, 56 widows or widowers and 68 individuals who are divorced.

, there were 459 private households in the municipality, and an average of 2.1 persons per household. There were 177 households that consist of only one person and 23 households with five or more people. Out of a total of 473 households that answered this question, 37.4% were households made up of just one person and there was 1 adult who lived with their parents. Of the rest of the households, there are 148 married couples without children, 113 married couples with children There were 14 single parents with a child or children. There were 6 households that were made up of unrelated people and 14 households that were made up of some sort of institution or another collective housing.

 there were 709 single family homes (or 72.1% of the total) out of a total of 983 inhabited buildings. There were 205 multi-family buildings (20.9%), along with 30 multi-purpose buildings that were mostly used for housing (3.1%) and 39 other use buildings (commercial or industrial) that also had some housing (4.0%). Of the single family homes 104 were built before 1919, while 42 were built between 1990 and 2000. The greatest number of single family homes (166) were built between 1961 and 1970. The most multi-family homes (52) were built between 1971 and 1980 and the next most (51) were built between 1981 and 1990.

 there were 1,765 apartments in the municipality. The most common apartment size was 3 rooms of which there were 439. There were 184 single room apartments and 384 apartments with five or more rooms. Of these apartments, a total of 449 apartments (25.4% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 1,231 apartments (69.7%) were seasonally occupied and 85 apartments (4.8%) were empty. , the construction rate of new housing units was 11.8 new units per 1000 residents. The vacancy rate for the municipality, , was 2.01%.

The historical population is given in the following chart:
==Politics==
In the 2007 federal election the most popular party was the SVP which received 23% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the FDP (22.05%), the SP (15.46%) and the Green Party (12.76%). In the federal election, a total of 283 votes were cast, and the voter turnout was 41.0%.

==Economy==

 the total number of full-time equivalent jobs was 403. There were 11 (2.7%) people employed in the primary economic sector and about 6 businesses involved in the same sector. 84 (20.8%) people were employed in the secondary sector working across 18 businesses. 308 (76.4%) people were employed in the tertiary sector, with 111 businesses in this sector. There were 475 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which females made up 42.9% of the workforce. , Gryon had an unemployment rate of 4.8%.

, there were 53 workers who commuted into the municipality and 256 workers who commuted away. The municipality is a net exporter of workers, with about 4.8 workers leaving the municipality for every one entering. Of the working population, 11.8% used public transportation to get to work, and 65.3% used a private car.

==Religion==

From the , 254 or 25.6% were Roman Catholic, while 524 or 52.8% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church. Of the rest of the population, there were 9 members of an Orthodox church (or about 0.91% of the population), and there were 15 individuals (or about 1.51% of the population) who belonged to another Christian church. There were 12 (or about 1.21% of the population) who were Islamic. There were and 4 individuals who belonged to another church. 153 (or about 15.41% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist, and 22 individuals (or about 2.22% of the population) did not answer the question.

==Weather==
Gryon has an average of 139.4 days of rain or snow per year and on average receives of precipitation. The wettest month is June during which time Gryon receives an average of of rain or snow. During this month there is precipitation for an average of 13.9 days. The month with the most days of precipitation is May, with an average of 13.9, but with only of rain or snow. The driest month of the year is October with an average of of precipitation over 9 days.

==Education==
In Gryon about 387 or (39.0%) of the population have completed non-mandatory upper secondary education, and 160 or (16.1%) have completed additional higher education (either university or a &quot;Fachhochschule&quot;). Of the 160 who completed tertiary schooling, 42.5% were Swiss men, 25.6% were Swiss women, 16.9% were non-Swiss men and 15.0% were non-Swiss women.

In the 2009/2010 school year there were a total of 111 students in the Gryon school district. In the Vaud cantonal school system, two years of non-obligatory pre-school are provided by the political districts. During the school year, the district provided pre-school care for a total of 205 children of which 96 children (46.8%) received subsidized pre-school care. There were 70 students in the primary school program, which lasts four years. The obligatory lower secondary school program lasts for six years and there were 41 students in those schools.

, there were 27 students in Gryon who came from another municipality, while 83 residents attended schools outside the municipality.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q69522" start="0" end="5" title="Gryon" label="Gryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q70208" start="14" end="26" title="Municipalities of Switzerland" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="34" end="40" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="44" end="48" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="52" end="63" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q647923" start="92" end="97" title="Aigle (district)" label="Aigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q502685" start="180" end="213" title="Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites" label="Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139" start="690" end="700" title="Diablerets" label="Diablerets"/>
<link wikidata="Q52261" start="857" end="860" title="Bex" label="Bex"/>
<link wikidata="Q70115" start="862" end="867" title="Ollon" label="Ollon"/>
<link wikidata="Q70082" start="888" end="901" title="Ormont-Dessus" label="Ormont-Dessus"/>
<link wikidata="Q52261" start="958" end="961" title="Bex" label="Bex"/>
<link wikidata="Q334174" start="2069" end="2091" title="Abbey of Saint-Maurice d&amp;#x27;Agaune" label="Abbey of Saint-Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q869930" start="2481" end="2496" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Sion" label="diocese of Sion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190323" start="3063" end="3076" title="Juste Olivier" label="Juste Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="4091" end="4097" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="4115" end="4127" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4447" end="4453" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="4475" end="4481" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="4524" end="4531" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="4588" end="4595" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5564" end="5586" title="Population growth#Population growth rate" label="population growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q666315" start="8327" end="8348" title="2007 Swiss federal election" label="2007 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q385258" start="8380" end="8383" title="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="SVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q202638" start="8461" end="8464" title="FDP.The Liberals" label="FDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q303745" start="8479" end="8481" title="Social Democratic Party of Switzerland" label="SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q659739" start="8499" end="8510" title="Green Party of Switzerland" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="8586" end="8599" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="8646" end="8666" title="full-time equivalent" label="full-time equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="8725" end="8748" title="Primary sector of the economy" label="primary economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="8840" end="8856" title="Secondary sector of the economy" label="secondary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="8927" end="8942" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9516" end="9530" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q338309" start="9567" end="9588" title="Swiss Reformed Church" label="Swiss Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="9634" end="9663" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="members of an Orthodox church"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="9865" end="9870" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="10002" end="10010" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="10014" end="10021" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="10206" end="10219" title="Precipitation (meteorology)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10672" end="10697" title="Education in Switzerland#Secondary" label="upper secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q688134" start="10769" end="10779" title="List of universities in Switzerland" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365560" start="10791" end="10805" title="Fachhochschule" label="Fachhochschule"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535037" wikidata="Q416133" url="?curid=535037" title="Liao">
<text>Liao may refer to:

==Chinese history==
* Liao (Zhou dynasty state) (蓼), two states in ancient China during the Spring and Autumn period in the 8th and 7th centuries BC
* Liao of Wu (吳王僚) (died 515 BC), king of Wu during ancient China&#x27;s Spring and Autumn period 
* Liao dynasty (遼朝) (916–1125), a dynasty of China ruled by the Khitan Yelü clan
** Northern Liao (北遼) (1122–1123), a regime in northern China
** Qara Khitai (西遼) (1124–1218), also called the &quot;Western Liao&quot;, successor to the Liao dynasty in northwestern China and Central Asia
** Eastern Liao (東遼) (1213–1269), a regime in northeastern China
** Later Liao (後遼) (1216–1219), a regime in northeastern China

==Other uses==
* Liaoning, abbreviated as Liao (辽), a province of China 
* Liao (surname) (廖), a Chinese family name
* Liao River, a river in northeast China
* &quot;liao&quot;, a grammatical particle in Singlish
* Liao, a character of the video game &quot;Overwatch&quot;
* House Liao, the noble house in the Battletech franchise that leads the major political power called the Capellan Confederation.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q416133" start="0" end="4" title="Liao" label="Liao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650468" start="42" end="67" title="Liao (Zhou dynasty state)" label="Liao (Zhou dynasty state)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265711" start="171" end="181" title="Liao of Wu" label="Liao of Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958" start="270" end="282" title="Liao dynasty" label="Liao dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q110491318" start="352" end="365" title="Northern Liao" label="Northern Liao"/>
<link wikidata="Q862304" start="414" end="425" title="Qara Khitai" label="Qara Khitai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028614" start="558" end="570" title="Eastern Liao" label="Eastern Liao"/>
<link wikidata="Q874561" start="623" end="633" title="Later Liao" label="Later Liao"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="701" end="709" title="Liaoning" label="Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929472" start="759" end="773" title="Liao (surname)" label="Liao (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q559661" start="803" end="813" title="Liao River" label="Liao River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="844" end="860" title="Singlish#Change of state" label="&amp;quot;liao&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q24877466" start="935" end="956" title="Characters of Overwatch" label="&amp;quot;Overwatch&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q810983" start="994" end="1004" title="Battletech" label="Battletech"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535039" wikidata="Q70250" url="?curid=535039" title="Lavey-Morcles">
<text>Lavey-Morcles is a municipality in Switzerland in the canton of Vaud, located in the district of Aigle.

The municipality was created in 1852 by a merger of Morcles and Lavey.

==History==
Lavey-Morcles is first mentioned in 1016 as &quot;A Laver&quot;. In 1189 it was mentioned as &quot;Laveto&quot; and as &quot;Lavey&quot;.

==Geography==
Lavey-Morcles has an area, , of . Of this area, or 18.3% is used for agricultural purposes, while or 62.9% is forested. Of the rest of the land, or 5.1% is settled (buildings or roads), or 1.4% is either rivers or lakes and or 11.8% is unproductive land.

Of the built up area, housing and buildings made up 2.8% and transportation infrastructure made up 1.5%. Out of the forested land, 56.9% of the total land area is heavily forested and 2.5% is covered with orchards or small clusters of trees. Of the agricultural land, 2.0% is used for growing crops and 3.2% is pastures and 12.9% is used for alpine pastures. All the water in the municipality is flowing water. Of the unproductive areas, 5.0% is unproductive vegetation and 6.8% is too rocky for vegetation.

The municipality is located in the Aigle district, on the right bank of the Rhone river. It was created in 1852 when Lavey and Morcles merged. It consists of the villages of Lavey-Village (across from Saint-Maurice), Lavey-les-Bains, Eslex and Morcles.

==Coat of arms==
The blazon of the municipal coat of arms is &quot;Vert, a Rooster Argent, crested, langued, beaked and armed Gules.&quot;

==Demographics==
Lavey-Morcles has a population () of . , 14.7% of the population are resident foreign nationals. Over the last 10 years (1999–2009 ) the population has changed at a rate of 7.2%. It has changed at a rate of 7.3% due to migration and at a rate of 1.4% due to births and deaths.

Most of the population () speaks French (695 or 89.0%), with German being second most common (42 or 5.4%) and Serbo-Croatian being third (18 or 2.3%). There are 13 people who speak Italian and 1 person who speaks Romansh.

Of the population in the municipality 232 or about 29.7% were born in Lavey-Morcles and lived there in 2000. There were 189 or 24.2% who were born in the same canton, while 221 or 28.3% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 118 or 15.1% were born outside of Switzerland.

In there were 7 live births to Swiss citizens and 1 birth to non-Swiss citizens, and in same time span there were 9 deaths of Swiss citizens. Ignoring immigration and emigration, the population of Swiss citizens decreased by 2 while the foreign population increased by 1. There was 1 Swiss woman who immigrated back to Switzerland. At the same time, there were 4 non-Swiss men and 8 non-Swiss women who immigrated from another country to Switzerland. The total Swiss population change in 2008 (from all sources, including moves across municipal borders) was an increase of 12 and the non-Swiss population increased by 7 people. This represents a population growth rate of 2.4%.

The age distribution, , in Lavey-Morcles is; 99 children or 11.6% of the population are between 0 and 9 years old and 81 teenagers or 9.5% are between 10 and 19. Of the adult population, 99 people or 11.6% of the population are between 20 and 29 years old. 108 people or 12.7% are between 30 and 39, 117 people or 13.7% are between 40 and 49, and 132 people or 15.5% are between 50 and 59. The senior population distribution is 99 people or 11.6% of the population are between 60 and 69 years old, 63 people or 7.4% are between 70 and 79,there are 47 people or 5.5% who are 80 and 89, and there are 6 people or 0.7% who are 90 and older.

, there were 284 people who were single and never married in the municipality. There were 380 married individuals, 56 widows or widowers and 61 individuals who are divorced.

, there were 349 private households in the municipality, and an average of 2.2 persons per household. There were 126 households that consist of only one person and 19 households with five or more people. Out of a total of 359 households that answered this question, 35.1% were households made up of just one person and there were 3 adults who lived with their parents. Of the rest of the households, there are 107 married couples without children, 88 married couples with children There were 21 single parents with a child or children. There were 4 households that were made up of unrelated people and 10 households that were made up of some sort of institution or another collective housing.

 there were 166 single family homes (or 63.6% of the total) out of a total of 261 inhabited buildings. There were 70 multi-family buildings (26.8%), along with 14 multi-purpose buildings that were mostly used for housing (5.4%) and 11 other use buildings (commercial or industrial) that also had some housing (4.2%). Of the single family homes 36 were built before 1919, while 8 were built between 1990 and 2000. The most multi-family homes (32) were built before 1919 and the next most (11) were built between 1919 and 1945.

 there were 484 apartments in the municipality. The most common apartment size was 3 rooms of which there were 172. There were 19 single room apartments and 94 apartments with five or more rooms. Of these apartments, a total of 339 apartments (70.0% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 88 apartments (18.2%) were seasonally occupied and 57 apartments (11.8%) were empty. , the construction rate of new housing units was 1.2 new units per 1000 residents. The vacancy rate for the municipality, , was 0%.

The historical population is given in the following chart:
==Politics==
In the 2007 federal election the most popular party was the SVP which received 37.31% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the FDP (20.9%), the SP (15.26%) and the Green Party (9.02%). In the federal election, a total of 260 votes were cast, and the voter turnout was 46.3%.

==Economy==
, Lavey-Morcles had an unemployment rate of 6.1%. , there were 11 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 5 businesses involved in this sector. 60 people were employed in the secondary sector and there were 7 businesses in this sector. 123 people were employed in the tertiary sector, with 18 businesses in this sector. There were 362 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which females made up 43.1% of the workforce.

 the total number of full-time equivalent jobs was 172. The number of jobs in the primary sector was 7, all of which were in agriculture. The number of jobs in the secondary sector was 56 of which 7 or (12.5%) were in manufacturing and 28 (50.0%) were in construction. The number of jobs in the tertiary sector was 109. In the tertiary sector; 10 or 9.2% were in wholesale or retail sales or the repair of motor vehicles, 2 or 1.8% were in the movement and storage of goods, 51 or 46.8% were in a hotel or restaurant, 3 or 2.8% were technical professionals or scientists, and 17 or 15.6% were in health care.

, there were 211 workers who commuted into the municipality and 256 workers who commuted away. The municipality is a net exporter of workers, with about 1.2 workers leaving the municipality for every one entering. Of the working population, 11% used public transportation to get to work, and 66% used a private car.

==Religion==
From the , 363 or 46.5% were Roman Catholic, while 306 or 39.2% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church. Of the rest of the population, there were 7 members of an Orthodox church (or about 0.90% of the population), there was 1 individual who belongs to the Christian Catholic Church, and there were 8 individuals (or about 1.02% of the population) who belonged to another Christian church. There were 9 (or about 1.15% of the population) who were Islamic. There was 1 person who was Buddhist and 1 individual who belonged to another church. 56 (or about 7.17% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist, and 29 individuals (or about 3.71% of the population) did not answer the question.

==Education==
In Lavey-Morcles about 303 or (38.8%) of the population have completed non-mandatory upper secondary education, and 53 or (6.8%) have completed additional higher education (either university or a &quot;Fachhochschule&quot;). Of the 53 who completed tertiary schooling, 49.1% were Swiss men, 32.1% were Swiss women, 11.3% were non-Swiss men.

In the 2009/2010 school year there was 1 student in the Lavey-Morcles school district. In the Vaud cantonal school system, two years of non-obligatory pre-school are provided by the political districts. During the school year, the district provided pre-school care for a total of 205 children of which 96 children (46.8%) received subsidized pre-school care. There were no students in the primary school program, which lasts four years. The obligatory lower secondary school program lasts for six years and there was 1 student in this school.

, there were 72 students in Lavey-Morcles who came from another municipality, while 82 residents attended schools outside the municipality.

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q70250" start="0" end="13" title="Lavey-Morcles" label="Lavey-Morcles"/>
<link wikidata="Q70208" start="19" end="31" title="Municipalities of Switzerland" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="35" end="46" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="64" end="68" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q647923" start="97" end="102" title="Aigle (district)" label="Aigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323830" start="157" end="164" title="Morcles" label="Morcles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15241950" start="169" end="174" title="Lavey, Switzerland" label="Lavey"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="1183" end="1188" title="Rhone" label="Rhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="1382" end="1388" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="1406" end="1418" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1829" end="1835" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1857" end="1863" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="1906" end="1920" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="1977" end="1984" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13199" start="2009" end="2016" title="Romansh language" label="Romansh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2944" end="2966" title="Population growth#Population growth rate" label="population growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q666315" start="5606" end="5627" title="2007 Swiss federal election" label="2007 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q385258" start="5659" end="5662" title="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="SVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q202638" start="5743" end="5746" title="FDP.The Liberals" label="FDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q303745" start="5760" end="5762" title="Social Democratic Party of Switzerland" label="SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q659739" start="5780" end="5791" title="Green Party of Switzerland" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="5866" end="5879" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="5993" end="6016" title="Primary sector of the economy" label="primary economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="6096" end="6112" title="Secondary sector of the economy" label="secondary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="6189" end="6204" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="6393" end="6413" title="full-time equivalent" label="full-time equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7341" end="7355" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q338309" start="7392" end="7413" title="Swiss Reformed Church" label="Swiss Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="7459" end="7488" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="members of an Orthodox church"/>
<link wikidata="Q671244" start="7567" end="7592" title="Christian Catholic Church of Switzerland" label="Christian Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="7757" end="7762" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="7793" end="7801" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="7916" end="7924" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="7928" end="7935" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8120" end="8145" title="Education in Switzerland#Secondary" label="upper secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q688134" start="8215" end="8225" title="List of universities in Switzerland" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365560" start="8237" end="8251" title="Fachhochschule" label="Fachhochschule"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535045" wikidata="Q69610" url="?curid=535045" title="Leysin">
<text>Leysin is a municipality of the canton of Vaud in the Aigle district of Switzerland. It is first mentioned around 1231–32 as &quot;Leissins&quot;, in 1352 as &quot;Leisins&quot;.

Located in the Vaud Alps, Leysin is a sunny alpine resort village at the eastern end of Lake Geneva in proximity to Montreux, Lausanne, and Geneva. In earlier years, Leysin was known for its TB sanatorias; today it is most famous for spectacular Alpine views across the Rhône Valley towards the Dents du Midi and year-round mountain sports and recreational facilities.
The village of Leysin and hamlet of Veyges are a designated part of the Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites.

== Geography ==


Leysin has an area, , of . Of this area, or 34.9% is used for agricultural purposes, while or 37.2% is forested. Of the rest of the land, or 7.7% is settled (buildings or roads), or 0.2% is either rivers or lakes and or 19.8% is unproductive land.

*Built-up areas: housing and buildings 4.4%; transport infrastructure 2.0%. 
*Forested land: heavily forested 33.3%; orchards or small clusters of trees 3.4%. 
*Agricultural land: alpine pastures 24.7%; other pastureland 10.0%; crops 0.0% 
*Unproductive areas: unproductive vegetation 12.9%; too rocky for vegetation 6.9% 
*All the water in the municipality is flowing water.

The municipality is located in the Aigle district, on the right side of the Grande-Eau at the foot of the Tour d&#x27;Aï and the Tour de Mayen. The main village is located at an elevation of . It consists of the village of Leysin and the hamlets of Veyges, Feydey, Aï, and Mayen.

Leysin can be accessed by road or by the hourly Aigle - Leysin train, which makes four stops in the area.

== Coat of arms ==
The blazon of the municipal coat of arms is &quot;Per fess Sable and Or, overall issuant from Hills in base a Pinetree all Vert.&quot;

== Demographics ==


Leysin has a population () of . , 59.3% of the population are resident foreign nationals. Over the last 10 years (1999–2009) the population has changed at a rate of 37.5%. It has changed at a rate of 39.4% due to migration and at a rate of 2.6% due to births and deaths.

Most of the population () speaks French (1,683 or 56.1%), with English being the second most common language (356 or 11.9%) and German third (104 or 3.5%). There are 43 people who speak Italian and one person who speaks Romansh.

Of the population in the municipality 539 or about 18.0% were born in Leysin and lived there in 2000. There were 424 or 14.1% who were born in the same canton, while 361 or 12.0% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 1,525 or 50.9% outside of Switzerland.

In there were 14 live births to Swiss citizens and 11 births to non-Swiss citizens, and in same time period there were 17 deaths of Swiss citizens and one of a non-Swiss citizen. Ignoring immigration and emigration, the population of Swiss citizens decreased by three while the foreign population increased by ten. Ten Swiss men and five Swiss women were former emigrants who had returned to Switzerland, while 95 non-Swiss men and 140 non-Swiss women where immigrants to Switzerland. The total Swiss population change in 2008 (from all sources, including moves across municipal borders) was an increase of 17 and the non-Swiss population increased by 240. This represents a population growth rate of 7.4%.

The age distribution, , in Leysin is; 271 children or 7.2% of the population are between 0 and 9 years old and 961 older children and teenagers or 25.6% are between 10 and 19. 843 people or 22.4% of the population are aged 20–29, 391 people or 10.4% are 30–39 years old, 426 people or 11.3% are between 40 and 49, and 341 people or 9.1% are between 50 and 59. The distribution of the senior part of the population is: 305 people or 8.1% between 60 and 69 years old; 148 people or 3.9% aged 70–79; 61 people or 1.6% are between 80 and 89, and there are 12 people or 0.3% who are 90 or older.

, 1,699 of the municipality&#x27;s inhabitants were single and had never been married. There were 989 married individuals, 126 widows or widowers, and 184 divorced people.

, there were 937 private households in the municipality, with an average occupancy of 2.1 persons per household. There were 409 households consisting of just one person and 30 households with five or more people. Out of a total of 1,004 households that answered this question, 40.7% were made up of just one person and there were three adults wliving with their parents. Of the remainder of the households, 223 were married couples without children and 235 were married couples with children. There were 56 single parents with one or more children. Eleven households that were made up of unrelated people, while 67 households consututed institutions or some other kind of collective housing.

 there were 312 single-family homes (or 43.3% of the total) out of a total of 720 inhabited buildings. There were 235 multi-family buildings (32.6%), along with 68 multi-purpose buildings that were chiefly being used for housing (9.4%) and 105 other-use buildings (commercial or industrial) that also had some housing (14.6%). Of the single-family homes 103 were built before 1919, while 19 were built between 1990 and 2000. The majority of multi-family homes (76) were built before 1919 and the next biggest proportion (43) were built between 1961 and 1970. There was one multi-family house built between 1996 and 2000.

 there were 2,345 apartments in the municipality. The most common apartment size was three rooms, of which there were 711. There were 344 single-room apartments and 289 apartments with five or more rooms. Of these apartments, a total of 885 (37.7% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 1,095 (46.7%) were seasonally occupied, and 365 (15.6%) were empty.

, the construction rate of new housing units was 3.5 new units per 1000 residents. The vacancy rate for the municipality, , was 2.51%.

The historical population is given in the following chart:
== Politics ==
In the 2007 federal election the most popular party was the FDP which received 21.19% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the SVP (20.41%), the SP (19.92%) and the Green Party (15.84%). In the federal election, a total of 477 votes were cast, and the voter turnout was 40.7%.

== Economy ==
, Leysin had an unemployment rate of 4.8%. , there were 39 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 13 businesses involved in this sector. 137 people were employed in the secondary sector and there were 26 businesses in this sector. 1,074 people were employed in the tertiary sector, with 116 businesses in this sector. There were 1,160 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which females made up 45.7% of the workforce.

 the total number of full-time equivalent jobs was 1,080. The number of jobs in the primary sector was 30, of which 21 were in agriculture and 8 were in forestry or lumber production. The number of jobs in the secondary sector was 128 of which 36 or (28.1%) were in manufacturing and 85 (66.4%) were in construction. The number of jobs in the tertiary sector was 922. In the tertiary sector; 76 or 8.2% were in wholesale or retail sales or the repair of motor vehicles, 54 or 5.9% were in the movement and storage of goods, 167 or 18.1% were in a hotel or restaurant, 13 or 1.4% were the insurance or financial industry, 7 or 0.8% were technical professionals or scientists, 351 or 38.1% were in education and 174 or 18.9% were in health care.

, there were 206 workers who commuted into the municipality and 234 workers who commuted away. The municipality is a net exporter of workers, with about 1.1 workers leaving the municipality for every one entering. Of the working population, 10.3% used public transportation to get to work, and 45.3% used a private car.

== Religion==
From the , 769 or 25.7% were Roman Catholic, while 803 or 26.8% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church. Of the rest of the population, there were 110 members of an Orthodox church (or about 3.67% of the population), there was 1 individual who belongs to the Christian Catholic Church, and there were 50 individuals (or about 1.67% of the population) who belonged to another Christian church. There were 3 individuals (or about 0.10% of the population) who were Jewish, and 63 (or about 2.10% of the population) who were Islamic. There were 84 individuals who were Buddhist, 23 individuals who were Hindu and 6 individuals who belonged to another church. 612 (or about 20.41% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist, and 474 individuals (or about 15.81% of the population) did not answer the question.

== Education ==
In Leysin about 658 or (21.9%) of the population have completed non-mandatory upper secondary education, and 365 or (12.2%) have completed additional higher education (either university or a &quot;Fachhochschule&quot;). Of the 365 who completed tertiary schooling, 27.9% were Swiss men, 18.4% were Swiss women, 28.2% were non-Swiss men and 25.5% were non-Swiss women.

In the 2009/2010 school year there were a total of 317 students in the Leysin school district. In the Vaud cantonal school system, two years of non-obligatory pre-school are provided by the political districts. During the school year, the political district provided pre-school care for a total of 205 children of which 96 children (46.8%) received subsidized pre-school care. The canton&#x27;s primary school program requires students to attend for four years. There were 175 students in the municipal primary school program. The obligatory lower secondary school program lasts for six years and there were 139 students in those schools. There were also 3 students who were home schooled or attended another non-traditional school.

, there were 39 students in Leysin who came from another municipality, while 98 residents attended schools outside the municipality.

=== Primary and secondary schools ===

Leysin is presently the home to two international schools serving secondary education levels: Leysin American School and Kumon Leysin Academy of Switzerland.

=== Colleges and universities ===
Swiss Hotel Management School, an international tertiary education institution, has one campus Leysin. Leysin previously hosted two other higher educational institutions that no longer exist; there was once a campus of the Schiller International University located in Leysin as well as the American College of Switzerland which is no longer is in operation.

=== Public libraries ===
The Leysin Library (&quot;Bibliothèque de Leysin&quot;) is located in the municipality, near the communal school. Its collection includes 6,500 publications.

=== Other institutions ===
Leysin also has language schools: &quot;Ecole Suisse de Langues&quot;, Swiss Language Club, and Voxlingua Language School.

== Sport ==

Leysin hosted the FIS Snowboard World Cup 2008.

Leysin has hosted three world cup events in recent years: Boardercross, Speedskiing, and downhill mountain-biking.

Leysin also hosted the 2020 winter youth Olympics.

== Work of Art ==
On 26 April 2020 a biodegradable image called &quot;Beyond Crisis&quot; was made by the French artist Saype (Guillaume Legros) to inspire hope for the world after the COVID-19 pandemic. It was unveiled in a meadow near Leysin. The chalk and charcoal powder design covers approximately . Viewed from the air in a certain angle, it looks like a 3-dimensional sitting girl with a circular line of stick figures in front of her. The image will last for about two to four weeks before it is covered by grass and washed away by rain.

== References ==
== External links ==

* Commune of Leysin
* Leysin tourism office</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q69610" start="0" end="6" title="Leysin" label="Leysin"/>
<link wikidata="Q70208" start="12" end="24" title="Municipalities of Switzerland" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="32" end="38" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="42" end="46" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q647923" start="54" end="59" title="Aigle (district)" label="Aigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="72" end="83" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="195" end="199" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q25220" start="200" end="204" title="Swiss Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q69354" start="296" end="304" title="Montreux" label="Montreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="306" end="314" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="320" end="326" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="371" end="373" title="tuberculosis" label="TB"/>
<link wikidata="Q46124" start="374" end="383" title="sanatorium" label="sanatoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747791" start="450" end="462" title="Rhône Valley" label="Rhône Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15255" start="475" end="488" title="Dents du Midi" label="Dents du Midi"/>
<link wikidata="Q502685" start="621" end="654" title="Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites" label="Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="1539" end="1546" title="hamlet (place)" label="hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q277234" start="1630" end="1644" title="Aigle - Leysin" label="Aigle - Leysin"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="1712" end="1718" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="1736" end="1748" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2170" end="2176" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2200" end="2207" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="2265" end="2271" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="2323" end="2330" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13199" start="2357" end="2364" title="Romansh language" label="Romansh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3306" end="3328" title="Population growth#Population growth rate" label="population growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q666315" start="6000" end="6021" title="2007 Swiss federal election" label="2007 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q202638" start="6053" end="6056" title="FDP.The Liberals" label="FDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q385258" start="6137" end="6140" title="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="SVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q303745" start="6155" end="6157" title="Social Democratic Party of Switzerland" label="SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q659739" start="6175" end="6186" title="Green Party of Switzerland" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="6262" end="6275" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="6384" end="6407" title="Primary sector of the economy" label="primary economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="6489" end="6505" title="Secondary sector of the economy" label="secondary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="6585" end="6600" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="6792" end="6812" title="full-time equivalent" label="full-time equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7880" end="7894" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q338309" start="7931" end="7952" title="Swiss Reformed Church" label="Swiss Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="8000" end="8029" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="members of an Orthodox church"/>
<link wikidata="Q671244" start="8108" end="8133" title="Christian Catholic Church of Switzerland" label="Christian Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="8311" end="8317" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="8370" end="8375" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="8414" end="8422" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="8448" end="8453" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="8571" end="8579" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="8583" end="8590" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8772" end="8797" title="Education in Switzerland#Secondary" label="upper secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q688134" start="8869" end="8879" title="List of universities in Switzerland" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365560" start="8891" end="8905" title="Fachhochschule" label="Fachhochschule"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="9458" end="9472" title="primary school" label="primary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538122" start="10064" end="10086" title="Leysin American School" label="Leysin American School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444012" start="10091" end="10126" title="Kumon Leysin Academy of Switzerland" label="Kumon Leysin Academy of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292968" start="10163" end="10192" title="Swiss Hotel Management School" label="Swiss Hotel Management School"/>
<link wikidata="Q327361" start="10386" end="10419" title="Schiller International University" label="Schiller International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743480" start="10453" end="10484" title="American College of Switzerland" label="American College of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q212928" start="10888" end="10891" title="International Ski Federation" label="FIS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10892" end="10916" title="Snowboard World Cup 2008" label="Snowboard World Cup 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053559" start="11058" end="11084" title="2020 Winter Youth Olympics" label="2020 winter youth Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q67368323" start="11207" end="11212" title="Saype" label="Saype"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="11272" end="11289" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535046" wikidata="Q232082" url="?curid=535046" title="Talbot County">
<text>Talbot County may refer to counties:

;In the United States:
* Talbot County, Georgia
* Talbot County, Maryland

;Elsewhere
* Talbot County, Victoria, Australia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28575" start="27" end="35" title="County" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q498356" start="63" end="85" title="Talbot County, Georgia" label="Talbot County, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q511084" start="88" end="111" title="Talbot County, Maryland" label="Talbot County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177918" start="126" end="149" title="Talbot County, Victoria" label="Talbot County, Victoria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535048" wikidata="Q70005" url="?curid=535048" title="Noville, Switzerland">
<text>Noville is a municipality of the canton of Vaud in Switzerland, located in the district of Aigle.

==History==
Noville is first mentioned in 903 as &quot;Nova villa&quot;. In 1162-1173 it was mentioned as &quot;Nouila&quot;. Due to the similarity between the names Noville and the neighboring municipality of Villeneuve (Villa Nova) it is very difficult to identify which village is being mentioned in older records.

Charlie Chaplin&#x27;s coffin was found buried in a field near Noville after being stolen by Roman Wardas and Gantcho Ganev in an attempt to extort money from his widow, Oona Chaplin.

==Geography==
Noville has an area, , of . Of this area, or 41.5% is used for agricultural purposes, while or 35.1% is forested. Of the rest of the land, or 8.5% is settled (buildings or roads), or 4.2% is either rivers or lakes and or 10.5% is unproductive land.

Of the built up area, housing and buildings made up 3.4% and transportation infrastructure made up 2.3%. while parks, green belts and sports fields made up 1.3%. Out of the forested land, all of the forested land area is covered with heavy forests. Of the agricultural land, 34.8% is used for growing crops and 5.8% is pastures. Of the water in the municipality, 0.6% is in lakes and 3.6% is in rivers and streams.

The municipality is located in the Aigle district, on a small hill above the right bank of the Rhone river where it enters Lake Geneva. It consists of the village of Noville and the hamlet of Crebelley.

==Coat of arms==
The blazon of the municipal coat of arms is &quot;Azure, a Griffin rampant Or langued and armed Gules.&quot;

==Demographics==
Noville has a population () of . , 14.2% of the population are resident foreign nationals. Over the last 10 years (1999–2009 ) the population has changed at a rate of 10.1%. It has changed at a rate of 5.4% due to migration and at a rate of 4.6% due to births and deaths.

Most of the population () speaks French (579 or 89.5%), with German being second most common (32 or 4.9%) and Italian being third (17 or 2.6%).

Of the population in the municipality 207 or about 32.0% were born in Noville and lived there in 2000. There were 230 or 35.5% who were born in the same canton, while 103 or 15.9% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 83 or 12.8% were born outside of Switzerland.

In there were 7 live births to Swiss citizens and 1 birth to non-Swiss citizens, and in same time span there were 4 deaths of Swiss citizens. Ignoring immigration and emigration, the population of Swiss citizens increased by 3 while the foreign population increased by 1. There was 1 Swiss woman who emigrated from Switzerland. At the same time, there were 4 non-Swiss men and 1 non-Swiss woman who immigrated from another country to Switzerland. The total Swiss population change in 2008 (from all sources, including moves across municipal borders) was an increase of 6 and the non-Swiss population increased by 3 people. This represents a population growth rate of 1.3%.

The age distribution, , in Noville is; 75 children or 10.8% of the population are between 0 and 9 years old and 102 teenagers or 14.6% are between 10 and 19. Of the adult population, 61 people or 8.8% of the population are between 20 and 29 years old. 70 people or 10.0% are between 30 and 39, 136 people or 19.5% are between 40 and 49, and 95 people or 13.6% are between 50 and 59. The senior population distribution is 90 people or 12.9% of the population are between 60 and 69 years old, 39 people or 5.6% are between 70 and 79,there are 26 people or 3.7% who are 80 and 89, and there are 3 people or 0.4% who are 90 and older.

, there were 246 people who were single and never married in the municipality. There were 344 married individuals, 29 widows or widowers and 28 individuals who are divorced.

, there were 253 private households in the municipality, and an average of 2.4 persons per household. There were 64 households that consist of only one person and 18 households with five or more people. Out of a total of 262 households that answered this question, 24.4% were households made up of just one person and there were 4 adults who lived with their parents. Of the rest of the households, there are 83 married couples without children, 91 married couples with children There were 8 single parents with a child or children. There were 3 households that were made up of unrelated people and 9 households that were made up of some sort of institution or another collective housing.

 there were 135 single-family homes (or 66.5% of the total) out of a total of 203 inhabited buildings. There were 31 multi-family buildings (15.3%), along with 27 multi-purpose buildings that were mostly used for housing (13.3%) and 10 other use buildings (commercial or industrial) that also had some housing (4.9%). Of the single-family homes 27 were built before 1919, while 18 were built between 1990 and 2000. The greatest number of single-family homes (28) were built between 1981 and 1990. The most multi-family homes (10) were built before 1919 and the next most (7) were built between 1919 and 1945. There was 1 multi-family house built between 1996 and 2000.

 there were 273 apartments in the municipality. The most common apartment size was 3 rooms of which there were 74. There were 6 single-room apartments and 101 apartments with five or more rooms. Of these apartments, a total of 228 apartments (83.5% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 33 apartments (12.1%) were seasonally occupied and 12 apartments (4.4%) were empty. , the construction rate of new housing units was 0 new units per 1000 residents. The vacancy rate for the municipality, , was 0%.

The historical population is given in the following chart:
==Sights==
The entire village of Noville is designated as part of the Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites.

==Politics==
In the 2007 federal election the most popular party was the SVP which received 38.08% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the SP (21.26%), the FDP (17.21%) and the LPS Party (6.68%). In the federal election, a total of 212 votes were cast, and the voter turnout was 46.5%.

==Economy==
, Noville had an unemployment rate of 2.1%. , there were 77 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 23 businesses involved in this sector. 76 people were employed in the secondary sector and there were 13 businesses in this sector. 183 people were employed in the tertiary sector, with 33 businesses in this sector. There were 345 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which females made up 44.1% of the workforce.

 the total number of full-time equivalent jobs was 295. The number of jobs in the primary sector was 65, all of which were in agriculture. The number of jobs in the secondary sector was 72 of which 28 or (38.9%) were in manufacturing and 43 (59.7%) were in construction. The number of jobs in the tertiary sector was 158. In the tertiary sector; 99 or 62.7% were in wholesale or retail sales or the repair of motor vehicles, 4 or 2.5% were in the movement and storage of goods, 21 or 13.3% were in a hotel or restaurant, 8 or 5.1% were in the information industry, 5 or 3.2% were the insurance or financial industry, 3 or 1.9% were technical professionals or scientists, 6 or 3.8% were in education.

, there were 140 workers who commuted into the municipality and 226 workers who commuted away. The municipality is a net exporter of workers, with about 1.6 workers leaving the municipality for every one entering. About 10.7% of the workforce coming into Noville are coming from outside Switzerland. Of the working population, 9% used public transportation to get to work, and 61.7% used a private car.

==Religion==
From the , 168 or 26.0% were Roman Catholic, while 380 or 58.7% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church. Of the rest of the population, there was 1 member of an Orthodox church who belonged, and there were 5 individuals (or about 0.77% of the population) who belonged to another Christian church. There was 1 individual who was Jewish, and 12 (or about 1.85% of the population) who were Islamic. There were 2 individuals who were Buddhist and 2 individuals who belonged to another church. 50 (or about 7.73% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist, and 26 individuals (or about 4.02% of the population) did not answer the question.

==Education==
In Noville about 254 or (39.3%) of the population have completed non-mandatory upper secondary education, and 58 or (9.0%) have completed additional higher education (either university or a &quot;Fachhochschule&quot;). Of the 58 who completed tertiary schooling, 53.4% were Swiss men, 27.6% were Swiss women, 12.1% were non-Swiss men.

In the 2009/2010 school year there were a total of 93 students in the Noville school district. In the Vaud cantonal school system, two years of non-obligatory pre-school are provided by the political districts. During the school year, the political district provided pre-school care for a total of 205 children of which 96 children (46.8%) received subsidized pre-school care. The canton&#x27;s primary school program requires students to attend for four years. There were 49 students in the municipal primary school program. The obligatory lower secondary school program lasts for six years and there were 44 students in those schools.

, there were 12 students in Noville who came from another municipality, while 86 residents attended schools outside the municipality.

==Charlie Chaplin Incident==
On 1 March 1978, Charlie Chaplin&#x27;s coffin was dug up and stolen from its grave by two unemployed mechanics, Roman Wardas and Gantcho Ganev. The body was held for ransom in an attempt to extort money from his widow, Oona Chaplin. The pair were caught in a large police operation in May, and Chaplin&#x27;s coffin was found buried in a field in Noville.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q70005" start="0" end="7" title="Noville, Switzerland" label="Noville"/>
<link wikidata="Q70208" start="13" end="25" title="Municipalities of Switzerland" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="33" end="39" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="43" end="47" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="51" end="62" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q647923" start="91" end="96" title="Aigle (district)" label="Aigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="418" end="433" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="511" end="523" title="Roman Wardas" label="Roman Wardas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="528" end="541" title="Gantcho Ganev" label="Gantcho Ganev"/>
<link wikidata="Q137808" start="588" end="600" title="Oona O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Oona Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="1378" end="1383" title="Rhone" label="Rhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403" start="1406" end="1417" title="Lake Geneva" label="Lake Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="1465" end="1471" title="hamlet (place)" label="hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="1508" end="1514" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="1532" end="1544" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1937" end="1943" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1965" end="1971" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="2014" end="2021" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2962" end="2984" title="Population growth#Population growth rate" label="population growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q502685" start="5802" end="5835" title="Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites" label="Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q666315" start="5858" end="5879" title="2007 Swiss federal election" label="2007 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q385258" start="5911" end="5914" title="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="SVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q303745" start="5995" end="5997" title="Social Democratic Party of Switzerland" label="SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q202638" start="6012" end="6015" title="FDP.The Liberals" label="FDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q667785" start="6033" end="6042" title="Liberal Party of Switzerland" label="LPS Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="6117" end="6130" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="6238" end="6261" title="Primary sector of the economy" label="primary economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="6342" end="6358" title="Secondary sector of the economy" label="secondary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="6436" end="6451" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="6640" end="6660" title="full-time equivalent" label="full-time equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7766" end="7780" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q338309" start="7817" end="7838" title="Swiss Reformed Church" label="Swiss Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="7883" end="7911" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="member of an Orthodox church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="8063" end="8069" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="8122" end="8127" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="8165" end="8173" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="8289" end="8297" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="8301" end="8308" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8487" end="8512" title="Education in Switzerland#Secondary" label="upper secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q688134" start="8582" end="8592" title="List of universities in Switzerland" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365560" start="8604" end="8618" title="Fachhochschule" label="Fachhochschule"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="9139" end="9153" title="primary school" label="primary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="9563" end="9578" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q137808" start="9766" end="9778" title="Oona O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Oona Chaplin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535053" wikidata="Q70115" url="?curid=535053" title="Ollon">
<text>Ollon is a municipality in the district of Aigle in the canton of Vaud in Switzerland, sited in the foothills of the mountains to the south-east of the Lake of Geneva. The old German language name &quot;Olun&quot; is no longer used.

==History==
Ollon is first mentioned in 1018 as &quot;Aulonum&quot; though there is some debate about whether this refers to another settlement. In 1025-1032 it was mentioned as &quot;Olonum&quot;.

===Saint-Triphon===
The village of Saint-Triphon is situated on three hills overlooking the Rhone valley. It was first mentioned in 1332 as &quot;Triphonis Sancti&quot;. Archeological finds include items from the Middle Neolithic to the Roman era, including an Early Bronze Age necropolis and a Late Bronze Age smelter for copper processing.

On the hill &quot;Le Lessus&quot; stands a high square tower, probably from the 13th century. The tower was partially destroyed in 1476. Foundations indicate that the tower was reached by a walkway. Nearby, the remains of a romanesque chapel from the 12th century is still visible. In 1232 the Counts of Savoy granted the castle to Guy de Saillon. The fief was dismembered in the 14th century and reunited in the 16th century under the Rovéréa family. Between 1476 and 1798 it was one of the twelve &quot;Zenden des Mandements Ollon&quot; in the government of Aigle. The village was ruled by a Bernese mayor. Since the Middle Ages, black marble has been mined in the village.

==Geography==
Ollon has an area, , of . Of this area, or 40.1% is used for agricultural purposes, while or 45.5% is forested. Of the rest of the land, or 10.6% is settled (buildings or roads), or 0.9% is either rivers or lakes and or 2.8% is unproductive land.

Of the built up area, housing and buildings made up 5.6% and transportation infrastructure made up 3.1%. Out of the forested land, 38.9% of the total land area is heavily forested and 4.8% is covered with orchards or small clusters of trees. Of the agricultural land, 11.1% is used for growing crops and 8.5% is pastures, while 2.9% is used for orchards or vine crops and 17.7% is used for alpine pastures. Of the water in the municipality, 0.3% is in lakes and 0.6% is in rivers and streams.

The municipality is located in the Aigle district. The area covered by Ollon borders the Rhône on the southwest side, and rises up the mountainside as far as Chamossaire. Ollon includes of vineyards. It is one of the largest municipalities in the canton. It consists of the village of Ollon and 23 other villages and hamlets (including; Antagnes, Arveyes, Chesières, Huémoz, Panex, Saint-Triphon, Villars-sur-Ollon) as well as scattered summer grazing camps (Bretaye, Les Closalets, La Barboleusaz).

==Coat of arms==
The blazon of the municipal coat of arms is &quot;Quartered Vert and Gules, overall a Cross couped Argent.&quot;

==Demographics==

Ollon has a population () of . , 32.7% of the population are resident foreign nationals. Over the last 10 years (1999–2009) the population has changed at a rate of 11.7%. It has changed at a rate of 10.7% due to migration and at a rate of 1.2% due to births and deaths.

Most of the population () speaks French (4,955 or 79.2%), with English being second most common (335 or 5.4%) and German being third (246 or 3.9%). There are 96 people who speak Italian and 3 people who speak Romansh.

Of the population in the municipality 1,724 or about 27.6% were born in Ollon and lived there in 2000. There were 1,374 or 22.0% who were born in the same canton, while 1,011 or 16.2% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 1,869 or 29.9% were born outside of Switzerland.

In there were 38 live births to Swiss citizens and 15 births to non-Swiss citizens, and in same time span there were 45 deaths of Swiss citizens and 5 non-Swiss citizen deaths. Ignoring immigration and emigration, the population of Swiss citizens decreased by 7 while the foreign population increased by 10. There was 1 Swiss man and 1 Swiss woman who emigrated from Switzerland. At the same time, there were 81 non-Swiss men and 107 non-Swiss women who immigrated from another country to Switzerland. The total Swiss population change in 2008 (from all sources, including moves across municipal borders) was an increase of 91 and the non-Swiss population increased by 95 people. This represents a population growth rate of 2.8%.

The age distribution, , in Ollon is; 690 children or 9.9% of the population are between 0 and 9 years old and 1,368 teenagers or 19.7% are between 10 and 19. Of the adult population, 622 people or 9.0% of the population are between 20 and 29 years old. 772 people or 11.1% are between 30 and 39, 1,142 people or 16.4% are between 40 and 49, and 900 people or 13.0% are between 50 and 59. The senior population distribution is 750 people or 10.8% of the population are between 60 and 69 years old, 437 people or 6.3% are between 70 and 79, there are 246 people or 3.5% who are 80 and 89, and there are 22 people or 0.3% who are 90 and older.

, there were 2,723 people who were single and never married in the municipality. There were 2,915 married individuals, 318 widows or widowers and 301 individuals who are divorced.

, there were 2,399 private households in the municipality, and an average of 2.3 persons per household. There were 839 households that consist of only one person and 151 households with five or more people. Out of a total of 2,519 households that answered this question, 33.3% were households made up of just one person and there were 15 adults who lived with their parents. Of the rest of the households, there are 627 married couples without children, 726 married couples with children. There were 158 single parents with a child or children. There were 34 households that were made up of unrelated people and 120 households that were made up of some sort of institution or another collective housing.

 there were 5,227 apartments in the municipality. The most common apartment size was 3 rooms of which there were 1,523. There were 486 single room apartments and 1,154 apartments with five or more rooms. Of these apartments, a total of 2,130 apartments (40.7% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 2,880 apartments (55.1%) were seasonally occupied and 217 apartments (4.2%) were empty. , the construction rate of new housing units was 2 new units per 1000 residents. The vacancy rate for the municipality, , was 1.33%.

The historical population is given in the following chart:
==Heritage sites of national significance==
The &quot;Saint-Triphon Et Charpigny&quot;, a prehistoric to medieval hilltop settlement, is listed as a Swiss heritage site of national significance. The entire villages of Huémoz and Ollon are part of the Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites.

==Politics==
In the 2007 federal election the most popular party was the SVP which received 26.43% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the SP (20.06%), the FDP (19.34%) and the Green Party (12.08%). In the federal election, a total of 1,602 votes were cast, and the voter turnout was 45.5%. The current mayor (2011–16) is Jean-Luc Chollet.

==Economy==
, Ollon had an unemployment rate of 3.7%. , there were 221 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 75 businesses involved in this sector. 287 people were employed in the secondary sector and there were 54 businesses in this sector. 1,588 people were employed in the tertiary sector, with 227 businesses in this sector. There were 2,815 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which females made up 43.4% of the workforce.

 the total number of full-time equivalent jobs was 1,777. The number of jobs in the primary sector was 139, of which 124 were in agriculture and 15 were in forestry or lumber production. The number of jobs in the secondary sector was 269 of which 78 or (29.0%) were in manufacturing and 168 (62.5%) were in construction. The number of jobs in the tertiary sector was 1,369. In the tertiary sector; 224 or 16.4% were in wholesale or retail sales or the repair of motor vehicles, 110 or 8.0% were in the movement and storage of goods, 355 or 25.9% were in a hotel or restaurant, 5 or 0.4% were in the information industry, 28 or 2.0% were the insurance or financial industry, 66 or 4.8% were technical professionals or scientists, 387 or 28.3% were in education and 8 or 0.6% were in health care.

, there were 499 workers who commuted into the municipality and 1,334 workers who commuted away. The municipality is a net exporter of workers, with about 2.7 workers leaving the municipality for every one entering. About 2.0% of the workforce coming into Ollon are coming from outside Switzerland, while 0.1% of the locals commute out of Switzerland for work. Of the working population, 10.5% used public transportation to get to work, and 59.5% used a private car.

==Religion==

From the , 1,922 or 30.7% were Roman Catholic, while 2,603 or 41.6% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church. Of the rest of the population, there were 128 members of an Orthodox church (or about 2.05% of the population), there were 3 individuals (or about 0.05% of the population) who belonged to the Christian Catholic Church, and there were 167 individuals (or about 2.67% of the population) who belonged to another Christian church. There were 14 individuals (or about 0.22% of the population) who were Jewish, and 175 (or about 2.80% of the population) who were Islamic. There were 11 individuals who were Buddhist, 14 individuals who were Hindu and 8 individuals who belonged to another church. 732 (or about 11.70% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist, and 480 individuals (or about 7.67% of the population) did not answer the question.

==Education==
In Ollon about 1,975 or (31.6%) of the population have completed non-mandatory upper secondary education, and 885 or (14.1%) have completed additional higher education (either university or a &quot;Fachhochschule&quot;). Of the 885 who completed tertiary schooling, 44.2% were Swiss men, 23.2% were Swiss women, 18.0% were non-Swiss men and 14.7% were non-Swiss women.

In the 2009/2010 school year there were a total of 789 students in the Ollon school district. In the Vaud cantonal school system, two years of non-obligatory pre-school are provided by the political districts. During the school year, the political district provided pre-school care for a total of 205 children of which 96 children (46.8%) received subsidized pre-school care. The canton&#x27;s primary school program requires students to attend for four years. There were 402 students in the municipal primary school program. The obligatory lower secondary school program lasts for six years and there were 386 students in those schools. There were also 1 students who were home schooled or attended another non-traditional school.

, there were 46 students in Ollon who came from another municipality, while 346 residents attended schools outside the municipality.

==References==

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q70115" start="0" end="5" title="Ollon" label="Ollon"/>
<link wikidata="Q70208" start="11" end="23" title="municipalities of Switzerland" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q647923" start="43" end="48" title="Aigle (district)" label="Aigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="56" end="62" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="66" end="70" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="74" end="85" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403" start="148" end="166" title="Lac Leman" label="the Lake of Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678646" start="468" end="481" title="Saint-Triphon" label="Saint-Triphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="525" end="530" title="Rhone" label="Rhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="653" end="662" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q675312" start="670" end="675" title="Switzerland in the Roman era" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="700" end="710" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q200141" start="711" end="721" title="necropolis" label="necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="1000" end="1010" title="Romanesque architecture" label="romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="1080" end="1085" title="House of Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="1128" end="1132" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q43195" start="1336" end="1341" title="Aigle" label="Aigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="1370" end="1374" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1395" end="1406" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="2298" end="2303" title="River Rhône" label="Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="Q22715" start="2398" end="2406" title="vineyard" label="vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="2526" end="2533" title="hamlet (place)" label="hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q674237" start="2606" end="2623" title="Villars-sur-Ollon" label="Villars-sur-Ollon"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="2731" end="2737" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="2755" end="2767" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3163" end="3169" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3193" end="3200" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="3244" end="3250" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="3308" end="3315" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13199" start="3339" end="3346" title="Romansh language" label="Romansh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4326" end="4348" title="Population growth#Population growth rate" label="population growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678646" start="6529" end="6542" title="Saint-Triphon" label="Saint-Triphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q869941" start="6630" end="6668" title="Swiss inventory of cultural property of national and regional significance" label="heritage site of national significance"/>
<link wikidata="Q502685" start="6726" end="6759" title="Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites" label="Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q666315" start="6782" end="6803" title="2007 Swiss federal election" label="2007 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q385258" start="6835" end="6838" title="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="SVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q303745" start="6919" end="6921" title="Social Democratic Party of Switzerland" label="SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q202638" start="6936" end="6939" title="FDP.The Liberals" label="FDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q659739" start="6957" end="6968" title="Green Party of Switzerland" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="7046" end="7059" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="7215" end="7238" title="Primary sector of the economy" label="primary economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="7320" end="7336" title="Secondary sector of the economy" label="secondary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="7416" end="7431" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="7623" end="7643" title="full-time equivalent" label="full-time equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8911" end="8925" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q338309" start="8964" end="8985" title="Swiss Reformed Church" label="Swiss Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="9033" end="9062" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="members of an Orthodox church"/>
<link wikidata="Q671244" start="9179" end="9204" title="Christian Catholic Church of Switzerland" label="Christian Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="9384" end="9390" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="9444" end="9449" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="9488" end="9496" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="9522" end="9527" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="9645" end="9653" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="9657" end="9664" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9844" end="9869" title="Education in Switzerland#Secondary" label="upper secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q688134" start="9941" end="9951" title="List of universities in Switzerland" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365560" start="9963" end="9977" title="Fachhochschule" label="Fachhochschule"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="10529" end="10543" title="primary school" label="primary school"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535060" wikidata="Q70227" url="?curid=535060" title="Ormont-Dessous">
<text>Ormont-Dessous is a municipality of the canton of Vaud in Switzerland, located in the district of Aigle.

==History==
Ormont-Dessous is first mentioned in 1200 as &quot;Ormont&quot;. In 1564 it was mentioned as &quot;Bas-Ormont&quot;. The German name &quot;Ormund&quot; is no longer used.

==Geography==
Ormont-Dessous has an area, , of . Of this area, or 38.9% is used for agricultural purposes, while or 45.4% is forested. Of the rest of the land, or 3.2% is settled (buildings or roads), or 2.0% is either rivers or lakes and or 10.5% is unproductive land.

Of the built up area, housing and buildings made up 1.3% and transportation infrastructure made up 1.7%. Out of the forested land, 37.8% of the total land area is heavily forested and 4.8% is covered with orchards or small clusters of trees. Of the agricultural land, 0.0% is used for growing crops and 10.6% is pastures and 28.3% is used for alpine pastures. Of the water in the municipality, 1.8% is in lakes and 0.2% is in rivers and streams. Of the unproductive areas, 7.2% is unproductive vegetation and 3.2% is too rocky for vegetation.

The municipality is located in the Aigle district, in the middle of the Grande-Eau valley. It consists of the villages of Ormont, Dessous, Le Sépey and La Forclaz as well as scattered settlements at Cergnat, Matélon, La Comballaz and Les Voëttes.

==Coat of arms==
The blazon of the municipal coat of arms is &quot;Gules, from three Hills Or rising a Tower Argent masoned and windowed Sable between four, two and two, Mullets of Five Argent.&quot; This coat of arms might be an example of canting with Ormont-Dessous being read as &quot;Or-Mont-Dessous&quot; or &quot;Gold(en)-Mount-Below&quot;.

==Demographics==
Ormont-Dessous has a population () of . , 9.6% of the population are resident foreign nationals. Over the last 10 years (1999–2009) the population has changed at a rate of 3.4%. It has changed at a rate of 9.2% due to migration and at a rate of -5.5% due to births and deaths.

Most of the population () speaks French (1,000 or 93.0%), with German being second most common (33 or 3.1%) and Portuguese being third (16 or 1.5%). There are 8 people who speak Italian.

Of the population in the municipality 368 or about 34.2% were born in Ormont-Dessous and lived there in 2000. There were 321 or 29.9% who were born in the same canton, while 150 or 14.0% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 127 or 11.8% were born outside of Switzerland.

In there were 10 live births to Swiss citizens and were 20 deaths of Swiss citizens. Ignoring immigration and emigration, the population of Swiss citizens decreased by 10 while the foreign population remained the same. There were 3 Swiss men who immigrated back to Switzerland. At the same time, there was 1 non-Swiss man who immigrated from another country to Switzerland. The total Swiss population change in 2008 (from all sources, including moves across municipal borders) was a decrease of 18 and the non-Swiss population decreased by 16 people. This represents a population growth rate of -3.3%.

The age distribution, , in Ormont-Dessous is; 91 children or 9.1% of the population are between 0 and 9 years old and 122 teenagers or 12.2% are between 10 and 19. Of the adult population, 81 people or 8.1% of the population are between 20 and 29 years old. 139 people or 13.8% are between 30 and 39, 139 people or 13.8% are between 40 and 49, and 153 people or 15.2% are between 50 and 59. The senior population distribution is 135 people or 13.4% of the population are between 60 and 69 years old, 70 people or 7.0% are between 70 and 79, there are 58 people or 5.8% who are 80 and 89, and there are 16 people or 1.6% who are 90 and older.

, there were 337 people who were single and never married in the municipality. There were 556 married individuals, 93 widows or widowers and 89 individuals who are divorced.

, there were 500 private households in the municipality, and an average of 2. persons per household. There were 210 households that consist of only one person and 22 households with five or more people. Out of a total of 531 households that answered this question, 39.5% were households made up of just one person and there were 8 adults who lived with their parents. Of the rest of the households, there are 146 married couples without children, 103 married couples with children. There were 23 single parents with a child or children. There were 10 households that were made up of unrelated people and 31 households that were made up of some sort of institution or another collective housing.

 there were 701 single family homes (or 66.5% of the total) out of a total of 1,054 inhabited buildings. There were 116 multi-family buildings (11.0%), along with 187 multi-purpose buildings that were mostly used for housing (17.7%) and 50 other use buildings (commercial or industrial) that also had some housing (4.7%). Of the single family homes 419 were built before 1919, while 21 were built between 1990 and 2000. The most multi-family homes (50) were built before 1919 and the next most (23) were built between 1961 and 1970. There were 2 multi-family houses built between 1996 and 2000.

 there were 1,444 apartments in the municipality. The most common apartment size was 3 rooms of which there were 359. There were 114 single room apartments and 435 apartments with five or more rooms. Of these apartments, a total of 483 apartments (33.4% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 842 apartments (58.3%) were seasonally occupied and 119 apartments (8.2%) were empty. , the construction rate of new housing units was 0 new units per 1000 residents. The vacancy rate for the municipality, , was 0%.

The historical population is given in the following chart:
==Heritage sites of national significance==
The Pont des Planches is listed as Swiss heritage site of national significance. The entire village of La Forclaz is part of the Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites.

==Politics==
In the 2007 federal election the most popular party was the SVP which received 35.26% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the FDP (19.63%), the SP (13.52%) and the Green Party (9.71%). In the federal election, a total of 263 votes were cast, and the voter turnout was 33.6%.

==Economy==
, Ormont-Dessous had an unemployment rate of 3.6%. , there were 104 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 42 businesses involved in this sector. 51 people were employed in the secondary sector and there were 17 businesses in this sector. 172 people were employed in the tertiary sector, with 39 businesses in this sector. There were 468 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which females made up 38.2% of the workforce.

 the total number of full-time equivalent jobs was 239. The number of jobs in the primary sector was 60, all of which were in agriculture. The number of jobs in the secondary sector was 46 of which 8 or (17.4%) were in manufacturing and 37 (80.4%) were in construction. The number of jobs in the tertiary sector was 133. In the tertiary sector; 22 or 16.5% were in wholesale or retail sales or the repair of motor vehicles, 10 or 7.5% were in the movement and storage of goods, 40 or 30.1% were in a hotel or restaurant, 1 was the insurance or financial industry, 27 or 20.3% were in education and 18 or 13.5% were in health care.

, there were 47 workers who commuted into the municipality and 233 workers who commuted away. The municipality is a net exporter of workers, with about 5.0 workers leaving the municipality for every one entering. Of the working population, 8.5% used public transportation to get to work, and 61.3% used a private car.

==Religion==
From the , 184 or 17.1% were Roman Catholic, while 658 or 61.2% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church. Of the rest of the population, there were 11 individuals (or about 1.02% of the population) who belonged to another Christian church. There were 3 (or about 0.28% of the population) who were Islamic. There were 2 individuals who were Buddhist. 103 (or about 9.58% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist, and 114 individuals (or about 10.60% of the population) did not answer the question.

==Education==
In Ormont-Dessous about 380 or (35.3%) of the population have completed non-mandatory upper secondary education, and 85 or (7.9%) have completed additional higher education (either university or a &quot;Fachhochschule&quot;). Of the 85 who completed tertiary schooling, 67.1% were Swiss men, 28.2% were Swiss women.

In the 2009/2010 school year there were a total of 115 students in the Ormont-Dessous school district. In the Vaud cantonal school system, two years of non-obligatory pre-school are provided by the political districts. During the school year, the political district provided pre-school care for a total of 205 children of which 96 children (46.8%) received subsidized pre-school care. The canton&#x27;s primary school program requires students to attend for four years. There were 54 students in the municipal primary school program. The obligatory lower secondary school program lasts for six years and there were 57 students in those schools. There were also 4 students who were home schooled or attended another non-traditional school.

, there were 80 students in Ormont-Dessous who came from another municipality, while 46 residents attended schools outside the municipality.

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q70227" start="0" end="14" title="Ormont-Dessous" label="Ormont-Dessous"/>
<link wikidata="Q70208" start="20" end="32" title="Municipalities of Switzerland" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="40" end="46" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="50" end="54" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="58" end="69" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q647923" start="98" end="103" title="Aigle (district)" label="Aigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="239" end="245" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="1374" end="1380" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="1398" end="1410" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q515877" start="1594" end="1601" title="canting arms" label="canting"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2030" end="2036" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="2060" end="2066" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="2109" end="2119" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="2175" end="2182" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3034" end="3056" title="Population growth#Population growth rate" label="population growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q869941" start="5840" end="5878" title="Swiss inventory of cultural property of national and regional significance" label="heritage site of national significance"/>
<link wikidata="Q502685" start="5928" end="5961" title="Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites" label="Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q666315" start="5984" end="6005" title="2007 Swiss federal election" label="2007 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q385258" start="6037" end="6040" title="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="SVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q202638" start="6121" end="6124" title="FDP.The Liberals" label="FDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q303745" start="6139" end="6141" title="Social Democratic Party of Switzerland" label="SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q659739" start="6159" end="6170" title="Green Party of Switzerland" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="6245" end="6258" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="6374" end="6397" title="Primary sector of the economy" label="primary economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="6478" end="6494" title="Secondary sector of the economy" label="secondary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="6572" end="6587" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="6776" end="6796" title="full-time equivalent" label="full-time equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7748" end="7762" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q338309" start="7799" end="7820" title="Swiss Reformed Church" label="Swiss Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="8013" end="8018" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="8056" end="8064" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="8132" end="8140" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="8144" end="8151" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8339" end="8364" title="Education in Switzerland#Secondary" label="upper secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q688134" start="8434" end="8444" title="List of universities in Switzerland" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365560" start="8456" end="8470" title="Fachhochschule" label="Fachhochschule"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="8973" end="8987" title="primary school" label="primary school"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535062" wikidata="Q70082" url="?curid=535062" title="Ormont-Dessus">
<text>Ormont-Dessus is a municipality of the canton of Vaud in Switzerland, located in the district of Aigle.

==History==
Ormont-Dessus is first mentioned in 1200 as &quot;Ormont&quot;. The German name of &quot;Ormund&quot; is no longer used.

==Geography==
Ormont-Dessus has an area, , of . Of this area, or 33.5% is used for agricultural purposes, while or 32.9% is forested. Of the rest of the land, or 3.6% is settled (buildings or roads), or 0.6% is either rivers or lakes and or 29.4% is unproductive land.

Of the built up area, housing and buildings made up 1.8% and transportation infrastructure made up 1.5%. Out of the forested land, 27.0% of the total land area is heavily forested and 2.8% is covered with orchards or small clusters of trees. Of the agricultural land, 0.0% is used for growing crops and 6.5% is pastures and 27.0% is used for alpine pastures. All the water in the municipality is flowing water. Of the unproductive areas, 8.1% is unproductive vegetation, 18.6% is too rocky for vegetation and 2.7% of the land is covered by glaciers.

The municipality is located in the Aigle district, in the upper section of the Grande-Eau valley. It consists of the villages of Ormont-Dessus and Vers-l&#x27;Eglise as well as scattered individual settlements. Les Diablerets is the highest village.

==Coat of arms==
The blazon of the municipal coat of arms is &quot;Azure, a Coupeaux Vert and a Crescent and Mullet of Five Or.&quot;

==Demographics==

Ormont-Dessus has a population () of . , 21.0% of the population are resident foreign nationals. Over the last 10 years (1999–2009) the population has changed at a rate of 10.9%. It has changed at a rate of 13.3% due to migration and at a rate of -2.2% due to births and deaths.

Most of the population () speaks French (1,170 or 89.5%), with German being second most common (47 or 3.6%) and Portuguese being third (26 or 2.0%). There are 9 people who speak Italian.

Of the population in the municipality 431 or about 33.0% were born in Ormont-Dessus and lived there in 2000. There were 372 or 28.5% who were born in the same canton, while 184 or 14.1% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 284 or 21.7% were born outside of Switzerland.

In there were 6 live births to Swiss citizens and 1 birth to non-Swiss citizens, and in same time span there were 7 deaths of Swiss citizens. Ignoring immigration and emigration, the population of Swiss citizens decreased by 1 while the foreign population increased by 1. There was 1 Swiss man and 2 Swiss women who immigrated back to Switzerland. At the same time, there were 31 non-Swiss men and 18 non-Swiss women who immigrated from another country to Switzerland. The total Swiss population change in 2008 (from all sources, including moves across municipal borders) was an increase of 2 and the non-Swiss population increased by 27 people. This represents a population growth rate of 2.1%.

The age distribution, , in Ormont-Dessus is; 93 children or 6.4% of the population are between 0 and 9 years old and 128 teenagers or 8.8% are between 10 and 19. Of the adult population, 192 people or 13.3% of the population are between 20 and 29 years old. 170 people or 11.7% are between 30 and 39, 191 people or 13.2% are between 40 and 49, and 227 people or 15.7% are between 50 and 59. The senior population distribution is 200 people or 13.8% of the population are between 60 and 69 years old, 154 people or 10.6% are between 70 and 79, there are 75 people or 5.2% who are 80 and 89, and there are 17 people or 1.2% who are 90 and older.

, there were 476 people who were single and never married in the municipality. There were 652 married individuals, 101 widows/widowers and 78 divorced individuals.

, there were 588 private households in the municipality, and an average of 2.1 persons per household. There were 224 households that consist of only one person and 18 households with five or more people. Out of a total of 621 households that answered this question, 36.1% were households made up of just one person and there were 4 adults who lived with their parents. Of the rest of the households, there are 179 married couples without children, 148 married couples with children. There were 27 single parents with a child or children. There were 6 households that were made up of unrelated people and 33 households that were made up of some sort of institution or another collective housing.

 there were 601 single family homes (or 58.7% of the total) out of a total of 1,023 inhabited buildings. There were 248 multi-family buildings (24.2%), along with 114 multi-purpose buildings that were mostly used for housing (11.1%) and 60 other use buildings (commercial or industrial) that also had some housing (5.9%). Of the single family homes 205 were built before 1919, while 49 were built between 1990 and 2000. The most multi-family homes (71) were built before 1919 and the next most (54) were built between 1981 and 1990. There were 4 multi-family houses built between 1996 and 2000.

 there were 1,729 apartments in the municipality. The most common apartment size was 3 rooms of which there were 493. There were 102 single room apartments and 456 apartments with five or more rooms. Of these apartments, a total of 567 apartments (32.8% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 1,061 apartments (61.4%) were seasonally occupied and 101 apartments (5.8%) were empty. , the construction rate of new housing units was 42.1 new units per 1000 residents. The vacancy rate for the municipality, , was 2.04%.

The historical population is given in the following chart:
==Heritage sites of national significance==
The Swiss Reformed Church of Saint-Théodule and the village sawmill () are listed as Swiss heritage site of national significance. The villages of Vers-l’Église and La Ville are part of the Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites.

==Politics==
In the 2007 federal election the most popular party was the FDP which received 34.38% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the SVP (27.47%), the SP (12.65%) and the LPS Party (7.81%). In the federal election, a total of 404 votes were cast, and the voter turnout was 42.2%.

==Economy==
, Ormont-Dessus had an unemployment rate of 2.4%. , there were 46 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 25 businesses involved in this sector. 116 people were employed in the secondary sector and there were 20 businesses in this sector. 449 people were employed in the tertiary sector, with 81 businesses in this sector. There were 639 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which females made up 42.1% of the workforce.

 the total number of full-time equivalent jobs was 530. The number of jobs in the primary sector was 33, of which 30 were in agriculture and 3 were in forestry or lumber production. The number of jobs in the secondary sector was 111 of which 20 or (18.0%) were in manufacturing and 92 (82.9%) were in construction. The number of jobs in the tertiary sector was 386. In the tertiary sector; 58 or 15.0% were in wholesale or retail sales or the repair of motor vehicles, 31 or 8.0% were in the movement and storage of goods, 173 or 44.8% were in a hotel or restaurant, 2 or 0.5% were in the information industry, 10 or 2.6% were the insurance or financial industry, 7 or 1.8% were technical professionals or scientists, 8 or 2.1% were in education and 38 or 9.8% were in health care.

, there were 112 workers who commuted into the municipality and 174 workers who commuted away. The municipality is a net exporter of workers, with about 1.6 workers leaving the municipality for every one entering. Of the working population, 7.4% used public transportation to get to work, and 52.4% used a private car.

==Religion==
From the , 299 or 22.9% were Roman Catholic, while 768 or 58.8% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church. Of the rest of the population, there were 37 members of an Orthodox church (or about 2.83% of the population), and there were 11 individuals (or about 0.84% of the population) who belonged to another Christian church. There were 13 (or about 0.99% of the population) who were Islamic. There was 1 person who was Buddhist and 5 individuals who belonged to another church. 124 (or about 9.49% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist, and 49 individuals (or about 3.75% of the population) did not answer the question.

==Education==

In Ormont-Dessus about 464 or (35.5%) of the population have completed non-mandatory upper secondary education, and 147 or (11.2%) have completed additional higher education (either university or a &quot;Fachhochschule&quot;). Of the 147 who completed tertiary schooling, 45.6% were Swiss men, 33.3% were Swiss women, 9.5% were non-Swiss men and 11.6% were non-Swiss women.

In the 2009/2010 school year there were a total of 113 students in the Ormont-Dessus school district. In the Vaud cantonal school system, two years of non-obligatory pre-school are provided by the political districts. During the school year, the political district provided pre-school care for a total of 205 children of which 96 children (46.8%) received subsidized pre-school care. The canton&#x27;s primary school program requires students to attend for four years. There were 62 students in the municipal primary school program. The obligatory lower secondary school program lasts for six years and there were 50 students in those schools. There were also 1 students who were home schooled or attended another non-traditional school.

, there were 132 students from Ormont-Dessus who attended schools outside the municipality.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q70082" start="0" end="13" title="Ormont-Dessus" label="Ormont-Dessus"/>
<link wikidata="Q70208" start="19" end="31" title="Municipalities of Switzerland" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="39" end="45" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="49" end="53" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="57" end="68" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q647923" start="97" end="102" title="Aigle (district)" label="Aigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="185" end="191" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232074" start="1271" end="1285" title="Les Diablerets (Ormont-Dessus)" label="Les Diablerets"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="1332" end="1338" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="1356" end="1368" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1777" end="1783" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="1856" end="1866" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="1922" end="1929" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2875" end="2897" title="Population growth#Population growth rate" label="population growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q338309" start="5643" end="5657" title="Swiss Reformed Church" label="Swiss Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q869941" start="5730" end="5768" title="Swiss inventory of cultural property of national and regional significance" label="heritage site of national significance"/>
<link wikidata="Q502685" start="5829" end="5862" title="Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites" label="Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q666315" start="5885" end="5906" title="2007 Swiss federal election" label="2007 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q202638" start="5938" end="5941" title="FDP.The Liberals" label="FDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q385258" start="6022" end="6025" title="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="SVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q303745" start="6040" end="6042" title="Social Democratic Party of Switzerland" label="SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q667785" start="6060" end="6069" title="Liberal Party of Switzerland" label="LPS Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="6144" end="6157" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="6271" end="6294" title="Primary sector of the economy" label="primary economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="6376" end="6392" title="Secondary sector of the economy" label="secondary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="6470" end="6485" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="6674" end="6694" title="full-time equivalent" label="full-time equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7798" end="7812" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="7917" end="7946" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="members of an Orthodox church"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="8148" end="8153" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="8184" end="8192" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="8309" end="8317" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="8321" end="8328" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8514" end="8539" title="Education in Switzerland#Secondary" label="upper secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q688134" start="8611" end="8621" title="List of universities in Switzerland" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365560" start="8633" end="8647" title="Fachhochschule" label="Fachhochschule"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="9206" end="9220" title="primary school" label="primary school"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535065" wikidata="Q70214" url="?curid=535065" title="Rennaz">
<text>Rennaz () is a municipality of the canton of Vaud in Switzerland, located in the district of Aigle.

==History==
Rennaz is first mentioned in 1252 as &quot;ad villam de rayna&quot;.

==Geography==
Rennaz has an area, , of . Of this area, or 67.6% is used for agricultural purposes, while or 1.8% is forested. Of the rest of the land, or 31.1% is settled (buildings or roads), or 0.5% is either rivers or lakes.

Of the built up area, industrial buildings made up 3.2% of the total area while housing and buildings made up 8.7% and transportation infrastructure made up 14.2%. Power and water infrastructure as well as other special developed areas made up 1.8% of the area while parks, green belts and sports fields made up 3.2%. Out of the forested land, all of the forested land area is covered with heavy forests. Of the agricultural land, 57.1% is used for growing crops and 6.8% is pastures, while 3.7% is used for orchards or vine crops. All the water in the municipality is flowing water.

The municipality is located in the Aigle district, along the Rhone river.

==Coat of arms==
The blazon of the municipal coat of arms is &quot;Per fess Sable and Or, overall a Fox rampant Gules.&quot;

==Demographics==
Rennaz has a population () of . , 29.8% of the population are resident foreign nationals. Over the last 10 years (1999–2009 ) the population has changed at a rate of 12.6%. It has changed at a rate of 2% due to migration and at a rate of 10.6% due to births and deaths.

Most of the population () speaks French (492 or 87.1%), with German being second most common (21 or 3.7%) and Italian being third (20 or 3.5%).

Of the population in the municipality 103 or about 18.2% were born in Rennaz and lived there in 2000. There were 247 or 43.7% who were born in the same canton, while 91 or 16.1% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 118 or 20.9% were born outside of Switzerland.

In there were 4 live births to Swiss citizens and 4 births to non-Swiss citizens, and in same time span there were 2 deaths of Swiss citizens. Ignoring immigration and emigration, the population of Swiss citizens increased by 2 while the foreign population increased by 4. There were 2 Swiss women who emigrated from Switzerland. At the same time, there were 2 non-Swiss men who emigrated from Switzerland to another country and 6 non-Swiss women who immigrated from another country to Switzerland. The total Swiss population change in 2008 (from all sources, including moves across municipal borders) was an increase of 3 and the non-Swiss population increased by 12 people. This represents a population growth rate of 2.5%.

The age distribution, , in Rennaz is; 77 children or 12.5% of the population are between 0 and 9 years old and 73 teenagers or 11.9% are between 10 and 19. Of the adult population, 74 people or 12.1% of the population are between 20 and 29 years old. 88 people or 14.3% are between 30 and 39, 116 people or 18.9% are between 40 and 49, and 79 people or 12.9% are between 50 and 59. The senior population distribution is 57 people or 9.3% of the population are between 60 and 69 years old, 33 people or 5.4% are between 70 and 79, there are 13 people or 2.1% who are 80 and 89, and there are 4 people or 0.7% who are 90 and older.

, there were 236 people who were single and never married in the municipality. There were 272 married individuals, 26 widows or widowers and 31 individuals who are divorced.

, there were 230 private households in the municipality, and an average of 2.4 persons per household. There were 68 households that consist of only one person and 13 households with five or more people. Out of a total of 237 households that answered this question, 28.7% were households made up of just one person and there was 1 adult who lived with their parents. Of the rest of the households, there are 63 married couples without children, 81 married couples with children There were 16 single parents with a child or children. There was 1 household that was made up of unrelated people and 7 households that were made up of some sort of institution or another collective housing.

 there were 51 single family homes (or 52.0% of the total) out of a total of 98 inhabited buildings. There were 27 multi-family buildings (27.6%), along with 13 multi-purpose buildings that were mostly used for housing (13.3%) and 7 other use buildings (commercial or industrial) that also had some housing (7.1%). Of the single family homes 8 were built before 1919, while 1 were built between 1990 and 2000. The greatest number of single family homes (19) were built between 1981 and 1990. The most multi-family homes (8) were built between 1981 and 1990 and the next most (6) were built before 1919. There were 2 multi-family houses built between 1996 and 2000.

 there were 214 apartments in the municipality. The most common apartment size was 4 rooms of which there were 70. There were 8 single room apartments and 42 apartments with five or more rooms. Of these apartments, a total of 200 apartments (93.5% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 8 apartments (3.7%) were seasonally occupied and 6 apartments (2.8%) were empty. , the construction rate of new housing units was 1.6 new units per 1000 residents. The vacancy rate for the municipality, , was 0%.

The historical population is given in the following chart:
==Politics==
In the 2007 federal election the most popular party was the SVP which received 33.3% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the FDP (18.8%), the SP (17.85%) and the Green Party (8.9%). In the federal election, a total of 122 votes were cast, and the voter turnout was 38.7%.

==Economy==
, Rennaz had an unemployment rate of 5.4%. , there were 15 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 4 businesses involved in this sector. 1 person was employed in the secondary sector and there was 1 business in this sector. 405 people were employed in the tertiary sector, with 27 businesses in this sector. There were 326 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which females made up 44.2% of the workforce.

 the total number of full-time equivalent jobs was 332. The number of jobs in the primary sector was 13, all of which were in agriculture. The number of jobs in the secondary sector was 1, all of which were in manufacturing. The number of jobs in the tertiary sector was 318. In the tertiary sector; 138 or 43.4% were in wholesale or retail sales or the repair of motor vehicles, 46 or 14.5% were in a hotel or restaurant, 3 or 0.9% were in education.

, there were 313 workers who commuted into the municipality and 244 workers who commuted away. The municipality is a net importer of workers, with about 1.3 workers entering the municipality for every one leaving. About 4.2% of the workforce coming into Rennaz are coming from outside Switzerland. Of the working population, 13.2% used public transportation to get to work, and 65% used a private car.

==Religion==
From the , 210 or 37.2% were Roman Catholic, while 233 or 41.2% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church. Of the rest of the population, there were 3 members of an Orthodox church (or about 0.53% of the population), there were 2 individuals (or about 0.35% of the population) who belonged to the Christian Catholic Church, and there were 11 individuals (or about 1.95% of the population) who belonged to another Christian church. There were 32 (or about 5.66% of the population) who were Islamic. There were and 2 individuals who belonged to another church. 57 (or about 10.09% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist, and 15 individuals (or about 2.65% of the population) did not answer the question.

==Education==
In Rennaz about 261 or (46.2%) of the population have completed non-mandatory upper secondary education, and 54 or (9.6%) have completed additional higher education (either university or a &quot;Fachhochschule&quot;). Of the 54 who completed tertiary schooling, 50.0% were Swiss men, 27.8% were Swiss women, 14.8% were non-Swiss men.

In the 2009/2010 school year there were a total of 89 students in the Rennaz school district. In the Vaud cantonal school system, two years of non-obligatory pre-school are provided by the political districts. During the school year, the political district provided pre-school care for a total of 205 children of which 96 children (46.8%) received subsidized pre-school care. The canton&#x27;s primary school program requires students to attend for four years. There were 55 students in the municipal primary school program. The obligatory lower secondary school program lasts for six years and there were 33 students in those schools. There were also 1 students who were home schooled or attended another non-traditional school.

, there were 47 students in Rennaz who came from another municipality, while 60 residents attended schools outside the municipality.

==Infrastructure==
===Health===
Since 2019, the intercantonal Riviera-Chablais Hospital, Vaud-Valais is located in the municipality, as well at the Pharmacy of the Eastern Vaud Hospitals.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q70214" start="0" end="6" title="Rennaz" label="Rennaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q70208" start="15" end="27" title="Municipalities of Switzerland" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="35" end="41" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="45" end="49" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="53" end="64" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q647923" start="93" end="98" title="Aigle (district)" label="Aigle"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="1058" end="1063" title="Rhone" label="Rhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="1093" end="1099" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="1117" end="1129" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1519" end="1525" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1547" end="1553" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="1596" end="1603" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2596" end="2618" title="Population growth#Population growth rate" label="population growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q666315" start="5375" end="5396" title="2007 Swiss federal election" label="2007 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q385258" start="5428" end="5431" title="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="SVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q202638" start="5511" end="5514" title="FDP.The Liberals" label="FDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q303745" start="5528" end="5530" title="Social Democratic Party of Switzerland" label="SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q659739" start="5548" end="5559" title="Green Party of Switzerland" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339847" start="5633" end="5646" title="voter turnout" label="voter turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="5753" end="5776" title="Primary sector of the economy" label="primary economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="5854" end="5870" title="Secondary sector of the economy" label="secondary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="5944" end="5959" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543700" start="6148" end="6168" title="full-time equivalent" label="full-time equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7025" end="7039" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q338309" start="7076" end="7097" title="Swiss Reformed Church" label="Swiss Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="7143" end="7172" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="members of an Orthodox church"/>
<link wikidata="Q671244" start="7289" end="7314" title="Christian Catholic Church of Switzerland" label="Christian Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="7481" end="7486" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="7617" end="7625" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="7629" end="7636" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7814" end="7839" title="Education in Switzerland#Secondary" label="upper secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q688134" start="7909" end="7919" title="List of universities in Switzerland" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365560" start="7931" end="7945" title="Fachhochschule" label="Fachhochschule"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="8465" end="8479" title="primary school" label="primary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q12771" start="9025" end="9029" title="Vaud" label="Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q834" start="9030" end="9036" title="Valais" label="Valais"/>
<link wikidata="Q99838610" start="9084" end="9122" title="Pharmacy of the Eastern Vaud Hospitals" label="Pharmacy of the Eastern Vaud Hospitals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535074" wikidata="Q1872461" url="?curid=535074" title="Rafael Lozano-Hemmer">
<text>Rafael Lozano-Hemmer (born 1967 in Mexico City) is a Mexican-Canadian electronic artist living and working in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. He creates platforms for public participation by using robotic lights, digital fountains, computerized surveillance, and telematic networks. Inspired by phantasmagoria, carnival, and animatronics, his interactive works are “anti-monuments for people to self-represent.”

He emigrated to Canada in 1985 to study at the University of Victoria in British Columbia and then received his Bachelor of Science in Physical Chemistry from Concordia University in Montreal. The son of Mexico City nightclub owners, Lozano-Hemmer was drawn to science but could not resist joining the creative activities of his friends. Initially he worked in a molecular recognition lab in Montreal and published his research in Chemistry journals. Though he did not pursue the sciences as a direct career, it has influenced his work in many ways, providing conceptual inspiration and practical approaches to create his work.

==Biography==

Lozano-Hemmer is best known for creating and presenting theatrical interactive installations in public spaces around the world. Using robotics, real-time computer graphics, film projections, positional sound, internet links, cell phone interfaces, video and ultrasonic sensors, LED screens and other devices, his installations seek to interrupt the increasingly homogenized urban condition by providing critical platforms for participation. Lozano-Hemmer&#x27;s smaller-scaled sculptural and video installations explore themes of perception, deception and surveillance. As an outgrowth of these various large scale and performance-based projects Lozano-Hemmer documents the works in photography editions that are also exhibited.

He was the first artist to represent Mexico at the Venice Biennale with an exhibition at Palazzo Van Axel in 2007. He has also shown at Biennials in Cuenca, Havana, Istanbul, Kochi, Liverpool, Melbourne NGV, Moscow, New Orleans, New York ICP, Seoul, Seville, Shanghai, Singapore, Sydney, and Wuzhen. His public art has been commissioned for the Millennium Celebrations in Mexico City (1999), the Expansion of the European Union in Dublin (2004), the Student Massacre Memorial in Tlatelolco (2008), the Vancouver Olympics (2010), the pre-opening exhibition of the Guggenheim in Abu Dhabi (2015), and the activation of the Raurica Roman Theatre in Basel (2018). Collections holding his work include MoMA and Guggenheim in New York, TATE in London, MAC and MBAM in Montreal, Jumex, and MUAC in Mexico City, DAROS in Zurich, MONA in Hobart, 21C Museum in Kanazawa, Borusan Contemporary in Istanbul, CIFO in Miami, MAG in Manchester, SFMOMA in San Francisco, ZKM in Karlsruhe, SAM in Singapore and many others.

He has received two BAFTA British Academy Awards for Interactive Art in London, a Golden Nica at the Prix Ars Electronica in Austria, &quot;Artist of the year&quot; Rave Award from Wired Magazine, a Rockefeller fellowship, the Trophée des Lumières in Lyon, an International Bauhaus Award in Dessau, the title of Compagnon des Arts et des Lettres du Québec in Quebec, and the Governor General&#x27;s Award in Canada. He has lectured at Goldsmiths College, the Bartlett School, Princeton University, Harvard University, UC Berkeley, Cooper Union, USC, MIT MediaLab, Guggenheim Museum, LA MOCA, Netherlands Architecture Institute, Cornell University, UPenn, SCAD, Danish Architecture Centre, CCA in Montreal, ICA in London, and the Art Institute of Chicago.

In the past few years, Lozano-Hemmer was the subject of eighteen solo exhibitions worldwide, including a major show at the Hirshhorn Museum in Washington DC, the inaugural show at the AmorePacific Museum in Seoul, and a mid-career retrospective co-produced by the Musée d’Art Contemporain de Montréal and SFMOMA. In 2019, his immersive performance “Atmospheric Memory” premiered at the Manchester International Festival, and his interactive installation “Border Tuner” connected people across the US-Mexico border using bridges of light controlled by the voices of participants in Ciudad Juárez, Chihuahua and El Paso, Texas. Major recent solo exhibitions include “Listening Forest,” which featured his largest collection to date of outdoor works, installed over 120 acres of land at Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art in Bentonville, Arkansas, “Common Measures,” his first exhibition at PACE Gallery, New York, and “Translation Island,” a 2-km parcours which included ten public artworks, in Lulu Island, Abu Dhabi.

Lozano-Hemmer is represented by bitforms gallery (New York), Galería Max Estrella (Madrid), Wilde Gallery (Geneva, Basel, and Zürich), and PACE Gallery (Worldwide). His work has been shown at fairs such as Art Basel (Basel, Miami, and Hong Kong), Frieze (London and LA), Armory Show (New York), ARCO (Madrid), Zona Maco (Mexico), Paris Photo, and Art Cologne. He has shown three times at Art Basel Unlimited.

== Publications ==
Ten monographs have been published featuring essays by writers such as Cuauhtémoc Medina, Scott McQuire, John Hanhardt, Rodrigo Alonso, Beryl Graham, Cecilia Fajardo-Hill, Manuel De Landa, Victor Stoichita, Barbara London, Geert Lovink, Brian Massumi. Lozano-Hemmer’s own writing has appeared, for example, in Kunstforum (Germany), Leonardo (USA), Performance Research (UK), and Archis (Netherlands).

=== Rafael Lozano- Hemmer: Unstable Presence ===
Edited by Rudolf Frieling and François LeTourneux.

&quot;This mid-career monograph offers a nuanced perspective on contemporary artist Rafael Lozano-Hemmer’s oeuvre. Rafael Lozano-Hemmer’s installations engage the audience in unique and seductive ways—measuring their heart rate, surveilling their faces, even circulating their breath. Often characterized by particular interactions between the work and the viewer, Lozano-Hemmer’s art explores themes such as forced cohabitations, power imbalances, and contemporary techniques of surveillance and control. This mid-career retrospective book focuses on works produced over the past two decades. It includes essays that explore the poetic and political dimensions of the artist’s work, along with in-depth examinations of four major pieces—Zoom Pavilion, Vicious Circular Breathing, Voz Alta, and Pulse Room. It also features full-color illustrations of 16 recent works, including a newly created immersive sound environment, Sphere Packing: Bach. An essential guide to a deeper understanding of the themes that connect these technically sophisticated and emotionally resonant works, this book draws on the idea of an “unstable presence” to communicate the humanity and the anxiety that lie at the center of Lozano-Hemmer’s art.&quot;

== Museums &amp; Permanent Collections ==
Over two-dozen permanent architectural pieces for public and private buildings have been installed around the world. These include Planet Word Museum of Language in Washington D.C., Maison Manuvie in Montréal, ATT in Dallas, Museum of Old, and New Art in Hobart, Science Museum in London, AmorePacific Museum in Seoul, PHI Centre and MAC in Montréal, and Fidelity Headquarters in Boston, London, and Dalian.

=== Pulse Room (2006) ===
Is an interactive installation featuring over 300 hundred clear incandescent light bulbs, 300 W each, hung by cables three metres from the floor. The bulbs are uniformly distributed over the exhibition room, filling it completely. An interface placed on one side of the room has a sensor that detects the heart rate of participants. When someone holds the interface, a computer detects his or her pulse and immediately sets off the closest bulb to flash at the exact rhythm of his or her heart. The moment the interface is released, all the lights turn off briefly, and the flashing sequence advances by one position down the queue to the next bulb in the grid. Each time someone touches the interface, a heart pattern is recorded and sent to the first bulb in the grid, pushing ahead all the existing recordings. At any given time, the installation will show the recordings from the most recent participants.

=== Vicious Circular Breathing (2015) ===
Is a hermetically sealed apparatus that invites the public to breathe the air previously breathed by participants before them. It consists of a glass room with double sliding doors, two emergency exits, carbon dioxide and oxygen sensors, a set of motorized bellows, an electromagnetic valve system, and 61 brown paper bags hanging from respiration tubes.

In the piece, visitors’ breath is kept circulating and made tangible by automatically inflating and deflating the brown paper bags around 10,000 times a day, the typical respiratory frequency for an adult at rest. There are 61 bags because that constitutes 5 octaves, a typical range of musical organs that inspire the design.

The piece includes warnings for asphyxiation, contagion, and panic, producing a faint mechanical sound, a quiet whir from the air flow, and a louder crackle from the crumpling bags.

To participate, an audience member presses a button on the outside of the glass prism. They can then enter a vestibule and wait for it to be decompressed. Once they enter the main chamber, they sit down and breathe the recycled air.

=== A Crack in the Hourglass (2020) ===
In this participatory artwork, a modified robotic plotter deposits grains of hourglass sand onto a black surface to recreate the images of those lost due to COVID-19. After each portrait is completed, the surface tilts and the same sand is recycled into the next portrait, echoing the collective and ongoing nature of the pandemic. Those seeking a way to mourn loved ones lost during the pandemic are invited to participate by submitting a photograph of the deceased accompanied by a personalized dedication. The resulting memorials are available, via livestream and in archive form on the project’s website.

The project was originally commissioned by MUAC Museum in Mexico City and was shown at the Brooklyn Museum for six months.

 made an episode about this artwork, &quot;Episode 280: In the midst of loss and isolation, an artist’s anti-monument, “A Crack in the Hourglass” (2021), brings communities together to mourn, remember, and feel connected again.&quot;

== Public Art Commissions ==
Large-scale interactive installations have been commissioned for events such as the Millennium Celebrations in Mexico City (1999), the Cultural Capital of Europe in Rotterdam (2001), the UN World Summit of Cities in Lyon (2003), the opening of the YCAM Center in Japan (2003), the Expansion of the European Union in Dublin (2004), the memorial for the Tlatelolco Student Massacre in Mexico City (2008), the Winter Olympics in Vancouver (2010), the pre-opening exhibition of the Guggenheim in Abu Dhabi (2015), the activation of the Augusta Raurica Roman Theatre in Basel (2018), and the sound to light intervention across the US-Mexico border in Ciudad Juárez and El Paso (2019).
=== Border Tuner / Sintonizador Fronterizo (2019) ===
Border Tuner was a large-scale, participatory art installation designed to interconnect the cities of El Paso, Texas, and Ciudad Juárez, Chihuahua. Powerful searchlights make “bridges of light” that open live sound channels for communication across the US-Mexico border. Each of the interactive Border Tuner stations featured a microphone, a speaker and a large wheel or dial. As a participant turned the dial, three nearby searchlights created an “arm” of light that followed the movement of the dial, automatically scanning the horizon. When two such “arms of light” met in the sky and intersected, a bidirectional channel of sound was opened between the people at the two remote stations. As they spoke and heard each other, the brightness of the “light bridge” modulated in sync, creating a glimmer similar to a Morse code scintillation. Every interactive station could tune into any other, so for example, a participant in Mexico could connect to the three US-based stations or to the other two in Mexico.

The project brought together tens of thousands of people, reuniting families on both sides of the border, creating new connections, performing poetry recitals and serenades, observing mournful vigils, and staging the vibrancy of the diverse culture and activism in the region.

 presented &quot;this special extended segment as a complement to the “Borderlands” episode from the tenth season of the &quot;Art in the Twenty-First Century&quot; series. Edited to focus on a singular artist narrative, this film contains original material not included in the television broadcast.&quot;

=== Speaking Willow (2020) ===
A metal tree sculpture, covered in living vine and ivy, features hundreds of hanging loudspeakers which detect the presence of a visitor underneath and, in response, play quiet voice recordings in one of 400 different languages. Each speaker contains recordings in a different language, obtained from the Wikitongues language preservation project. The speakers also light up on playback to create a glimmering effect similar to fireflies. If no visitor is around, the tree quietly plays back bird songs from hundreds of species.

Curated by the Public Art Fund for the courtyard of the new Planet Word Museum of Language in Washington D.C., the piece was fabricated by UAP in New York.

== Performances ==

=== Levels of Nothingness (2009) ===
Collaboration with Brian Massumi and Isabella Rossellini

Levels of Nothingness is an installation-performance commissioned for the 50th Anniversary of the Guggenheim Museum, inspired by Kandinsky’s opera, “The Yellow Sound” (1912). In “Levels of Nothingness”, the human voice is analyzed by computers, automatically controlling a full rig of Rock-and-Roll concert lighting and creating an interactive colour show. For the New York performances, Isabella Rossellini read a libretto co-written by Brian Massumi, which included seminal philosophical texts on skepticism, color and perception, including writings by Kandinsky, Deleuze, Sanches, Simon Baron-Cohen and Alexander Luria. Following the performances, audience members could test the colour-generating microphone. Video here

=== Sync, a performance with Eli Keszler (2022) ===
Sync is an audiovisual collaboration between artist Rafael Lozano-Hemmer and percussionist, composer, and artist Eli Keszler. Taking place amid Lozano-Hemmer’s first solo exhibition at PACE Gallery New York, this one-off performance centers on the immersive, biometric artwork Pulse Topology.

Consisting of 3,000 suspended lightbulbs that glimmer in tune with activity detected by pulse sensors, the installation, which typically records participants’ heartbeats, is activated by Keszler’s distinctive drumming in Sync. Using a Sensory Percussion system by Sunhouse, Keszler triggered and controlled a series of mesmeric lighting patterns—what he terms a “morphing geography of light”—in Pulse Topology over the course of his performance.

=== Storm Riders Hörspiel, Denmark (1992) ===
Hörspiel (radio play) by English composer and Poet Dick Higgins, written and recorded at the Banff Centre for the Arts in Canada in 1991. Lozano- Hemmer played the part of Stravinsky in performances in Banff and at the Alberta College of Art.

== Art Parcours and &quot;Inversive&quot; Exhibitions ==

=== Listening Forest (2022) ===
An art walk designed to transform Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art’s North Forest at night, featuring eight large-scale interactive artworks to create an interactive pathway. Using technology that responded to visitors’ voices, heartbeats, and body heat, “Listening Forest” highlighted the unique physical characteristics of participants while simultaneously establishing connections between them and the landscape itself.

=== Atmospheric Memory, Sydney (2023) ===
Computer pioneer Charles Babbage suggested that the air surrounding us is a “vast library” containing every sound, motion and word spoken. Two hundred years later, Atmospheric Memory explores this idea at a moment when perfect recollection is one of the defining conditions of our digital life, and the air that we breathe has become a battleground for the future of our planet.

Atmospheric Memory uses new interactive artworks to transform vibrations in the atmosphere into something visitors can see, hear and even touch. Presented at the Powerhouse Ultimo Museum, the exhibition’s works include a voice-controlled fountain where spoken words momentarily hang in the air as water vapour; a room with over 3000 different channels of natural and unnatural sounds; a voice-controlled light beacon, and the world’s first 3D printed speech bubble. On view are also original artifacts from the XIX Century including prototypes of the Analytical Engine, Edison’s first phonograph, and a first edition of Babbage’s treatise.

Atmospheric Memory headlined the Sydney Science Festival, and was originally commissioned by Factory International for the Manchester International Festival. Curated by José Luis de Vicente.

=== Translation Island (2023) ===
Translation Island consists of ten audiovisual artworks that transformed Lulu Island, a deserted island right across the water from downtown Abu Dhabi. Visitors were welcome to interact with the artworks by walking a 2-km path inside the island, alongside sand dunes, desert flora, beaches, and fresh water lakes.

The installations use technologies such as AI, computer vision, environmental sensors, and 3D mapping to create poetic shared experiences in a desert landscape. “Collider,” for instance, detects invisible cosmic radiation arriving on Earth from stars and black holes, translating the radiation and making it visible as gentle ripples along a colossal curtain of light that can be seen from a 10 Km radius. Other works such as “Dune Ringers”, and “Pulse Island” make tangible our own biometric signatures. Several installations are literally live translations of language. “Translation Stream” is a fluid stream of letters, projected onto the sandy trail, which organize themselves around visitors, revealing the poetry of contemporary Emirati poets in both English and Arabic. Meanwhile, “Shadow Tuner” allows visitors to use their shadow to tune-in up to 12,000 live streams of radio from around the world, and “Translation Lake” uses AI voice avatars to endlessly translate James Joyce’s recondite masterpiece “Finnegan’s Wake” into 24 languages, celebrating the impossibility and absurdity of fluid machine translation of complex human literature.

== Relational Architecture ==
In 1994, Lozano-Hemmer coined the term &quot;relational architecture&quot; as the technological actualization of buildings and the urban environment with alien memory. He aimed to transform the dominant narratives of a specific building or urban setting by superimposing audiovisual elements to affect it, effect it and re-contextualize it. From 1997 to 2006, he built ten works of relational architecture beginning with &quot;Displaced Emperors&quot; and ending with &quot;Under Scan&quot;. Lozano-Hemmer says, &quot;I want buildings to pretend to be something other than themselves, to engage in a kind of dissimulation&quot;

==Technology==
Lozano-Hemmer differs from many artists in his comprehensive use of technology; most of his productions contain more than one element of technology to create a lasting effect. Lozano-Hemmer recognizes that Western culture is a technology-based culture, emphasizing &quot;even if you are not using a computer you are affected by this environment. Working with technology is inevitable.&quot; &quot;Our politics, our culture, our economy, everything is running through globalized networks of communication...&quot;

Technologies that Lozano-Hemmer has used in his works include robotics, custom software, projections, internet links, cell phones, sensors, LEDs, cameras, and tracking systems.

==Notable Exhibitions==
* &quot;A Draft of Shadows&quot; Bildmuseet, Umeå University, Sweden. November 2, 2014 - April 26, 2015
* Rafael Lozano-Hemmer: Translation Island (curated by: Reem Fadda and Alia Zaal Sultan Lootah), Department of Culture and Tourism of Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, November 20 - December 31.
* Lumiere 2023 (curated by: Helen Marriage), Lumiere Festival Durham, Durham, United Kingdom, November 16 - November 19.
* Rafael Lozano-Hemmer: Vicious Circular Breathing (curated by: Kathleen Forde), Borusan Contemporary, Istanbul, Turkey, September 14 - February 16, 2014.

==Awards==
* Governor General&#x27;s Awards in Visual and Media Arts, Ottawa, Canada 2015.
* Interactive Art Honorable Mention, Ars Electronica 2013, Linz, Austria 2013.
* Joyce Award, The Joyce Foundation, Chicago, Illinois, United States 2012.
* BAFTA British Academy Award for Interactive Art 2005, London, United Kingdom 2005.
* Artist/Performer of the year, Wired Magazine Rave Awards, San Francisco, California, United States 2003.
* Rockefeller-Ford Fellowship, New York City, New York, United States 2003.
* Trophée des Lumiéres, Lyon, France 2003.
* World Technology Network Award for the Arts, San Francisco, California, United States 2003.
* BAFTA British Academy Award for Interactive Art 2002, London, United Kingdom 2002.
* Gold Award, Interactive Media Design Review 2002, I.D. Magazine, United States 2002.
* Interactive Art Distinction, Ars Electronica 2002, Linz, Austria 2002.
* International Bauhaus Award 2002, 1st Prize, Dessau, Germany 2002.
* Distinction, SFMOMA Webby Awards 2000, San Francisco, California, United States 2000.
* Excellence Award, Media Arts Festival 2000, CG Arts, Tokyo, Japan 2000.
* Finalist, Medienkunstpreis 2000, ZKM, Karlsruhe, Germany 2000.
* Interactive Art Golden Nica, Ars Electronica 2000, Linz, Austria 2000.
* Interactive Art Honorable Mention, Ars Electronica 1998, Linz, Austria 1998.
* Best Installation, Interactive Digital Media Awards 1996, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 1996.
* 2nd Prize, Cyberstar, Köln, Germany, June 1995.
* Interactive Art Honorable Mention, Ars Electronica 1995, Linz, Austria 1995.

==Further reading==
*Maciej Ożóg, &quot;Surveilling the Surveillance Society: The Case of Rafael Lozano-Hemmer&#x27;s Installations&quot; in Outi Remes and Pam Skelton (eds.), &quot;Conspiracy Dwellings: Surveillance in Contemporary Art&quot;. Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2010. Info at: https://web.archive.org/web/20110609232602/http://www.c-s-p.org/flyers/Conspiracy-Dwellings--Surveillance-in-Contemporary-Art1-4438-1905-0.htm

==References==
==External links==

*Official website
*Art 21 interview
* Pulse Room
* Vicious Circular Breathing
* Levels of Nothingness

 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1872461" start="0" end="20" title="Rafael Lozano-Hemmer" label="Rafael Lozano-Hemmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="35" end="46" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358332" start="70" end="84" title="electronic art" label="electronic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458113" start="454" end="476" title="University of Victoria" label="University of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="519" end="538" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="542" end="560" title="physical chemistry" label="Physical Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q326342" start="566" end="586" title="Concordia University (Montreal)" label="Concordia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="590" end="598" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394336" start="1118" end="1143" title="Interactive art" label="interactive installations"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="1607" end="1619" title="surveillance" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q205751" start="1832" end="1847" title="Venice Biennale" label="Venice Biennale"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="2478" end="2482" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="MoMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q193375" start="2511" end="2515" title="Tate Modern" label="TATE"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="2808" end="2813" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q697762" start="2889" end="2909" title="Prix Ars Electronica" label="Prix Ars Electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q520154" start="2969" end="2983" title="Wired (magazine)" label="Wired Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q528231" start="3223" end="3241" title="Goldsmiths, University of London" label="Goldsmiths College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715722" start="3247" end="3262" title="The Bartlett" label="Bartlett School"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="3264" end="3284" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="3286" end="3304" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="3306" end="3317" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="UC Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q130981" start="3319" end="3331" title="Cooper Union" label="Cooper Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="3333" end="3336" title="University of Southern California" label="USC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373549" start="3338" end="3350" title="MIT Media Lab" label="MIT MediaLab"/>
<link wikidata="Q201469" start="3352" end="3369" title="Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum" label="Guggenheim Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="3416" end="3434" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="3436" end="3441" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="UPenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020699" start="3443" end="3447" title="Savannah College of Art and Design" label="SCAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434214" start="3449" end="3475" title="Danish Architecture Centre" label="Danish Architecture Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q239303" start="3517" end="3541" title="Art Institute of Chicago" label="Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142334" start="4328" end="4366" title="Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art" label="Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918850" start="4598" end="4614" title="bitforms gallery" label="bitforms gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121900" start="4705" end="4717" title="Pace Gallery" label="PACE Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q684443" start="4772" end="4781" title="Art Basel" label="Art Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464827" start="4813" end="4819" title="Frieze Art Fair" label="Frieze"/>
<link wikidata="Q688909" start="4837" end="4848" title="Armory Show" label="Armory Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q24730661" start="4876" end="4885" title="Zona Maco" label="Zona Maco"/>
<link wikidata="Q74249" start="4896" end="4907" title="Paris Photo" label="Paris Photo"/>
<link wikidata="Q316634" start="4913" end="4924" title="Art Cologne" label="Art Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715572" start="5100" end="5113" title="John Hanhardt" label="John Hanhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q556699" start="5167" end="5182" title="Manuel DeLanda" label="Manuel De Landa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499705" start="5202" end="5216" title="Barbara London (curator)" label="Barbara London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497725" start="5218" end="5230" title="Geert Lovink" label="Geert Lovink"/>
<link wikidata="Q912704" start="5232" end="5245" title="Brian Massumi" label="Brian Massumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q24056767" start="12968" end="12979" title="Wikitongues" label="Wikitongues"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925277" start="13208" end="13223" title="Public Art Fund" label="Public Art Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q912704" start="13426" end="13439" title="Brian Massumi" label="Brian Massumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q203840" start="13444" end="13463" title="Isabella Rossellini" label="Isabella Rossellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921696" start="14355" end="14366" title="Eli Keszler" label="Eli Keszler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121900" start="14427" end="14439" title="Pace Gallery" label="PACE Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209700" start="15080" end="15092" title="Dick Higgins" label="Dick Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142334" start="15397" end="15435" title="Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art" label="Crystal Bridges Museum of American Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q46633" start="15852" end="15867" title="Charles Babbage" label="Charles Babbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q485257" start="16766" end="16783" title="Analytical engine" label="Analytical Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="16800" end="16810" title="phonograph" label="phonograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451599" start="16949" end="16970" title="Factory International" label="Factory International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907651" start="19972" end="19982" title="Bildmuseet" label="Bildmuseet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405813" start="20538" end="20593" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards in Visual and Media Arts" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards in Visual and Media Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="20773" end="20778" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="21178" end="21183" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985442" start="21313" end="21326" title="I.D. Magazine" label="I.D. Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q913672" start="21505" end="21511" title="SFMOMA" label="SFMOMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411891" start="21512" end="21524" title="Webby Awards" label="Webby Awards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21598" end="21617" title="Media Arts Festival" label="Media Arts Festival"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535075" wikidata="Q6480908" url="?curid=535075" title="Lamar River">
<text>The Lamar River is a tributary of the Yellowstone River, approximately long, in northwestern Wyoming in the United States. The river is located entirely within Yellowstone National Park.

== History ==
Prior to the 1884–85 Geological Survey of the park, the Lamar was known as the East Fork of the Yellowstone River. During that survey, Geologist Arnold Hague named the river for L.Q.C. (Lucius Quintius Cincinnatus) Lamar, then Secretary of the Interior (March 1885 – January 1888), and a former slaveholder and author of the Mississippi Ordinance of Secession. The Lamar Valley, or the &quot;Secluded Valley&quot; of Trapper Osborne Russell and other park features or administrative names which contain &quot;Lamar&quot; are derived from this original naming.

Osborne Russell in his 1921 &quot;Journal of a Trapper&quot; described the Lamar as follows:
In 1869, the Cook–Folsom–Peterson Expedition encountered the Lamar River (East Fork) just upstream from the canyon section flowing into the Yellowstone and traveled upstream to the confluence of Calfee Creek where they camped on September 16, 1869.

==Location and tributaries ==
It rises in the Absaroka Range, on the eastern edge of the park, and flows northwest through the northeast corner of the park. It is joined by many tributary streams, including Soda Butte Creek and Slough Creek and joins the Yellowstone near Tower Junction, below the Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone. The river flows through a portion of the park hit hard by the 1988 wildfires.

==Angling==
The Lamar River, with its tributaries is a popular destination for fly fishing in Yellowstone Park. The access is very easy and the cutthroat fishing is some of the best in the world. There are some rainbow trout in the river below the road bridge, but the primary fishing throughout the drainage is for Yellowstone cutthroat trout. Cutthroat trout in the Lamar offer good dry fly fishing with heavy hatches of caddis, pale morning duns, and large Green Drakes in July. Terrestrials are prominent in late summer.
The Lamar and its tributaries are not usually fishable until about the second week of July, because of high water, so check conditions by contacting local fly stores.
The National Park Service has made frequent changes to the regulations for the Lamar and for its tributaries including Slough Creek and Soda Butte, and in 2018 has made significant new changes. Anglers are now required to kill all non-native fish, including rainbow trout, brook trout, and identifiable rainbow/cutthroat hybrids throughout the Lamar drainage. On page 14 of the 2018 regulations they still say that if it has a red slash put it back, but that is clearly superseded by the region specific requirement that if a fish landed in the Lamar drainage is clearly identifiable as a hybrid then it must be killed, even if it has a red slash, with the caveat that &quot;if you don&#x27;t know, let it go.&quot; Another significant change to the Park-wide fishing regulations is that felt soles are no longer permitted on waders. Other Park-wide regulations, that continue from previous years, are that barbed hooks, lead weights, lead split shot, and live bait are banned.

== Wildlife ==
Along the river, there are pronghorn, bison, and bear within the area of the Lamar River Valley. Around the world, it is one of the most consistent environments to view wolves. There are two famous wolf packs in the area. The Lamar Canyon and Junction Butte wolf packs inhabit the area along the Lamar River. and is widely known as one of the best places in Yellowstone National Park to view wildlife, especially grizzly bears and wolves. Three locations in the valley—Soda Butte, Crystal Creek and Rose Creek were the sites for the 1995 re-introduction of wolves into Yellowstone. Birds in the area include osprey and bald eagle. The area along the Lamar River is often referred to as America&#x27;s Serengeti.

== Hiking ==
The Lamar River Trail is a seven mile long round-trip hiking trail. The trail&#x27;s hiking difficulty is easy and the trip can be completed in one day. Along this trail, it is possible to see the extensive wildlife habitat the area has to offer. Even if one does not hike the entire trail, even only when hiking a few miles you will be near herds of bison along the trail. There are two great campsites, 3L1 and 3L2, along the trail within the area near Cache Creek. However, campsite 3L2 can be hard to access in the spring when the Lamar River is high, as it requires a ford in order to reach it. Along the upper sections of the trail one can find outfitters offering guided trips on horseback to go deep into the wilderness.

==Climate==


==See also==
* Angling in Yellowstone National Park
* Fishes of Yellowstone National Park
* List of Wyoming rivers

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6480908" start="4" end="15" title="Lamar River" label="Lamar River"/>
<link wikidata="Q374772" start="38" end="55" title="Yellowstone River" label="Yellowstone River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="93" end="100" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="108" end="121" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="160" end="185" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915366" start="223" end="240" title="Geological Survey" label="Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795068" start="347" end="359" title="Arnold Hague" label="Arnold Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549250" start="380" end="422" title="Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus Lamar (II)" label="L.Q.C. (Lucius Quintius Cincinnatus) Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879307" start="527" end="561" title="Mississippi Ordinance of Secession" label="Mississippi Ordinance of Secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105806" start="627" end="642" title="Osborne Russell" label="Osborne Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435573" start="869" end="900" title="Cook–Folsom–Peterson Expedition" label="Cook–Folsom–Peterson Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q331762" start="1152" end="1166" title="Absaroka Range" label="Absaroka Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553162" start="1313" end="1329" title="Soda Butte Creek" label="Soda Butte Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541478" start="1334" end="1346" title="Slough Creek (Wyoming)" label="Slough Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q12314203" start="1378" end="1392" title="Grand Loop Road Historic District" label="Tower Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542533" start="1404" end="1435" title="Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone" label="Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q995553" start="1499" end="1513" title="Yellowstone fires of 1988" label="1988 wildfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q898886" start="1595" end="1606" title="fly fishing" label="fly fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="1727" end="1740" title="rainbow trout" label="rainbow trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q474133" start="1832" end="1859" title="Yellowstone cutthroat trout" label="Yellowstone cutthroat trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="3615" end="3628" title="grizzly bears" label="grizzly bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="3633" end="3639" title="Gray wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871088" start="3740" end="3765" title="History of wolves in Yellowstone" label="re-introduction of wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763570" start="4687" end="4723" title="Angling in Yellowstone National Park" label="Angling in Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454968" start="4726" end="4761" title="Fishes of Yellowstone National Park" label="Fishes of Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738448" start="4764" end="4786" title="List of Wyoming rivers" label="List of Wyoming rivers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535078" wikidata="Q1934659" url="?curid=535078" title="Uncertain (EP)">
<text>Uncertain is the first EP by the Irish band the Cranberries. The EP was released in the autumn of 1991, with the band having previously released cassette EPs under the name The Cranberry Saw Us. &quot;Uncertain&quot; was released by Island under the Xeric Records name on both CD and 12&quot; vinyl formats. Approximately 5,000 total copies of &quot;Uncertain&quot; were produced. Guitarist Noel Hogan said of the album that Gilmore &quot;cluttered the mixes with dance beats and industrial-style guitar&quot;, which resulted from a conflictual relationship between the group and Gilmore. The EP peaked at number 118 on the UK Singles Chart

An unreleased music video was made for the main theme &quot;Uncertain&quot;; a brief part of the clip was included on their DVD compilation, &quot;&quot;. The unedited complete video clip appeared for the first time on YouTube on 14 April 2020, and shows a young Dolores O&#x27;Riordan, with her brother Brendan and his daughter Cora, recalling her days as a child in an Irish forest.

==Television performance==
After the release of &#x27;Uncertain&#x27;, The Cranberries appeared on the Irish television show &quot;On The Waterfront&quot; which was hosted by Robert Arkins and Felim Gormley from The Commitments. They performed &quot;Linger&quot;, which was recorded and was broadcast in 1992.

==Track listing==
==Personnel==
Personnel taken from &quot;Uncertain&quot; liner notes.

The Cranberries
*Fergal Lawler – drums, percussion
*Mike Hogan – bass
*Noel Hogan – guitar, backing vocals
*Dolores O&#x27;Riordan – vocals

Additional personnel
*Mike Mahoney – sounds (&quot;Them&quot;)
*Brendan O&#x27;Riordan – backing vocals (&quot;Uncertain&quot;)
*Pearse Gilmore – production, recording, mixing
*Shane Mc&#x27;Carthy – sleeve photograph
*Cally – art direction

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="23" end="25" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q483810" start="44" end="59" title="the Cranberries" label="the Cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="233" end="239" title="Island Records" label="Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="277" end="279" title="Compact disc" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q841983" start="284" end="298" title="LP record" label="12&amp;quot; vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704746" start="391" end="401" title="Noel Hogan" label="Noel Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="624" end="640" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757149" start="801" end="809" title="Mashup (video)" label="unedited"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="861" end="868" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q541599" start="905" end="927" title="Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan" label="Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621075" start="1019" end="1025" title="List of forests in Ireland" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q483810" start="1099" end="1114" title="The Cranberries" label="The Cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434448" start="1203" end="1216" title="Robert Arkins" label="Robert Arkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q644065" start="1240" end="1255" title="The Commitments (film)" label="The Commitments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734705" start="1278" end="1284" title="Linger (The Cranberries song)" label="Linger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704746" start="1499" end="1509" title="Noel Hogan" label="Noel Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q541599" start="1536" end="1558" title="Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan" label="Dolores O&amp;#x27;Riordan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535080" wikidata="Q12955115" url="?curid=535080" title="Roche (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Roche]] (F. Hoffmann–La Roche) is a Swiss healthcare company.

Roche may also refer to:
==Companies==
*Roche Diagnostics, a division of F. Hoffmann–La Roche
** Roche Applied Science, a business group of Roche Diagnostics
*The Roche Group, an Australian property development company established by Imelda and Bill Roche in 2000

==Places==

=== France ===
*Roche, Isère, in the Isère department
*Roche-en-Forez, in the Loire department
*Roches, Creuse, in the Creuse department
*Roches, Loir-et-Cher, in the Loir-et-Cher department

=== Switzerland ===
* Roche, Vaud, in the Aigle district, canton of Vaud
* Roches, Switzerland, a village in the canton of Bern

=== United Kingdom ===
* Roche, Cornwall
* Roche Abbey, South Yorkshire, England

=== United States ===
* Roche de Bout, a rock formation in the Maumee River near the town of Waterville, Ohio, in Farnsworth Metropark

=== Further afield ===
* Roche (crater), a crater on the Moon

==People==
* Roche (surname)
* Roche baronets, baronetcy of Great Britain
* Roche Braziliano, Dutch buccaneer
* The Roches, Irish-American singer-songwriter group of siblings

==Science and mathematics==
* Roche limit (also known as the &quot;Roche radius&quot;), a concept in celestial mechanics
* Roche lobe, a concept in celestial mechanics
* &quot;Roche&quot; (spider), a spider genus in the family Ochyroceratidae
* Rouché&#x27;s theorem

==Other uses==
* Roch (disambiguation)
* Rivière des Roches (disambiguation)
* Roche convention, a defense against a one notrump (1NT) opening in contract bridge
* Ruché, an Italian wine grape</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12955115" start="0" end="9" title="Roche (disambiguation)" label="[[Roche]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q12955115" start="65" end="70" title="Roche (disambiguation)" label="Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q212646" start="105" end="122" title="Roche Diagnostics" label="Roche Diagnostics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353833" start="162" end="183" title="Roche Applied Science" label="Roche Applied Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911491" start="299" end="320" title="Imelda Roche" label="Imelda and Bill Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068353" start="358" end="370" title="Roche, Isère" label="Roche, Isère"/>
<link wikidata="Q601350" start="397" end="411" title="Roche-en-Forez" label="Roche-en-Forez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012448" start="438" end="452" title="Roches, Creuse" label="Roches, Creuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382509" start="480" end="500" title="Roches, Loir-et-Cher" label="Roches, Loir-et-Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q70224" start="556" end="567" title="Roche, Vaud" label="Roche, Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q68011" start="609" end="628" title="Roches, Switzerland" label="Roches, Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160232" start="688" end="703" title="Roche, Cornwall" label="Roche, Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314988" start="706" end="717" title="Roche Abbey" label="Roche Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436055" start="769" end="782" title="Roche de Bout" label="Roche de Bout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160236" start="906" end="920" title="Roche (crater)" label="Roche (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160221" start="957" end="972" title="Roche (surname)" label="Roche (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353843" start="975" end="989" title="Roche baronets" label="Roche baronets"/>
<link wikidata="Q956039" start="1020" end="1036" title="Roche Braziliano" label="Roche Braziliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413972" start="1056" end="1066" title="The Roches" label="The Roches"/>
<link wikidata="Q232086" start="1150" end="1161" title="Roche limit" label="Roche limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q848485" start="1243" end="1253" title="Roche lobe" label="Roche lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q735869" start="1290" end="1316" title="Roche (spider)" label="&amp;quot;Roche&amp;quot; (spider)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191862" start="1365" end="1386" title="Rouché&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Rouché&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796990" start="1405" end="1426" title="Roch (disambiguation)" label="Roch (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29402539" start="1429" end="1464" title="Rivière des Roches (disambiguation)" label="Rivière des Roches (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6615788" start="1487" end="1522" title="List of defenses to 1NT" label="defense against a one notrump (1NT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q473255" start="1552" end="1557" title="Ruché" label="Ruché"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535081" wikidata="Q368037" url="?curid=535081" title="Wes Bentley">
<text>Wes Bentley (born September 4, 1978) is an American actor. He is best known for his roles as Ricky Fitts in &quot;American Beauty&quot; (1999), which earned him a nomination for the BAFTA Award for Supporting Actor; Seneca Crane in &quot;The Hunger Games&quot; (2012); Doyle in &quot;Interstellar&quot; (2014); Erik in &quot;&quot;; and Jamie Dutton in &quot;Yellowstone&quot;. He was one of four subjects in the documentary &quot;My Big Break&quot; (2009), which covered his fame after &quot;American Beauty&quot; and his subsequent struggles with substance abuse. Rebuilding his career, he starred in the premiere of &quot;Venus in Fur&quot; by David Ives in the off-Broadway production in 2010. Other film roles include &quot;The Four Feathers&quot; (2002), &quot;Ghost Rider&quot; (2007), &quot;P2&quot; (2007), and &quot;Pete&#x27;s Dragon&quot; (2016).

He began appearing in the FX anthology series &quot;American Horror Story&quot; in 2014, playing Edward Mordrake in &quot;Freak Show&quot;. In 2015, he starred as Detective John Lowe in &quot;Hotel&quot;, for which he received a Critics&#x27; Choice Television Award nomination. The following year, he played Dylan (the actor who plays Ambrose White in &quot;My Roanoke Nightmare&quot;) in the series&#x27; sixth cycle, subtitled &quot;Roanoke&quot;. From 2018 until 2024, Bentley starred in the Paramount Network original television series &quot;Yellowstone&quot;.

==Early life==
Bentley was born in Jonesboro, Arkansas, and raised in Little Rock, the third of four sons of Cherie Baker and David Bentley. His father is a minister, and his mother is a chaplain and ordained elder in the Arkansas Conference, both in the United Methodist denomination. His grandfather was an evangelical minister. He is of German, Scottish, and English descent.

In 1996, he graduated from Sylvan Hills High School in Sherwood, Arkansas. He attended the Juilliard School&#x27;s Drama Division as part of its Group 29 (1996–2000) but left the school after one year to pursue his acting career.

==Career==
Bentley has starred in several films, including the Oscar-winning &quot;American Beauty&quot;, &quot;The Four Feathers&quot;, &quot;P2&quot;, and &quot;Ghost Rider&quot;. He starred in the thriller &quot;Dolan&#x27;s Cadillac&quot;, based on the short story by Stephen King, and &quot;There Be Dragons&quot; by director Roland Joffé. Bentley is one of the main subjects in the documentary &quot;My Big Break&quot;, directed by Tony Zierra, which follows Bentley and three of his former roommates, Chad Lindberg, Brad Rowe and Greg Fawcett, as they pursue their dream to become successful actors in Hollywood. In &quot;Ghost Rider&quot; (2007), Bentley played Blackheart, a demonic being that served as the main antagonist.

In 2010, he starred opposite Nina Arianda in the premiere of the David Ives play &quot;Venus in Fur&quot; off-Broadway at the Classic Stage Company in New York City. The production later moved to Broadway, with Hugh Dancy in the role debuted by Bentley.

In March 2012, Bentley had a supporting role in the blockbuster movie &quot;The Hunger Games&quot;, playing gamemaker Seneca Crane. In 2012, Bentley starred in the indie feature &quot;3 Nights in the Desert&quot;, directed by Gabriel Cowan.

Bentley and Scott Speedman starred in a pilot episode for a planned HBO series created by Ryan Murphy, &quot;Open&quot;, but the series was not picked up. The following year, Bentley guest starred in Murphy&#x27;s FX series &quot;American Horror Story&quot; for its fourth season, &quot;Freak Show&quot;. In 2015, he was promoted to the main cast for the fifth season, &quot;Hotel&quot;, starring as Detective John Lowe. In 2016, he played a main role in the sixth season, &quot;Roanoke&quot;. From 2018 to 2024, he played Jamie Dutton on Paramount Network&#x27;s &quot;Yellowstone&quot;.

On &quot;Jimmy Kimmel Live!&quot; on December 9, 2022, Bentley said he turned down the role of Spider-Man, a role later offered to Tobey Maguire.

==Personal life==
Bentley was married to actress Jennifer Quanz from 2001 to 2009. They divorced in 2009, reportedly due to his substance abuse. He married producer Jacqui Swedberg in 2010, and their son was born in 2010 and their daughter in 2014.

In a &quot;New York Times&quot; article on February 8, 2010, he described his descent into drug addiction that began almost immediately after his success in &quot;American Beauty&quot;. He said he hid his addiction from his wife; they separated in 2006, and he moved to an apartment where he began doing drugs full-time. During this time, he worked sporadically, just enough to pay bills and buy drugs. His addiction began to cause problems on the sets of the films &quot;P2&quot; and &quot;Weirdsville&quot;. In 2008, he was arrested and ordered into counseling and 12-step programs. He relapsed, however, and &quot;continued using heroin until he was broke&quot;.

In July 2009, he said, he confessed to a friend, &quot;I&#x27;m a drug addict, and an alcoholic, and I need help. I need help or I&#x27;m going to die&quot;. He again entered a 12-step program and, while clean since then, considers himself on the path to recovery.

The documentary &quot;My Big Break&quot; (2009) captures Bentley&#x27;s early life as an unknown actor, his sudden fame after &quot;American Beauty&quot;, his subsequent emotional struggle with fame, and his admission years later that he was recovering from an addiction to drugs and alcohol. He began to rebuild his career by starring in the Off-Broadway premiere of the play &quot;Venus in Fur&quot; by David Ives.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
===Stage===
==Awards and nominations==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q368037" start="0" end="11" title="Wes Bentley" label="Wes Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q25139" start="114" end="129" title="American Beauty (1999 film)" label="American Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q548389" start="182" end="214" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role" label="BAFTA Award for Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q212965" start="238" end="254" title="The Hunger Games (film)" label="The Hunger Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417189" start="284" end="296" title="Interstellar (film)" label="Interstellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q47452423" start="359" end="370" title="Yellowstone (American TV series)" label="Yellowstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945014" start="431" end="443" title="My Big Break" label="My Big Break"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920632" start="625" end="637" title="Venus in Fur" label="Venus in Fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893202" start="647" end="657" title="David Ives" label="David Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q391540" start="729" end="746" title="The Four Feathers (2002 film)" label="The Four Feathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41754" start="767" end="778" title="Ghost Rider (2007 film)" label="Ghost Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190492" start="799" end="801" title="P2 (film)" label="P2"/>
<link wikidata="Q18786473" start="826" end="844" title="Pete&amp;#x27;s Dragon (2016 film)" label="Pete&amp;#x27;s Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q651228" start="886" end="888" title="FX (TV channel)" label="FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q53922" start="912" end="933" title="American Horror Story" label="American Horror Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q16004491" start="957" end="972" title="Edward Mordrake (American Horror Story character)" label="Edward Mordrake"/>
<link wikidata="" start="982" end="992" title="American Horror Story: Freak Show" label="Freak Show"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1052" end="1057" title="American Horror Story: Hotel" label="Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465314" start="1089" end="1126" title="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Television Award" label="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Television Award"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1296" end="1303" title="American Horror Story: Roanoke" label="Roanoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q47460738" start="1356" end="1373" title="Paramount Network" label="Paramount Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q47452423" start="1407" end="1418" title="Yellowstone (American TV series)" label="Yellowstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q61455" start="1462" end="1481" title="Jonesboro, Arkansas" label="Jonesboro, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q33405" start="1497" end="1508" title="Little Rock" label="Little Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="1682" end="1698" title="United Methodist" label="United Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="1767" end="1773" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="1775" end="1783" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="1789" end="1796" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660653" start="1834" end="1858" title="Sylvan Hills High School" label="Sylvan Hills High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q79681" start="1862" end="1880" title="Sherwood, Arkansas" label="Sherwood, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q503246" start="1898" end="1914" title="Juilliard School" label="Juilliard School"/>
<link wikidata="Q25139" start="2121" end="2136" title="American Beauty (1999 film)" label="American Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q391540" start="2150" end="2167" title="The Four Feathers (2002 film)" label="The Four Feathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190492" start="2181" end="2183" title="P2 (film)" label="P2"/>
<link wikidata="Q41754" start="2201" end="2212" title="Ghost Rider (2007 film)" label="Ghost Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q907787" start="2253" end="2274" title="Dolan&amp;#x27;s Cadillac (film)" label="Dolan&amp;#x27;s Cadillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="2310" end="2322" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q531043" start="2334" end="2350" title="There Be Dragons" label="There Be Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q309715" start="2369" end="2381" title="Roland Joffé" label="Roland Joffé"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945014" start="2444" end="2456" title="My Big Break" label="My Big Break"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823729" start="2476" end="2487" title="Tony Zierra" label="Tony Zierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314842" start="2546" end="2559" title="Chad Lindberg" label="Chad Lindberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q733691" start="2561" end="2570" title="Brad Rowe (actor)" label="Brad Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605551" start="2575" end="2587" title="Greg Fawcett" label="Greg Fawcett"/>
<link wikidata="Q41754" start="2667" end="2678" title="Ghost Rider (2007 film)" label="Ghost Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839684" start="2708" end="2718" title="Blackheart" label="Blackheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q245204" start="2760" end="2770" title="antagonist" label="antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069179" start="2802" end="2814" title="Nina Arianda" label="Nina Arianda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893202" start="2838" end="2848" title="David Ives" label="David Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920632" start="2860" end="2872" title="Venus in Fur" label="Venus in Fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128221" start="2899" end="2920" title="Classic Stage Company" label="Classic Stage Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q314603" start="2984" end="2994" title="Hugh Dancy" label="Hugh Dancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212965" start="3104" end="3120" title="The Hunger Games (film)" label="The Hunger Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q18786478" start="3212" end="3234" title="3 Nights in the Desert" label="3 Nights in the Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515586" start="3254" end="3267" title="Gabriel Cowan" label="Gabriel Cowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q336131" start="3282" end="3296" title="Scott Speedman" label="Scott Speedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="3310" end="3323" title="pilot episode" label="pilot episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="3338" end="3341" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q316844" start="3360" end="3371" title="Ryan Murphy (producer)" label="Ryan Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q651228" start="3484" end="3486" title="FX (TV channel)" label="FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q53922" start="3500" end="3521" title="American Horror Story" label="American Horror Story"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3557" end="3567" title="American Horror Story: Freak Show" label="Freak Show"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3645" end="3650" title="American Horror Story: Hotel" label="Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3749" end="3756" title="American Horror Story: Roanoke" label="Roanoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q47452423" start="3840" end="3851" title="Yellowstone (American TV series)" label="Yellowstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315167" start="3869" end="3887" title="Jimmy Kimmel Live!" label="Jimmy Kimmel Live!"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="3955" end="3965" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q165524" start="3991" end="4004" title="Tobey Maguire" label="Tobey Maguire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="4268" end="4282" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029" start="4348" end="4362" title="drug addiction" label="drug addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q25139" start="4420" end="4435" title="American Beauty (1999 film)" label="American Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190492" start="4729" end="4731" title="P2 (film)" label="P2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543508" start="4748" end="4759" title="Weirdsville" label="Weirdsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q245169" start="4824" end="4840" title="12-step programs" label="12-step programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="4890" end="4896" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="5010" end="5019" title="alcoholic" label="alcoholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945014" start="5212" end="5224" title="My Big Break" label="My Big Break"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="5533" end="5545" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920632" start="5573" end="5585" title="Venus in Fur" label="Venus in Fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893202" start="5595" end="5605" title="David Ives" label="David Ives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535087" wikidata="Q1089027" url="?curid=535087" title="Chuan">
<text>Chuan may refer to:

* Quan, a Chinese surname
* Chuan (food), a food originating in Xinjiang
* Abbreviation for Sichuan

==See also==
*Chuanqi (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1089027" start="0" end="5" title="Chuan" label="Chuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q66627724" start="23" end="27" title="Quan" label="Quan"/>
<link wikidata="Q519761" start="49" end="61" title="Chuan (food)" label="Chuan (food)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="113" end="120" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10885549" start="136" end="160" title="Chuanqi (disambiguation)" label="Chuanqi (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535090" wikidata="Q6766828" url="?curid=535090" title="Mark Brandenburg (baseball)">
<text>Mark Clay Brandenburg (born July 14, 1970) is an American former middle-relief pitcher in Major League Baseball who played from through for the Texas Rangers (1995–96) and Boston Red Sox (1996–97). Brandenburg batted and threw right-handed. Listed at 6&#x27; 0&quot;, 180 lb., he was selected by the Texas Rangers in the 1992 draft out of Texas Tech.

In a three-season career, Brandenburg posted a 5–8 record with a 4.49 earned run average, 121 strikeouts, 56 walks, 144 ⅓ innings, and no saves, in 97 games pitched.

In July 2008, Brandenburg was inducted into the Texas Tech Athletics Hall of Fame.

His daughter, Ryan Kate, appeared on Season 3 of MasterChef Junior.

==Notes==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6766828" start="0" end="21" title="Mark Brandenburg (baseball)" label="Mark Clay Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198553" start="65" end="86" title="relief pitcher" label="middle-relief pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="90" end="111" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="144" end="157" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="172" end="186" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708115" start="339" end="349" title="Texas Tech Red Raiders baseball" label="Texas Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="422" end="440" title="earned run average" label="earned run average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="446" end="455" title="strikeout" label="strikeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q587180" start="461" end="466" title="base on balls" label="walks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192188" start="474" end="481" title="innings pitched" label="innings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377846" start="490" end="495" title="save (baseball)" label="saves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520118" start="503" end="516" title="games pitched" label="games pitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297839" start="652" end="669" title="MasterChef Junior" label="MasterChef Junior"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535094" wikidata="Q2662770" url="?curid=535094" title="Norton Radstock">
<text>Norton Radstock is a former civil parish in the Bath and North East Somerset district, in the ceremonial county of Somerset, England, which covered the conurbation of Midsomer Norton, Radstock and Westfield. Created in 1933, the parish was abolished in 2011 and replaced by three smaller parishes.

The conurbation is south west of Bath, and the same distance north west of Frome. It had a population of 21,325 at the 2001 census. Besides the towns of Midsomer Norton and Radstock, and the parish of Westfield, the parish encompassed the smaller settlements of Clandown, Haydon, Welton and Writhlington.

Norton Radstock was twinned with Ambarès-et-Lagrave in France from September 1982.

==Governance==
The parish was created on 1 April 1933 from Midsomer Norton, Radstock, Writhlington and Kilmersdon. The Norton-Radstock urban district was created on 1 April 1933 by the merger of Midsomer Norton and Radstock urban districts, along with part of Frome Rural District and contained the parish of Norton Radstock. Under the Local Government Act 1972 it became a successor parish to the urban district on 1 April 1974.

A 2009 petition by Midsomer Norton residents to Bath and North East Somerset Council triggered a governance review which resulted in the creation of separate town councils for Midsomer Norton and Radstock, and a parish council for Westfield, all effective 1 April 2011.

Norton Radstock was governed by the unitary authority of Bath and North East Somerset Council and by Norton Radstock Town Council, which elected 14 councillors across the four wards of Midsomer Norton North, Midsomer Norton Redfield, Radstock and Westfield. It was part of the North East Somerset constituency, which elects a Member of Parliament to the House of Commons.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2662770" start="0" end="15" title="Norton Radstock" label="Norton Radstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="28" end="40" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q810793" start="48" end="76" title="Bath and North East Somerset" label="Bath and North East Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="115" end="123" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234789" start="167" end="182" title="Midsomer Norton" label="Midsomer Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234765" start="184" end="192" title="Radstock" label="Radstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988627" start="197" end="206" title="Westfield, Somerset" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="332" end="336" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242441" start="374" end="379" title="Frome" label="Frome"/>
<link wikidata="Q14955709" start="561" end="569" title="Clandown" label="Clandown"/>
<link wikidata="Q14955712" start="571" end="577" title="Haydon, Somerset" label="Haydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234789" start="579" end="585" title="Welton, Somerset" label="Welton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038516" start="590" end="602" title="Writhlington" label="Writhlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q243586" start="638" end="656" title="Ambarès-et-Lagrave" label="Ambarès-et-Lagrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="660" end="666" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420655" start="792" end="802" title="Kilmersdon" label="Kilmersdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217357" start="824" end="838" title="Urban districts formed in England and Wales 1896–1974" label="urban district"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505737" start="949" end="969" title="Frome Rural District" label="Frome Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="1025" end="1050" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632657" start="1063" end="1079" title="successor parish" label="successor parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234789" start="1139" end="1154" title="Midsomer Norton" label="Midsomer Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966588" start="1168" end="1204" title="Bath and North East Somerset Council" label="Bath and North East Somerset Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234765" start="1316" end="1324" title="Radstock" label="Radstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988627" start="1351" end="1360" title="Westfield, Radstock, Somerset" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="1427" end="1444" title="unitary authority" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052293" start="1668" end="1687" title="North East Somerset (UK Parliament constituency)" label="North East Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="1717" end="1737" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="1745" end="1761" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535096" wikidata="Q880525" url="?curid=535096" title="F connector">
<text>The F connector (also F-type connector) is a coaxial RF connector commonly used for &quot;over the air&quot; terrestrial television, cable television and universally for satellite television and cable modems, usually with RG-6/U cable or with RG-59/U cable.

The F connector was invented by Eric E. Winston in the early 1950s while working for Jerrold Electronics on their development of cable television. In the 1970s, it became commonplace on VHF, and later UHF, television antenna connections in the United States, as coaxial cables replaced twin-lead. It is now specified in IEC 61169-24:2019.

== Description ==
The F connector is an inexpensive, gendered, threaded, compression connector for radio frequency signals. It has good 75 Ω impedance match for frequencies well over 1 GHz and has usable bandwidth up to several GHz.

Connectors mate using a 3/8-32UNEF thread. The female connector has a socket for the center conductor and external threads. The male connector has a center pin, and a captive nut with internal threads.

The design allows for low-cost construction, where cables are terminated almost exclusively with male connectors. The coaxial cable center conductor forms the pin, and cable dielectric extends up to the mating face of the connector. Thus, the male connector consists of only a body, which is generally crimped onto or screwed over the cable shielding braid, and a captive nut, neither of which require tight tolerances. Push-on versions are also available.

Female connectors are typically used on bulkheads or as couplers, often being secured with the same threads as for the connectors. They can be manufactured as a single piece, with center sockets and dielectric, entirely at the factory where tolerances can easily be controlled.

This design is sensitive to the surface properties of the inner conductor (which must be solid wire, not stranded).

=== Weatherproofing ===
The F connector is not weatherproof. Neither the threads nor the joint between male connector body and captive nut provide a water-tight seal. However, male connectors are commonly enhanced with an o-ring (of about 7mm) inside the captive nut. This seals between the mating faces of both connectors, providing some protection for the center conductor.

Alternatively, waterproof versions or enclosures are recommended for outside use (for example, on antennas). Corrosion resistance, reliability of connector electrical conduction and water resistance can be improved by coating all bare copper wires and the connectors themselves with silicone grease. 

== Usage ==
The cable and satellite television entities (as a near standard practice) use compression fittings with F connectors on customer premises. In Europe, block down-converted satellite signals (950–2150 MHz) from LNBs and DC power and block signalling from satellite receivers are near exclusively passed through F connectors.

==Flex F connectors ==
Push-on (aka Flex) F connectors provide poorer shielding against microwave signals of high field strength. This leakage problem is more an artifact of bent or partly broken push on connectors, but is mostly not observed with compression connectors. Nearby television, FM radio, mobile &amp; cordless phones, government radiolocation (54–1,002 MHz) transmitters can potentially interfere with a CATV or DTH Satellite reception or operation if the Flex connector is poorly installed.

==See also==
* Belling-Lee connector
* BNC connector
* Coaxial cable
* Component video
* Composite video
* Diplexer
* FME connector
* RCA connector
* Satellite dish
* TV aerial plug
* MCX connector

==References==
==Further reading==

* &quot;F&quot; Port (Female Indoor) Physical Dimensions, ANSI/SCTE 02 2015 (see www.scte.org).
== External links ==

* Compression Tool for crimping
* Antenna-cables&amp;connectors</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q880525" start="4" end="15" title="F connector" label="F connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q880525" start="22" end="38" title="F connector" label="F-type connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751466" start="45" end="52" title="coaxial" label="coaxial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164724" start="53" end="65" title="RF connector" label="RF connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q175122" start="109" end="131" title="terrestrial television" label="terrestrial television"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="133" end="149" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="170" end="190" title="satellite television" label="satellite television"/>
<link wikidata="Q383978" start="195" end="207" title="cable modems" label="cable modems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832614" start="222" end="234" title="RG-6" label="RG-6/U cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276630" start="243" end="256" title="RG-59" label="RG-59/U cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183113" start="344" end="363" title="Jerrold Electronics" label="Jerrold Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q806345" start="545" end="554" title="twin-lead" label="twin-lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573759" start="579" end="596" title="List_of_International_Electrotechnical_Commission_standards" label="IEC 61169-24:2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="740" end="755" title="impedance match" label="impedance match"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="803" end="812" title="bandwidth (signal processing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579138" start="863" end="867" title="Unified Thread Standard" label="UNEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q183389" start="1154" end="1167" title="coaxial cable" label="coaxial cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140059" start="1338" end="1345" title="crimp (joining)" label="crimped"/>
<link wikidata="Q942417" start="2112" end="2118" title="o-ring" label="o-ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775832" start="2550" end="2565" title="silicone grease" label="silicone grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365197" start="3019" end="3033" title="field strength" label="field strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622218" start="3247" end="3260" title="radiolocation" label="radiolocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088359" start="3426" end="3447" title="Belling-Lee connector" label="Belling-Lee connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q906097" start="3450" end="3463" title="BNC connector" label="BNC connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q183389" start="3466" end="3479" title="Coaxial cable" label="Coaxial cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154483" start="3482" end="3497" title="Component video" label="Component video"/>
<link wikidata="Q185644" start="3500" end="3515" title="Composite video" label="Composite video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227176" start="3518" end="3526" title="Diplexer" label="Diplexer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426627" start="3529" end="3542" title="FME connector" label="FME connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q399653" start="3545" end="3558" title="RCA connector" label="RCA connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q253843" start="3561" end="3575" title="Satellite dish" label="Satellite dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426903" start="3578" end="3592" title="TV aerial plug" label="TV aerial plug"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103417" start="3595" end="3608" title="MCX connector" label="MCX connector"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535098" wikidata="Q1234765" url="?curid=535098" title="Radstock">
<text>Radstock is a town and civil parish on the northern slope of the Mendip Hills in Somerset, England, about south-west of Bath and north-west of Frome. It is within the area of the unitary authority of Bath and North East Somerset. The Radstock built-up area had a population of 9,419 at the 2011 Census.

Radstock has been settled since the Iron Age, and its importance grew after the construction of the Fosse Way, a Roman road. The town grew after 1763, when coal was discovered in the area. Large numbers of mines opened during the 19th century, including several owned by the Waldegrave family, who had been Lords of the Manor since the Civil War. Admiral Lord Radstock, brother of George, fourth Earl Waldegrave, took the town&#x27;s name as his title when created a Baron.

The spoil heap of Writhlington colliery is now the Writhlington Site of Special Scientific Interest, which includes 3,000 tons of Upper Carboniferous spoil from which more than 1,400 insect fossil specimens have been recovered. The complex geology and narrow seams made coal extraction difficult. Tonnage increased throughout the 19th century, reaching a peak around 1901, when there were 79 separate collieries and annual production was 1,250,000 tons per annum. However, due to local geological difficulties and manpower shortages, output declined and the number of pits reduced from 30 at the beginning of the 20th century to 14 by the mid-thirties; the last two pits, Kilmersdon and Writhlington, closed in September 1973. Manufacturing industries such as printing, binding and packaging provide some local employment. In recent years, Radstock has increasingly become a commuter town for the cities of Bath and Bristol.

Radstock is home to the Radstock Museum which is housed in a former market hall, and has a range of exhibits which offer an insight into north-east Somerset life since the 19th century. Many of the exhibits relate to local geology and the now disused Somerset coalfield. The town is also home to Writhlington School, famous for its Orchid collection, and a range of educational, religious and cultural buildings and sporting clubs.

==History==
Radstock has been settled since the Iron Age. Its importance grew with the construction of the Fosse Way, the Roman road that ran along what is now part of the A367 in Radstock. As a result, the town was known as &quot;Stoche&quot; at the time of the Domesday Book of 1086, meaning &quot;the stockade by the Roman road&quot;, from the Old English &quot;stoc&quot;. The &quot;rad&quot; part of the name is believed to relate to red; the soil locally is reddish marl. The parish of Radstock was part of the Kilmersdon Hundred,

The Great Western Railway, and the Somerset and Dorset Railway, established stations and marshalling yards in the town. Radstock was the terminus for the southern branch of the Somerset Coal Canal, which was turned into a tramway in 1815. It then became a central point for railway development, with large coal depots, wash houses, workshops and a gas works. As part of the development of the Wiltshire, Somerset and Weymouth Railway, an line from Radstock to Frome was built to carry the coal. In the 1870s the broad-gauge line was converted to standard gauge and connected to the Bristol and North Somerset Line which linked the town to the Great Western Railway. The Radstock Railway Land covers the old marshalling yards and sheds and comprises an area of approximately 8.8 hectares of land which is the subject of ongoing planning and development applications to redevelop the area.

The town is close to the site of the Radstock rail accident, a rail crash that took place on the Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway, on 7 August 1876. Two trains collided on a single track section, resulting in the deaths of 15 passengers.

The last passenger train services in Radstock closed in 1966, and the last coal mines closed in 1973. Manufacturing industries such as printing, binding and packaging provide some local employment. More recently Radstock has become a commuter town for the nearby cities of Bath and Bristol, leading to traffic problems at peak hours.

===Coal mining===
In 1763, coal was discovered in Radstock and mining began in the area. In, 1896 the pits were owned by the Trustee of Frances, late Countess of Waldegrave. The Waldegrave family had been Lords of the Manor of Radstock since the English Civil War. Between 1800 and 1850, Ludlows, Middle Pit, Old Pit, Smallcombe, Tynings, and Wellsway mines opened. There were also a series of pits east of the town at Writhlington and under different ownership. In 1896, they were owned by Writhlington, Huish and Foxcote Colliery Co.; however, following an acrimonious dispute about the terms and conditions of the miners in 1899, a new company, Writhlington Collieries Co., was set up to run the mines. The Upper and Lower Writhlington, Huish and Foxcote were all merged into one colliery. The spoil heap is a now Writhlington Site of Special Scientific Interest. The site and includes 3,000 tons of Upper Carboniferous spoil from which more than 1,400 insect fossils have been recovered. These include Phalangiotarbida, and Graeophonus. and the world&#x27;s earliest known Damselfly. It is a Geological Conservation Review Site.

The complex geology and narrow seams made the coal extraction difficult; three underground explosions, in 1893, 1895 and 1908, were amongst the first attributable solely to airborne coal dust.

Tonnage increased throughout the 19th century, reaching a peak around 1901, when there were 79 separate collieries and annual production was 1.25 million tons per annum. However, due to local geological difficulties and manpower shortages, decline soon took hold and the number of pits reduced from 30 at the beginning of the 20th century to 14 by the mid-thirties, 12 at nationalisation to create National Coal Board on 1 January 1947, 5 by 1959 and none after 1973. Narrow seams made production expensive, limiting profit and investment, and a reduced national demand together with competition from more economical coalfields led to the closure of the last two pits in the coalfield, Kilmersdon and Writhlington, in September 1973.

==Governance==

In 2011, Radstock gained a town council. Until then, the town was part of the Norton Radstock civil parish, which was created in 1974 as a successor to the Norton-Radstock Urban District, itself created in 1933 by the merger of Midsomer Norton and Radstock urban districts, along with part of Frome Rural District. Under the Local Government Act 1972 it became a successor parish to the urban district.

Radstock is administered by the unitary authority of Bath and North East Somerset and by Radstock Town Council.

The area is within the Frome and East Somerset UK Parliament constituency. Prior to Brexit in 2020, it was in the South West England constituency of the European Parliament.

==Geography==
The main geological feature in this area of the Mendip Hills south of Hallatrow consists of Supra-Pennant Measures which includes the upper coal measures and outcrops of sandstone. The southern part of the Radstock Syncline have coals of the Lower and Middle Coal Measures been worked, mainly at the Newbury and Vobster collieries in the southeast and in the New Rock and Moorewood pits to the southwest. The Hercynian orogeny caused shock waves in the rock as the Mendip Hills were pushed up, forcing the coal measures to break along fractures or faults. Along the Radstock Slide Fault the distance between the broken ends of a coal seam can be as much as .

Radstock lies on the Wellow Brook which then runs through Wellow to join the Cam Brook at Midford to form Midford Brook before joining the River Avon close to the Dundas Aqueduct and the remains of the Somerset Coal Canal. The base of the valley is of alluvium deposits. Above this on both sides of all of the valley is a band of shales and clays from the Penarth Group. These rocks are from the Triassic period. The majority of the remaining upland around Radstock is Lias Limestone (white and blue) while the very highest part above 130 m, south of Haydon, is a small outcrop of Inferior Oolitic Limestone. All these limestones are from the Jurassic period. The steepest slopes of both the Kilmersdon and Snail&#x27;s Bottom valleys have frequently slipped. Below all of the area is the coal bearing Carboniferous strata. Haydon is an outlier of Radstock and was built to house the miners for the local pit. The disused railway line and inclined railway at Haydon form important elements within the Kilmersdon valley east of Haydon. The modern landscape has a less maintained and &quot;rougher&quot; character and texture than neighbouring agricultural areas. This is caused in the main by the remnants of the coal industry and its infrastructure and changes in agricultural management. The disturbance caused by coal mining and the railways and the subsequent ending of mining and disuse of the railways has created valuable habitats of nature conservation interest.

Along with the rest of South West England, Radstock has a temperate climate, which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of England. The annual mean temperature is about 10 °C (50 °F) with seasonal and diurnal variations, but because of the modifying effect of the sea, the range is less than in most other parts of the United Kingdom. January is the coldest month, with mean minimum temperatures between 1 °C (34 °F) and 2 °C (36 °F). July and August are the warmest months in the region, with mean daily maxima around 21 °C (70 °F). In general, December is the dullest month and June the sunniest. The southwest of England enjoys a favoured location, particularly in summer, when the Azores High extends its influence north-eastwards towards the UK.

Cloud often forms inland, especially near hills, and reduces exposure to sunshine. The average annual sunshine is about 1,600 hours. Rainfall tends to be associated with Atlantic depressions or with convection. In summer, convection caused by solar surface heating sometimes forms shower clouds, and a large proportion of the annual precipitation falls from showers and thunderstorms at that time of year. Average rainfall is 800–900 mm (31–35 in). About 8–15 days of snowfall is typical. November to March have the highest mean wind speeds, and June to August having the lightest. The predominant wind direction is from the southwest.

== Population ==
At the 2011 Census, Radstock parish had a population of 5,620. At that time the wider built-up area, defined by the Office for National Statistics to include the Westfield area south-west of the town, had a population of 9,419.

==Transport==

Radstock was the terminus for the southern branch of the Somerset Coal Canal, which was turned into a tramway in 1815 and later incorporated into the Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway. It then became a central point for railway development with large coal depots, warehouses, workshops and a gas works. As part of the development of the Wilts, Somerset and Weymouth Railway an line from Radstock to Frome was built to carry the coal. In the 1870s the broad-gauge line was converted to standard gauge and connected to the Bristol and North Somerset Line connecting it to the Great Western Railway at Bristol; the GWR also took over the Wiltshire, Somerset and Weymouth Railway in 1876. The Bristol and North Somerset line closed to passenger traffic in 1959. The line is now the route of National Cycle Route 24, otherwise known as the Colliers&#x27; Way, a national cycle route which passes many landmarks associated with the coal field; other local roads and footpaths follow the tramways developed during the coal mining years. The cycle route currently runs from Dundas Aqueduct to Frome via Radstock, although it is intended to provide a continuous cycle route to Southampton and Portsmouth.

Radstock had a second railway station on the Somerset &amp; Dorset Joint Railway extension to Bath, which closed to passengers in 1966. The stations were adjacent to each other in the centre of the town, and each had level crossings across the busy A367 road, causing long tailbacks at busy periods. The S&amp;D line also carried substantial coal traffic. A spur from the Great Western line on to the S&amp;D and continuing to Writhlington Colliery remained open for a few years after the railway&#x27;s closure to passenger traffic, until the colliery closed in 1973. Today the nearest railway station is Bath Spa which is easily accessible via regular direct bus routes.

Radstock is situated on the A367 between Bath and Shepton Mallet, and on the A362 between Farrington Gurney and Frome, very close to the A37.

==Memorial Gardens==
Since the closure of the railways the railway land in the centre of the town stood empty for many years. Most prominent was a green space between the museum and brook which housed a dis-used pit wheel on a low steel frame, which many passers-by mistook for a spinning wheel. There had long been an aspiration to develop a memorial park or garden on the site to commemorate both the mining history of the town and to provide a new setting for the town&#x27;s war memorial.

In 2001 a local practice of landscape architects, New Leaf Studio were commissioned by Bath &amp; North East Somerset Council to develop proposals for the land. The first phase of the park, the Memorial gardens were then built for the Norton Radstock Town Council in 2005 to New leaf Studio&#x27;s designs incorporating a new sculptural base for the old mine wheel by artist Sebastien Boyesen.

The new Memorial Gardens incorporate the war memorial which was moved from Victoria Square as part of the project. The planting employs a naturalistic style with broad drifts of herbaceous perennials and grasses providing colour through a long season, extending through the winter with dry stems and seed heads.

==Museum==
The Radstock Museum is housed in the town&#x27;s former market hall. The museum has a range of exhibits which offer an insight into north-east Somerset life since the 19th century. The museum was originally opened in 1989 in barns in Haydon, and moved to its current site in the restored and converted Victorian Market Hall, a grade II listed building dating from 1897 which was opened on 10 July 1999 by Loyd Grossman. Many of the exhibits relate to the now disused local Somerset coalfield and geology. Other areas include aspects of local history including the school and shops, a forge, carpenter&#x27;s shop and exhibits relating to agriculture. Artefacts and memorabilia of the Somerset Coal Canal, Somerset and Dorset and Great Western Railways are also on display.
==Education==
First schools for children up to 11 include St Mary&#x27;s C of E Primary School, St Nicholas C of E Primary School and Trinity Primary School. In the neighbouring parish of Westfield lie Westfield Primary School and, for pupils with complex learning difficulties, Fosseway School.

Writhlington School in Radstock is a secondary school for pupils aged 11–18. It has specialist status as a Business and Enterprise College. The school has 1,242 pupils in both compulsory and sixth-form education. The school is notable for its orchid project, which includes the biggest collection of orchids outside Kew Gardens and has won numerous awards including a gold medal at the 2009 Chelsea Flower Show. The school has also won awards in business with its enterprise companies and was named the most enterprising school in England in 2006.

The town is served by the Somer Valley site of Bath College, a further education college in neighbouring Westfield.

==Sport and leisure==

Radstock has a Non-League football club Radstock Town F.C. who play at The Southfields Recreation Ground.

==Media==
The local free newspaper, the &quot;Midsomer Norton, Radstock &amp; District Journal&quot;, has its offices in the town. The other local weekly paper is the &quot;Somerset Guardian&quot;, which is part of the Daily Mail and General Trust. The monthly magazine, the &quot;Mendip Times&quot;, also includes local features.

Local news and television programmes are provided by BBC West and ITV West Country. Television signals are received from the Mendip TV transmitter.

The town is served by the local radio stations: BBC Radio Somerset on 95.5 FM, Heart West on 102.6 FM, Greatest Hits Radio South West on 102.4 FM and Somer Valley FM, a community based station which broadcast on 97.5 FM and also online.

==Religious sites==

Radstock contains four churches, united under the umbrella of &quot;Churches together in Radstock&quot;. There are frequent interfaith unity services in the town.

The Anglican parish church of St Nicholas has a west tower dating from the 15th century. The rest of the church was rebuilt in 1879 in Geometric style, by William Willcox. It is Grade II listed.

Radstock Methodist Church was formed in 1842 but the present building opened in 1902. It was damaged by a fire in 2004, and reopened in 2005. Radstock Baptist Church, situated on Wells Hill, was founded in 1844.

Radstock was one of the missions established in 1913 by the Downside community. A temporary building of thin wooden beams and asbestos blocks was erected in 1913, and dedicated to St Hugh. Its altar rails and benches came from Prior Park. Dom Mackey was succeeded in 1918 by Dom Ambrose Agius, who acquired a disused printing works, formerly a barn and converted it into the present church in Westfield, which opened in 1929. It was rebuilt after a serious fire in 1991. It has a statue of the patron on its façade. St Hugh&#x27;s church closed and was converted to private housing in 2018.

Radstock is also home to a Jehovah&#x27;s Witness Kingdom Hall.

==Notable people==
* William Blacker (1843–1913), Australian politician
* L. J. F. Brimble (1904–65), botanist and editor of &quot;Nature&quot; magazine.
* Frank Coombs (1906–1941), English painter and architect
* Alick Grant (1916–2008), footballer for Aldershot, Leicester City, Derby County, Newport County and York City.
* Bill Hyman (1875–1959), Somerset County cricketer.
* Ernest Hyman (1904–1927), Yeovil Town footballer.
* Frank Pratten (1886–1941), founder of F. Pratten and Co Ltd, manufacturer of prefabricated classrooms and other buildings.

==References==
==External links==
* Radstock Town Council</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1234765" start="0" end="8" title="Radstock" label="Radstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="23" end="35" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920360" start="65" end="77" title="Mendip Hills" label="Mendip Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="81" end="89" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="120" end="124" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242441" start="143" end="148" title="Frome" label="Frome"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561328" start="179" end="196" title="Unitary authorities of England" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q810793" start="200" end="228" title="Bath and North East Somerset" label="Bath and North East Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="340" end="348" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233334" start="404" end="413" title="Fosse Way" label="Fosse Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="417" end="427" title="Roman road" label="Roman road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961391" start="579" end="596" title="Waldegrave family" label="Waldegrave family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815782" start="611" end="629" title="Lords of the Manor" label="Lords of the Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="640" end="649" title="English Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326147" start="700" end="715" title="Earl Waldegrave" label="Earl Waldegrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="771" end="776" title="Baron" label="Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="810" end="818" title="coal mining" label="colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038515" start="830" end="878" title="Writhlington SSSI" label="Writhlington Site of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="1506" end="1530" title="Manufacturing industry" label="Manufacturing industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034" start="1539" end="1547" title="printing" label="printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q240471" start="1549" end="1556" title="Bookbinding" label="binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q207822" start="1561" end="1570" title="packaging" label="packaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q828359" start="1654" end="1667" title="commuter town" label="commuter town"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="1695" end="1702" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281699" start="1729" end="1744" title="Radstock Museum" label="Radstock Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559834" start="1956" end="1974" title="Somerset coalfield" label="Somerset coalfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038517" start="2001" end="2020" title="Writhlington School" label="Writhlington School"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="2037" end="2043" title="Orchid" label="Orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="2186" end="2194" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233334" start="2245" end="2254" title="Fosse Way" label="Fosse Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="2260" end="2270" title="Roman road" label="Roman road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660970" start="2310" end="2314" title="A367 road" label="A367"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="2401" end="2414" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="2485" end="2496" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q184053" start="2610" end="2614" title="marl" label="marl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257529" start="2655" end="2665" title="Kilmersdon (hundred)" label="Kilmersdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="2666" end="2673" title="Hundred (county subdivision)" label="Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="2680" end="2701" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559923" start="2711" end="2738" title="Somerset and Dorset Railway" label="Somerset and Dorset Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q519608" start="2765" end="2781" title="marshalling yard" label="marshalling yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559833" start="2853" end="2872" title="Somerset Coal Canal" label="Somerset Coal Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242441" start="3136" end="3141" title="Frome" label="Frome"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="3319" end="3340" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281702" start="3602" end="3624" title="Radstock rail accident" label="Radstock rail accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="3880" end="3889" title="coal mine" label="coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="3907" end="3931" title="Manufacturing industry" label="Manufacturing industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034" start="3940" end="3948" title="printing" label="printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q240471" start="3950" end="3957" title="Bookbinding" label="binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q207822" start="3962" end="3971" title="packaging" label="packaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q828359" start="4039" end="4052" title="commuter town" label="commuter town"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="4078" end="4082" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="4087" end="4094" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961391" start="4318" end="4335" title="Waldegrave family" label="Waldegrave family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815782" start="4345" end="4363" title="Lords of the Manor" label="Lords of the Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="4386" end="4403" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038516" start="4559" end="4571" title="Writhlington" label="Writhlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038515" start="4957" end="5005" title="Writhlington SSSI" label="Writhlington Site of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q19114" start="5146" end="5162" title="Phalangiotarbida" label="Phalangiotarbida"/>
<link wikidata="Q113461649" start="5168" end="5179" title="Graeophonus" label="Graeophonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q230502" start="5217" end="5226" title="Damselfly" label="Damselfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535303" start="5236" end="5266" title="Geological Conservation Review" label="Geological Conservation Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="5840" end="5855" title="nationalisation" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971538" start="5866" end="5885" title="National Coal Board" label="National Coal Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662770" start="6297" end="6312" title="Norton Radstock" label="Norton Radstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="6313" end="6325" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234789" start="6447" end="6462" title="Midsomer Norton" label="Midsomer Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505737" start="6512" end="6532" title="Frome Rural District" label="Frome Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="6544" end="6569" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632657" start="6582" end="6598" title="successor parish" label="successor parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561328" start="6655" end="6672" title="Unitary authorities of England" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q810793" start="6676" end="6704" title="Bath and North East Somerset" label="Bath and North East Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q121090673" start="6759" end="6782" title="Frome and East Somerset (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Frome and East Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="6820" end="6826" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973373" start="6850" end="6881" title="South West England (European Parliament constituency)" label="South West England constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="6889" end="6908" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920360" start="6973" end="6985" title="Mendip Hills" label="Mendip Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235723" start="6995" end="7004" title="Hallatrow" label="Hallatrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863626" start="7237" end="7244" title="Vobster" label="Vobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q840828" start="7334" end="7351" title="Hercynian orogeny" label="Hercynian orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920360" start="7390" end="7402" title="Mendip Hills" label="Mendip Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981591" start="7606" end="7618" title="Wellow Brook" label="Wellow Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024806" start="7662" end="7671" title="Cam Brook, Somerset" label="Cam Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842183" start="7675" end="7682" title="Midford" label="Midford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895108" start="7691" end="7704" title="Midford Brook" label="Midford Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q19711" start="7724" end="7734" title="River Avon, Bristol" label="River Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859207" start="7748" end="7763" title="Dundas Aqueduct" label="Dundas Aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559833" start="7787" end="7806" title="Somerset Coal Canal" label="Somerset Coal Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="7981" end="7989" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540284" start="8054" end="8058" title="Lias Group" label="Lias"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="8059" end="8068" title="Limestone" label="Limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q14955712" start="8136" end="8142" title="Haydon, Somerset" label="Haydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="8228" end="8236" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14955712" start="8409" end="8415" title="Haydon, Somerset" label="Haydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14955712" start="8612" end="8618" title="Haydon, Somerset" label="Haydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133612" start="9079" end="9097" title="Climate of south-west England" label="South West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="9114" end="9131" title="temperate" label="temperate climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q24384" start="9252" end="9260" title="seasonal" label="seasonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195520" start="9265" end="9272" title="Diurnal motion" label="diurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q489264" start="9749" end="9760" title="Azores High" label="Azores High"/>
<link wikidata="Q14189" start="9816" end="9821" title="Cumulus cloud" label="Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="9949" end="9957" title="Precipitation (meteorology)" label="Rainfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="9986" end="9994" title="Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q209190" start="9995" end="10006" title="Low pressure area" label="depressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="10186" end="10199" title="thunderstorms" label="thunderstorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="10284" end="10292" title="snowfall" label="snowfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988627" start="10632" end="10641" title="Westfield, Somerset" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559833" start="10771" end="10790" title="Somerset Coal Canal" label="Somerset Coal Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559923" start="10864" end="10897" title="Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway" label="Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023412" start="11051" end="11087" title="Wilts, Somerset and Weymouth Railway" label="Wilts, Somerset and Weymouth Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242441" start="11113" end="11118" title="Frome" label="Frome"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="11288" end="11309" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998472" start="11501" end="11524" title="NCR 24" label="National Cycle Route 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998472" start="11549" end="11567" title="Colliers Way" label="Colliers&amp;#x27; Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859207" start="11780" end="11795" title="Dundas Aqueduct" label="Dundas Aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242441" start="11799" end="11804" title="Frome" label="Frome"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="11882" end="11893" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="11898" end="11908" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="11933" end="11948" title="railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559923" start="11956" end="11991" title="Somerset &amp;amp; Dorset Joint Railway" label="Somerset &amp;amp; Dorset Joint Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q171448" start="12128" end="12142" title="level crossing" label="level crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038516" start="12338" end="12359" title="Writhlington" label="Writhlington Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q637185" start="12517" end="12525" title="Bath Spa railway station" label="Bath Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236661" start="12635" end="12649" title="Shepton Mallet" label="Shepton Mallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691996" start="12675" end="12692" title="Farrington Gurney" label="Farrington Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242441" start="12697" end="12702" title="Frome" label="Frome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649183" start="12722" end="12725" title="A37 road" label="A37"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815948" start="13250" end="13269" title="landscape architect" label="landscape architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281699" start="13945" end="13960" title="Radstock Museum" label="Radstock Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="14084" end="14092" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="14277" end="14292" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946691" start="14346" end="14359" title="Loyd Grossman" label="Loyd Grossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559834" start="14414" end="14432" title="Somerset coalfield" label="Somerset coalfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="14437" end="14444" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q40558" start="14525" end="14530" title="forge" label="forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q203605" start="14532" end="14541" title="carpenter" label="carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="14579" end="14590" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559833" start="14625" end="14644" title="Somerset Coal Canal" label="Somerset Coal Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559923" start="14646" end="14665" title="Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway" label="Somerset and Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="14670" end="14691" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988627" start="14902" end="14911" title="Westfield, Radstock, Somerset" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038517" start="15011" end="15030" title="Writhlington School" label="Writhlington School"/>
<link wikidata="Q20017412" start="15095" end="15112" title="Specialist school" label="specialist status"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001824" start="15118" end="15149" title="Business and Enterprise College" label="Business and Enterprise College"/>
<link wikidata="Q188617" start="15327" end="15338" title="Kew Gardens" label="Kew Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069124" start="15402" end="15421" title="Chelsea Flower Show" label="Chelsea Flower Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123579" start="15607" end="15619" title="Bath College" label="Bath College"/>
<link wikidata="Q765192" start="15623" end="15640" title="further education" label="further education"/>
<link wikidata="Q189004" start="15641" end="15648" title="college" label="college"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988627" start="15665" end="15674" title="Westfield, Radstock, Somerset" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111944" start="15715" end="15734" title="Non-League football" label="Non-League football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281701" start="15740" end="15758" title="Radstock Town F.C." label="Radstock Town F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6843015" start="15853" end="15901" title="Midsomer Norton, Radstock &amp;amp; District Journal" label="Midsomer Norton, Radstock &amp;amp; District Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559867" start="15980" end="15997" title="Somerset Guardian Standard" label="Somerset Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q667613" start="16026" end="16054" title="Daily Mail and General Trust" label="Daily Mail and General Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816649" start="16088" end="16100" title="Mendip Times" label="Mendip Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835009" start="16192" end="16200" title="BBC West" label="BBC West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975143" start="16205" end="16221" title="ITV West Country" label="ITV West Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816653" start="16264" end="16270" title="Mendip transmitting station" label="Mendip"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834965" start="16336" end="16354" title="BBC Radio Somerset" label="BBC Radio Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066887" start="16367" end="16377" title="Heart West" label="Heart West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719955" start="16391" end="16421" title="Greatest Hits Radio South West" label="Greatest Hits Radio South West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559729" start="16438" end="16453" title="Somer Valley FM" label="Somer Valley FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304214" start="16671" end="16681" title="Interfaith dialogue" label="interfaith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="16715" end="16723" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q317557" start="16724" end="16737" title="parish church" label="parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="16898" end="16904" title="listed building" label="listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="16916" end="16932" title="Methodist Church" label="Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="17058" end="17072" title="Baptist Church" label="Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253335" start="17180" end="17198" title="Downside Abbey" label="Downside community"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="17246" end="17254" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q924107" start="17300" end="17307" title="Hugh of Lincoln" label="St Hugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780582" start="17313" end="17323" title="altar rail" label="altar rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245410" start="17347" end="17357" title="Prior Park" label="Prior Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988627" start="17513" end="17522" title="Westfield, Somerset" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="17739" end="17761" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witness" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witness"/>
<link wikidata="Q743165" start="17762" end="17774" title="Kingdom Hall" label="Kingdom Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q21069715" start="17798" end="17813" title="William Blacker (politician)" label="William Blacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456289" start="17851" end="17867" title="L. J. F. Brimble" label="L. J. F. Brimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="17908" end="17914" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q30305515" start="17933" end="17945" title="Frank Coombs (artist)" label="Frank Coombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744966" start="17991" end="18002" title="Alick Grant" label="Alick Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909548" start="18104" end="18114" title="Bill Hyman" label="Bill Hyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23688795" start="18157" end="18169" title="Ernest Hyman" label="Ernest Hyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993674" start="18209" end="18222" title="Frank Pratten" label="Frank Pratten"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993674" start="18247" end="18268" title="F. Pratten and Co Ltd" label="F. Pratten and Co Ltd"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535099" wikidata="Q229135" url="?curid=535099" title="Sussex County">
<text>Sussex County may refer to:

==Australia==
* Sussex County, Western Australia

==United States==
* Sussex County, Delaware
* Sussex County, New Jersey
* Sussex County, Virginia

==England==
* Sussex, also known as &quot;the County of Sussex&quot;
* Royal Sussex County Hospital in Brighton (sometimes informally referred to as the Sussex County)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229135" start="0" end="13" title="Sussex County" label="Sussex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649416" start="45" end="77" title="Sussex County, Western Australia" label="Sussex County, Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156213" start="99" end="122" title="Sussex County, Delaware" label="Sussex County, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q495998" start="125" end="150" title="Sussex County, New Jersey" label="Sussex County, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q340591" start="153" end="176" title="Sussex County, Virginia" label="Sussex County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="192" end="198" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374890" start="249" end="277" title="Royal Sussex County Hospital" label="Royal Sussex County Hospital"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535103" wikidata="Q292343" url="?curid=535103" title="Surry County">
<text>Surry County is the name of two counties in the United States:

* Surry County, North Carolina
* Surry County, Virginia

==See also==
* Surrey</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q292343" start="0" end="12" title="Surry County" label="Surry County"/>
<link wikidata="Q507881" start="66" end="94" title="Surry County, North Carolina" label="Surry County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q506209" start="97" end="119" title="Surry County, Virginia" label="Surry County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="136" end="142" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535109" wikidata="Q228883" url="?curid=535109" title="Sumter County">
<text>Sumter County is the name of four counties in the United States:

* Sumter County, Alabama
* Sumter County, Florida
* Sumter County, Georgia
* Sumter County, South Carolina</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q501051" start="68" end="90" title="Sumter County, Alabama" label="Sumter County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q503889" start="93" end="115" title="Sumter County, Florida" label="Sumter County, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q503076" start="118" end="140" title="Sumter County, Georgia" label="Sumter County, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q513933" start="143" end="172" title="Sumter County, South Carolina" label="Sumter County, South Carolina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535111" wikidata="Q255401" url="?curid=535111" title="Sumner County">
<text>Sumner County is the name of two counties in the United States:

* Sumner County, Kansas
* Sumner County, Tennessee</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q375125" start="67" end="88" title="Sumner County, Kansas" label="Sumner County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q506175" start="91" end="115" title="Sumner County, Tennessee" label="Sumner County, Tennessee"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535114" wikidata="Q717555" url="?curid=535114" title="Yǐn (surname)">
<text>Yin () is a Chinese surname. In 800 BCE, Bo Jifu, a renowned judge during the reign of King Xuan of Zhou, held the position of Yin (equivalent to First Minister or most favored Minister) and changed his name to Yin Jifu. During the era of the Imperial Examination System, three other magistrates took on the surname Yǐn () to denote their Imperial rank and favoured status. It is the 100th name on the &quot;Hundred Family Surnames&quot; poem.

The Korean surname [[Yǐn (surname)|Yun]] and the Vietnamese surname Doãn are derived from Yin and traditionally written in the same Chinese character.

A 2013 study found it to be the 79th most common surname, being shared by 3,460,000 people or 0.260% of the population, with the province with the most being Hunan.

== Notable people ==
* Yiin Chii-ming (; born 1952) Minister of Economic Affairs of the Republic of China (2008–2009)
* Yin Fu (), creator of a sub-branch of the Bagua martial art; bodyguard to the Empress Dowager Cixi and personal trainer of the Emperor.
* Yin Han and Yin Zhen, members of the judiciary of the Han dynasty.
* Yin Lin, a painter of the Tang dynasty.
* Yin Zhongke, a member of the judiciary of the Song dynasty.
* Yin Zhangsheng, a painter of the Song dynasty,
* Yin Wen, a personal tutor of princes of the Ming dynasty
* Wan Kwong (, born 1949 in Saigon, Vietnam), Hong Kong pop singer, born Lui Minkwong ( and also known as Jackson Wan Kwong), a singer from Hong Kong, known as &quot;The Temple Street Prince&quot;
* Yin Li (politician), Governor of Sichuan (2016–)
* Wan Kuok-koi (; born 1955), popularly known as Broken Tooth Koi, former leader of the Macau branch of the 14K Triad
* Yin Zheng (, born 1986), Chinese actor
* Terence Yin Chi-wai (; born 1975), a Chinese film actor
* Samuel Yin (; born 1950) Taiwanese billionaire businessman and philanthropist
* Xi Yin (; born 1983) a Chinese-American theoretical physicist
* Yin Mingshan (; born 1938 in Chongqing, Sichuan) a Chinese businessman, the chairman of Lifan Industrial Corporation
* Yin Haoyu (; born 2003), also known as Patrick Finkler. Thai-German actor, singer, songwriter and model, member of the multi-national Chinese group INTO1, a debuted boy group of Produce Camp 2021.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q717555" start="0" end="3" title="Yǐn (surname)" label="Yin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55247" start="87" end="104" title="King Xuan of Zhou" label="King Xuan of Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725483" start="211" end="219" title="Yin Jifu" label="Yin Jifu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="243" end="263" title="Imperial Examination" label="Imperial Examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594605" start="284" end="295" title="magistrates" label="magistrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q55274" start="408" end="431" title="Hundred Family Surnames" label="Hundred Family Surnames"/>
<link wikidata="Q19606400" start="464" end="485" title="Yun (Korean surname)" label="[[Yǐn (surname)|Yun]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q717555" start="513" end="517" title="Yǐn (surname)" label="Doãn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="577" end="594" title="Chinese character" label="Chinese character"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="755" end="760" title="Hunan" label="Hunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8278721" start="786" end="800" title="Yiin Chii-ming" label="Yiin Chii-ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308717" start="883" end="889" title="Yin Fu" label="Yin Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47842" start="961" end="981" title="Empress Dowager Cixi" label="Empress Dowager Cixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="1075" end="1086" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="1116" end="1128" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="1178" end="1190" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="1287" end="1299" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967012" start="1302" end="1311" title="Wan Kwong" label="Wan Kwong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19825407" start="1499" end="1518" title="Yin Li (politician)" label="Yin Li (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967009" start="1550" end="1562" title="Wan Kuok-koi" label="Wan Kuok-koi"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084960" start="1668" end="1677" title="Yin Zheng (actor)" label="Yin Zheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702031" start="1709" end="1720" title="Terence Yin" label="Terence Yin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9080179" start="1767" end="1777" title="Samuel Yin" label="Samuel Yin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27964431" start="1847" end="1853" title="Xi Yin" label="Xi Yin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053645" start="1911" end="1923" title="Yin Mingshan" label="Yin Mingshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105654184" start="2030" end="2039" title="Patrick Nattawat Finkler" label="Yin Haoyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q106613344" start="2178" end="2183" title="INTO1" label="INTO1"/>
<link wikidata="Q104883373" start="2208" end="2225" title="Produce Camp 2021" label="Produce Camp 2021"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535116" wikidata="Q197532" url="?curid=535116" title="Zhe">
<text>Zhe may refer to:

* Zhe (Cyrillic), a letter of the Cyrillic alphabet
* Zhe, a proposed gender-neutral pronoun (with: zhim, zhers, zhimself)
* &quot;Maclura tricuspidata&quot; (or zhè), a tree native to East Asia
* Že, a letter of the Perso-Arabic alphabet
* Zhejiang, a province of China
* Qiantang River, the river after which Zhejiang Province was named
Schools
* Zhe school (guqin), a school of musicians for the guqin
* Zhe school (painting), painters of Southern School, which thrived during Ming dynasty of China
People
* Viceroy of Min-Zhe, title of government official of China
* Su Zhe (1039-1112), a politician and essayist from Meishan, China
* Zou Zhe (1636-c.1708), noted Chinese painter during Qing Dynasty
* Jiao Zhe, a Chinese footballer
* Feng Zhe (1987- ), a male Chinese gymnast
* Chen Zhe (1993- ), a professional snooker player from Shanxi, China
* Li Zhe (disambiguation), various people
* Shi Zhe (1905-1998), a Chinese interpreter
* Song Zhe, a diplomat, ambassador of the People&#x27;s Republic of China</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55589" start="21" end="35" title="Zhe (Cyrillic)" label="Zhe (Cyrillic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q127385223" start="73" end="76" title="Gender neutrality in languages with gendered third-person pronouns" label="Zhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q602322" start="150" end="170" title="Maclura tricuspidata" label="Maclura tricuspidata"/>
<link wikidata="Q393470" start="216" end="218" title="Že" label="Že"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="260" end="268" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q19751" start="292" end="306" title="Qiantang River" label="Qiantang River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889516" start="368" end="386" title="Zhe school (guqin)" label="Zhe school (guqin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150941" start="426" end="447" title="Zhe school (painting)" label="Zhe school (painting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138119" start="530" end="548" title="Viceroy of Min-Zhe" label="Viceroy of Min-Zhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155951" start="590" end="596" title="Su Zhe" label="Su Zhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576149" start="658" end="665" title="Zou Zhe" label="Zou Zhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8974767" start="725" end="733" title="Jiao Zhe" label="Jiao Zhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q289553" start="758" end="766" title="Feng Zhe" label="Feng Zhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069812" start="802" end="810" title="Chen Zhe" label="Chen Zhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11775604" start="872" end="895" title="Li Zhe (disambiguation)" label="Li Zhe (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16904966" start="914" end="921" title="Shi Zhe" label="Shi Zhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561068" start="959" end="967" title="Song Zhe" label="Song Zhe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535117" wikidata="Q231994" url="?curid=535117" title="Summit County">
<text>Summit County is the name of three counties in the United States:
*Summit County, Colorado
*Summit County, Ohio
*Summit County, Utah</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312453" start="67" end="90" title="Summit County, Colorado" label="Summit County, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q485536" start="92" end="111" title="Summit County, Ohio" label="Summit County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q484563" start="113" end="132" title="Summit County, Utah" label="Summit County, Utah"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="535121" wikidata="Q2508647" url="?curid=535121" title="Market penetration">
<text>Market penetration refers to the successful selling of a good or service in a specific market. It involves using tactics that increase the growth of an existing product in an existing market. It is measured by the amount of sales volume of an existing good or service compared to the total target market for that product or service. Market penetration is the key for a business growth strategy stemming from the Ansoff Matrix (Richardson, M., &amp; Evans, C. (2007). H. Igor Ansoff first devised and published the Ansoff Matrix in the &quot;Harvard Business Review&quot; in 1957, within an article titled &quot;Strategies for Diversification&quot;. The grid/matrix is utilized across businesses to help evaluate and determine the next stages the company must take in order to grow and the risks associated with the chosen strategy. With numerous options available, this matrix helps narrow down the best fit for an organization.

This strategy involves selling current products or services to the existing market in order to obtain a higher market share. This could involve persuading current customers to buy more and new customers to start buying or even converting customers from their competitors. This could be implemented using methods such as competitive pricing, increasing marketing communications, or utilizing reward systems such as loyalty points/discounts. New strategies involve utilizing pathways and finding new ways to improve profits and increase sales and productivity in order to stay competitive.

==Definition==
Market penetration refers to ways or strategies that are proposed or adopted so as to be able to create a niche in the already existing market. Although it can be performed throughout the business&#x27;s life, it can be especially helpful in the primary stages of setup. It helps establish the business&#x27;s current station and which direction it needs to expand in to achieve market growth. Successful outcomes stem from careful monitoring by key staff and leaders. Timing is key to successful market growth; this can be dependent on the overall market welfare, the business&#x27;s competitors, and current events. Questions, brainstorming, and discussions can help distinguish whether it is the best time for market growth. These can include questions surrounding market share increases or decreases. Sales can be declining but show opportunity for the business, which could be the perfect time to make alterations so as to grow market share. Market penetration can also be helpful when sales are proving to slow down, in that customers often need to be re-introduced to a company or reminded why they need a company&#x27;s goods/services. With consumers&#x27; attention span becoming less and less, organizations need to constantly keep on top of competitors to stay relevant.

Some factors of market penetration are holding costs, advanced inventory management practices and technology (e.g., ongoing replenishment and vendor-managed inventory), supply chain problems, and economies of scale (e.g., Chang and Lee 1995, Chen et al. 2005, Gaur and Kesavan 2005, Gaur et al. 2005, Hendricks and Singhal 2005, Huson and Nanda 1995, Lieberman et al. 1996).

Market penetration, market development, and product development together establish market growth for a company. Overall the major growth opportunities they implement attempt to peak sales through stressing current products in present markets and present products in new markets. This includes developing new products for existing markets, subsequently. It is about finding new ways to boost sales and keep customers loyal and increase market share. When implementing change, companies must be careful not to compromise their existing revenue or customers. If the packaging or visual aspects of a company are altered drastically, existing customers may not recognise a brand and opt for a competitor&#x27;s product or service. Too much alteration can make consumers wary, so change must be implemented in a subtle manner so as to only increase market share and build on profits. Managers and leaders should monitor this throughout the entire process to ensure smooth changes. Clear planning will also help minimise this risk and will lead to improvements and a boost in market share.

A few different options for market penetration are:
* Developing a new marketing strategy to entice more customers to purchase or continue purchasing.
* Become price competitive as a swaying factor for customers to choose a product or service over another company.
* Use special promotions or offers to grab attention.
* Utilise the Boston Matrix to decipher which product or service benefits further investment and time and which can be disregarded.
* Purchase a competitor&#x27;s company (in mature markets) to expand market share.

For a business to come up with a decision using the grid, key personnel must consider numerous factors such as market penetration, product development, market development, and diversification, which measure brand popularity, defined as the number of people who buy a specific brand or a category of goods at least once in a given period, divided by the size of the relevant market population. Market penetration is one of the four growth strategies of the Product-Market Growth Matrix as defined by Ansoff. Market penetration occurs when a company penetrates a market in which current or similar products already exist. A way to achieve this is by gaining competitors&#x27; customers (part of their market share). Other ways include attracting non-users of a product or convincing current clients to use more of a product/service (by advertising, etc.). Ansoff developed the Product-Market Growth Matrix to help firms recognize if there is any advantage to entering a market. The other three growth strategies in the Product-Market Growth Matrix are:
* Product development (existing markets, new products): McDonald&#x27;s is always within the fast-food industry but frequently markets new burgers. 
* Market development (new markets, existing products): Apple introduced the iPhone in a developed cell phone market. 
* Diversification (new markets, new products):

Market penetration refers to the successful selling of a product or service in a specific market, and it is a measure of the amount of sales volume of an existing good or service compared to the total target market for that product or service. Market penetration involves targeting on selling existing goods or services in the targeted markets to increase a better market share/value. It can be achieved in four different ways, including growing the market share of current goods or services; obtaining dominance of existing markets; reforming a mature market by monopolising the market and driving out competitors; or increasing consumptions by existing customers.

Another alternative to calculating market penetration is if the dividend growth rate is more than the ratio of the percentage population of wealth distribution ratio then market penetration is possible.

Market penetration is a way to determine the success of the business model and marketing strategy for a product. To check the success, one must have a way to gauge the amount of the targeted market and how many potential localized or otherwise customers there are that would be susceptible to a product. To this end, Charles Hill came up with a five-step system to understanding advertising&#x27;s influence on the market. 
#Identify the demographic most suited to a product. Even though other demographics may use a product, it is about identifying the largest demographic so that the majority of advertising is tailored to them (e.g., candy for children, salad for adult women who may be dieting).
#Decide upon the area in which they live. Location is important and wholly depends on the reach of a brand. If a company operates at a national level, then the entirety of the country will have to be averaged to reach the largest number of people. The smaller the area, the more specific one can be about the people of each demographic within it.
#Knowing the size of the market is integral to understanding market penetration. 
#Understanding competitors&#x27; market penetration. What benchmark should one go for? Based on the penetration that other products have reached, calculate the number that should be reached in the demographic by multiplying the total number of the demographic by whatever the percentage that other products are reaching. 
#Calculate the number of customers that a business needs to sell to in order to earn a profit and then compare that to the number other competitors are reaching; if the business does not make a profit with average market penetration, it&#x27;s time to rethink the business strategy.
Market penetration is a tool for understanding the potential earnings of a business and is integral to calculating a resourceful business model.

==In an emerging market==
A model was theorized for market penetration by Yan Dong, Martin Dresner and Chaodong Han.

This is meant for emerging markets but the connection extends across to more established markets as well. The model illustrates that market penetration and understanding of the number of people that will be reached with a product is indicative to how much stock must be ordered and both that and market penetration are of utmost importance for financial performance. However, emerging markets are difficult to predict as they are categorized by large amounts of growth. This means demand is hard to forecast and therefore inventory supply as well. 
The connection between emerging market penetration and inventory supply are bridged by several factors such as advanced inventory management, technologies and holding costs. So while the market penetration may dictate how much supply is needed other factors must dictate how much inventory it is prudent to keep. Understanding market penetration for an emerging market is more difficult due to the lack of established competitors and similar products. 
Emerging markets are susceptible to large companies and are sought after by globalized businesses due to the increase in disposable income the average person will have and weak local competitors. The weakness of local competitors is due to their poor customer service and limit in resources as they don&#x27;t have the capital and reach that large corporations have. The four big emerging markets are Brazil, Russia, India and China as they were the fastest to recover after the 2008/2009 economic crisis. These markets are untapped potential for revenue and a good spot for globalization for dominant company&#x27;s. Large market penetration is the key to fully tapping these markets.

== Purpose ==
As a strategy, market penetration is used when the business seeks to increase sales growth of its existing products or services to its existing markets in order to gain a higher market share. This strategy is often used during the early stages of the business or before it enters the market, in order to prove the market existence and show market size for its products or services, also to gain an understanding to the number of competitors and how well they are doing. Hence, the business can decide on either it is a good to enter their target market or not, and how it can make its products or services more attractive to consumers than its competitors. During the operation of the business, if the sales are decreasing or flatlining comparing to previous years, then it is also appropriate to apply market penetration strategy to seek for opportunities to increase sales. Therefore, it is unnecessary to this strategy if the sales are increasing. However, it is exceptional if the sales growth trend shows the gross increase but is much less significant comparing to its competitors, because this could indicate the business&#x27;s market share is actually shrinking, then this strategy can be a good approach to try regain its market share.

To achieve the goal of higher market share, the primary idea is that the business has to either increase sales volume to their existing customers by encouraging for more frequent or greater usages, or expanding the population size of customers in the current market by attracting potential new customers to buy its goods or services. Since the market penetration strategy is conducted based on established capabilities and characteristics of the business and the market, therefore it contains the lowest risk out of the four strategies in Ansoff&#x27;s product-market growth matrix. Hence, a business should give special consideration to conducts it, since this strategy is important for the evaluation work on the intended market and the existing businesses within this market. Especially when the business or product or service is about to enter the market or during its initial stage, and when it is not comfortable with risk-taking, or the owners of the business do not intend or not in a position to invest heavily into it. The amount of risk involved with each of the four types of Ansoff&#x27;s strategies increases from market penetration to market development, to production development, to diversification. Because the both market and product development involve with one aspect of new developments, changes, and innovation. The diversification strategy is with most risk because the business is growing into both a new market and product, and thus contains with most uncertainties.

Market penetration is not only a strategy but also a measurement (in percentage) for popularity of a brand or a product in the category, in other words, the number of customers in the market that buys from a brand or product.

== Strategies ==

=== Price adjustments ===
One of the common market penetration strategies is to lower the products&#x27; prices. Businesses aim to generate more sales volume by increasing the number of products purchased by putting on lower prices (price competition) for consumers comparing to the alternative goods. Companies may alternatively pursue strategies of higher prices depending on the demand elasticity of the product, in the hope that it will generate an increased sales volume and result in higher market penetration.

==== Penetration pricing ====
Penetration pricing is a marketing technique which is used to gain market share by selling a new product for a price that is significantly lower than its competitors. The company begins to raise the price of the product once it has achieved a large customer base and market share. Penetration pricing is frequently used by network provider and cable or satellite services companies. Many of the providers will initially offer an unbeatable price to attract customers into switching to their service and after the discount period has ended, the price increases dramatically and some customers will be forced to stay with the provider because of contract issues.

Penetration pricing benefits from the influence of word-of-mouth advertising, allowing customers to spread the words of how affordable the products are prior to business increasing the prices. It will also discourage and disadvantage competitors who are not willing to undersell and losing sales to others. However, businesses have to ensure they have enough capital to stay in surplus before the price is raised up again.

=== Increased promotion ===
Businesses can also increase their market penetration by offering promotions to customers. A promotion is a strategy often linked with pricing, used to raise awareness of the brand and generate profit to maximise their market share.

=== More distribution channels ===
A distribution channel is the connection between businesses and intermediaries before a good or service is purchased by the consumers. Distribution can also contribute to sales volumes for businesses. It can increase consumer awareness, change the strategies of competitors and alter the consumer&#x27;s perception of the product and the brand, and is another method to increase market penetration.

=== Product improvements ===
Product management is crucial to a high market penetration in the targeted market and by improving the quality of products, businesses are able to attract and out-quality the competitors&#x27; products to match customers&#x27; requirements and eventually lead to more sales made. Product improvements can be utilised to create new interests in a declining product, for example by changing the design of the packaging or material/ingredients.

=== Market development ===
Market development aims at non-buying shoppers in targeted markets and new customers in order to maximise the potential market. Before developing a new market, companies should consider all the risks associated with the decision including its profitability. If a company is confident about their products, believes in their strengths, and is enticing to new consumers, then market development is a suitable strategy for the business.

== Construction ==
Market penetration can be defined as the proportion of people in the target who bought (at least once in the period) a specific brand or a category of goods. Two key measures of a product&#x27;s &#x27;popularity&#x27; are penetration rate and penetration share. The penetration rate (also called penetration, brand penetration or market penetration as appropriate) is the percentage of the relevant population that has purchased a given brand or category at least once in the time period under study. A brand&#x27;s penetration share, in contrast to penetration rate, is determined by comparing that brand&#x27;s customer population to the number of customers for its category in the relevant market as a whole. Here again, to be considered a customer, one must have purchased the brand or category at least once during the period.

== References ==
==Further reading==
*Richardson, M., &amp; Evans, C. (2007). Strategy in Action Applying Ansoff&#x27;s Matrix. &quot;Manager: British Journal of Administrative Management&quot;, (59), i-iii.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2508647" start="0" end="18" title="Market penetration" label="Market penetration"/>
<link wikidata="Q194189" start="44" end="51" title="selling" label="selling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="224" end="236" title="sales volume" label="sales volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="378" end="384" title="economic growth" label="growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q776076" start="412" end="425" title="Ansoff Matrix" label="Ansoff Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q277351" start="541" end="564" title="Harvard Business Review" label="Harvard Business Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q828814" start="1041" end="1053" title="market share" label="market share"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758705" start="1640" end="1645" title="market niche" label="niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824206" start="2986" end="2998" title="supply chain" label="supply chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395034" start="3237" end="3256" title="product development" label="product development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900597" start="3849" end="3866" title="brand recognition" label="recognise a brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q795722" start="4610" end="4623" title="Boston Matrix" label="Boston Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711935" start="5268" end="5296" title="Product-Market Growth Matrix" label="Product-Market Growth Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q560901" start="5311" end="5317" title="Igor Ansoff" label="Ansoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395034" start="5865" end="5884" title="Product development" label="Product development"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="5919" end="5934" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770794" start="6014" end="6032" title="Market development" label="Market development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711935" start="6132" end="6147" title="Diversification (marketing strategy)" label="Diversification"/>
<link wikidata="Q546395" start="9065" end="9080" title="emerging market" label="emerging market"/>
</links>
</doc>
