<doc id="543935" wikidata="Q51648" url="?curid=543935" title="East–West Schism">
<text>The East–West Schism, also known as the Great Schism or the Schism of 1054, is the break of communion between the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church since 1054. A series of ecclesiastical differences and theological disputes between the Greek East and Latin West preceded the formal split that occurred in 1054. Prominent among these were the procession of the Holy Spirit (), whether leavened or unleavened bread should be used in the Eucharist, iconoclasm, the coronation of Charlemagne as Emperor of the Romans in 800, the Pope&#x27;s claim to universal jurisdiction, and the place of the See of Constantinople in relation to the pentarchy.

The first action that would lead to a formal schism was taken in 1053: Patriarch Michael I Cerularius of Constantinople ordered the closure of all Latin churches in Constantinople. In 1054, the papal legate sent by Leo IX travelled to Constantinople in order, among other things, to deny Cerularius the title of &quot;ecumenical patriarch&quot; and insist that he recognize the pope&#x27;s claim to be the head of all of the churches. The main purposes of the papal legation were to seek help from the Byzantine emperor, Constantine IX Monomachos, in view of the Norman conquest of southern Italy, and to respond to Leo of Ohrid&#x27;s attacks on the use of unleavened bread and other Western customs, attacks that had the support of Cerularius. The historian Axel Bayer says that the legation was sent in response to two letters, one from the emperor seeking help to organize a joint military campaign by the eastern and western empires against the Normans, and the other from Cerularius. When the leader of the legation, Cardinal Humbert of Silva Candida, O.S.B., learned that Cerularius had refused to accept the demand, he excommunicated him, and in response Cerularius excommunicated Humbert and the other legates. According to Ware, &quot;Even after 1054 friendly relations between East and West continued. The two parts of Christendom were not yet conscious of a great gulf of separation between them ... The dispute remained something of which ordinary Christians in East and West were largely unaware&quot;.

The validity of the Western legates&#x27; act is doubtful because Pope Leo had died and Cerularius&#x27; excommunication only applied to the legates personally. Still, the Church split along doctrinal, theological, linguistic, political, and geographical lines, and the fundamental breach has never been healed: each side occasionally accuses the other of committing heresy and of having initiated the schism. Reconciliation was made increasingly difficult in the generations that followed; events such as the Latin-led Crusades though originally intended to aid the Eastern Church only served to further tension. The Massacre of the Latins in 1182 greatly deepened existing animosity&#x27;s and led to the West&#x27;s retaliation via the Sacking of Thessalonica in 1185, the capture and pillaging of Constantinople during the Fourth Crusade in 1204, and the imposition of Latin patriarchs. The emergence of competing Greek and Latin hierarchies in the Crusader states, especially with two claimants to the patriarchal sees of Antioch, Constantinople, and Jerusalem, made the existence of a schism clear. Several attempts at reconciliation did not bear fruit.

In 1965, Pope Paul VI and Ecumenical Patriarch Athenagoras I nullified the anathemas of 1054, although this was a nullification of measures taken against only a few individuals, merely as a gesture of goodwill and not constituting any sort of reunion. The absence of full communion between the Churches is even explicitly mentioned when the Code of Canon Law gives Catholic ministers permission to administer the sacraments of penance, the Eucharist, and the anointing of the sick to members of eastern churches such as the Eastern Orthodox Church (as well as the Oriental Orthodox churches and the Church of the East) and members of western churches such as the Old Catholic Church, when those members spontaneously request these. Contacts between the two sides continue. Every year a delegation from each joins in the other&#x27;s celebration of its patronal feast, Saints Peter and Paul (29 June) for Rome and Saint Andrew (30 November) for Constantinople, and there have been several visits by the head of each to the other. The efforts of the ecumenical patriarchs towards reconciliation with the Catholic Church have often been the target of sharp internal criticism.

Although 1054 has become conventional, various scholars have proposed different dates for the Great Schism, including 1009, 1204, 1484, and 1756. Greek Orthodox Saint and theologian Nectarios of Pentapolis dated the schism to the Council of Florence.

==Differences underlying the schism==
Jaroslav Pelikan emphasizes that &quot;while the East–West schism stemmed largely from political and ecclesiastical discord, this discord also reflected basic theological differences&quot;. Pelikan further argues that the antagonists in the 11th century inappropriately exaggerated their theological differences, whereas modern historians tend to minimize them. Pelikan asserts that the documents from that era evidence the &quot;depths of intellectual alienation that had developed between the two sections of Christendom.&quot; While the two sides were technically more guilty of schism than heresy, they often charged each other with allegations of blasphemy. Pelikan describes much of the dispute as dealing with &quot;regional differences in usages and customs&quot;, some of which were adiaphorous (i.e. neither commanded nor forbidden). However, he goes on to say that while it was easy in principle to accept the existence of adiaphora, it was difficult in actual practice to distinguish customs which were innocuously adiaphoric from those that had doctrinal implications.

===Ecclesiological disputes===
Philip Sherrard, an Eastern Orthodox theologian, asserts that the underlying cause of the East–West schism was and continues to be &quot;the clash of these two fundamentally irreconcilable ecclesiologies&quot;. Roger Haight characterizes the question of episcopal authority in the Church as &quot;acute&quot; with the &quot;relative standings of Rome and Constantinople a recurrent source of tension&quot;. Haight characterizes the difference in ecclesiologies as &quot;the contrast between a pope with universal jurisdiction and a combination of the patriarchal superstructure with an episcopal and synodal communion ecclesiology analogous to that found in Cyprian&quot;. However, Nicholas Afansiev has criticized both the Catholic and Orthodox churches for &quot;subscribing to the universal ecclesiology of St. Cyprian of Carthage according to which only one true and universal church can exist&quot;.

Another point of controversy was celibacy among Western priests (both monastic and parish), as opposed to the Eastern discipline whereby parish priests could be married men. However, the Latin church has always had some priests who were legally married. They have been a small minority since the 12th century.

====Ecclesiological structure====
There are several different ecclesiologies: &quot;communion ecclesiology&quot;, &quot;eucharistic ecclesiology&quot;, &quot;baptismal ecclesiology&quot;, &quot;trinitarian ecclesiology&quot;, &quot;kerygmatic theology&quot;. Other ecclesiologies are the &quot;hierarchical-institutional&quot; and the &quot;organic-mystical&quot;, and the &quot;congregationalist&quot;.

The Eastern Churches maintained the idea that every local city-church with its bishop, presbyters, deacons, and people celebrating the eucharist constituted the whole church. In this view called eucharistic ecclesiology (or more recently holographic ecclesiology), every bishop is Saint Peter&#x27;s successor in his church (&quot;the Church&quot;), and the churches form what Eusebius called a common union of churches. This implied that all bishops were ontologically equal, although functionally particular bishops could be granted special privileges by other bishops and serve as metropolitans, archbishops or patriarchs. Within the Roman Empire, from the time of Constantine to the fall of the empire in 1453, universal ecclesiology, rather than eucharistic, became the operative principle.

The view prevailed that, &quot;when the Roman Empire became Christian the perfect world order willed by God had been achieved: one universal empire was sovereign and coterminous with it was the one universal church&quot;. Early on, the Roman Church&#x27;s ecclesiology was universal, with the idea that the Church was a worldwide organism with a divinely (not functionally) appointed center: the Church/Bishop of Rome. These two views are still present in modern Eastern Orthodoxy and Catholicism and can be seen as foundational causes for the schisms and Great Schism between East and West.

The Orthodox Church does not accept the doctrine of Papal authority set forth in the Vatican Council of 1870, and taught today in the Catholic Church. The Orthodox Church has always maintained the original position of collegiality of the bishops resulting in the structure of the church being closer to a confederacy. The Orthodox have synods where the highest authorities in each Church community are brought together, but, unlike the Catholic Church, no central individual or figure has the absolute and infallible last word on church doctrine. In practice, this has sometimes led to divisions among Greek, Russian, Bulgarian and Ukrainian Orthodox churches, as no central authority can serve as an arbitrator for various internal disputes.

Starting from the second half of the 20th century, eucharistic ecclesiology is upheld by Catholic theologians. Henri de Lubac writes: &quot;The Church, like the Eucharist, is a mystery of unity – the same mystery, and one with inexhaustible riches. Both are the body of Christ – the same body.&quot; Joseph Ratzinger called eucharistic ecclesiology &quot;the real core of Vatican II&#x27;s (Second Vatican Council) teaching on the cross&quot;. According to Ratzinger, the one church of God exists in no other way than in the various individual local congregations. In these the eucharist is celebrated in union with the Church everywhere. Eucharistic ecclesiology led the council to &quot;affirm the theological significance of the local church. If each celebration of the Eucharist is a matter not only of Christ&#x27;s sacramental presence on the altar but also of his ecclesial presence in the gathered community, then each local eucharistic church must be more than a subset of the universal church; it must be the body of Christ &#x27;in that place&#x27;.&quot;

The ecclesiological dimension of the East–West schism revolves around the authority of bishops within their dioceses and the lines of authority between bishops of different dioceses. It is common for Catholics to insist on the primacy of Roman and papal authority based on patristic writings and conciliar documents.

====Papal privilege and authority====

The Catholic Church&#x27;s current official teachings about papal privilege and power that are unacceptable to the Eastern Orthodox churches are the dogma of the pope&#x27;s infallibility when speaking officially &quot;from the chair of Peter ()&quot; on matters of faith and morals to be held by the whole Church, so that such definitions are irreformable &quot;of themselves, and not by the consent of the Church&quot; () and have a binding character for all (Catholic) Christians in the world; the pope&#x27;s direct episcopal jurisdiction over all (Catholic) Christians in the world; the pope&#x27;s authority to appoint (and so also to dismiss) the bishops of all (Catholic) Christian churches except in the territory of a patriarchate; and the affirmation that the legitimacy and authority of all (Catholic) Christian bishops in the world derive from their union with the Roman see and its bishop, the Supreme Pontiff, the unique Successor of Peter and Vicar of Christ on earth.

Principal among the ecclesiastical issues that separate the two churches is the meaning of papal primacy within any future unified church. The Orthodox insist that it should be a &quot;primacy of honor&quot;, and not a &quot;primacy of authority&quot;, whereas the Catholics see the pontiff&#x27;s role as required for its exercise of power and authority, the exact form of which is open to discussion with other Christians. According to Eastern Orthodox belief, the test of catholicity is adherence to the authority of &quot;Scripture&quot; and then by the &quot;Holy Tradition&quot; of the church. It is not defined by adherence to any particular see. It is the position of the Orthodox Church that it has never accepted the pope as &quot;de jure&quot; leader of the entire church.

Referring to Ignatius of Antioch, Carlton says:
The church is in the image of the Trinity and reflects the reality of the incarnation.
===Theological issues===

The iconoclast policy enforced by a series of decrees of Emperor Leo III the Isaurian in 726–729 was resisted in the West, giving rise to friction that ended in 787, when the Second Council of Nicaea reaffirmed that images are to be venerated but not worshipped. The Libri Carolini, commissioned by Charlemagne, criticized what a faulty translation gave as the council&#x27;s decision, but their objections were rebutted by Pope Adrian I.

From the Catholic Church&#x27;s perspective, the ecclesiological issues are central, which is why they characterize the split between the two churches as a schism. In their view, the Eastern Orthodox are very close to them in theology, and the Catholic Church does not consider the Eastern Orthodox beliefs to be heretical. However, from the perspective of Eastern Orthodox theologians, there are theological issues that run much deeper than just the theology around the primacy of the Pope. In fact, this is in contrast to Catholics, who do not generally consider the Orthodox heretical and speak instead about the Eastern &quot;schism&quot;.

In the Catholic Church, too, some writers may be found, who speak pejoratively about the Eastern Orthodox Church and its theology, but these writers are marginal.

The official view of the Catholic Church is the one expressed in the decree of Vatican II:

====Trinity====
Although the Western churches do not consider the Eastern and Western understanding of the Trinity to be radically different, Eastern theologians such as John Romanides and Michael Pomazansky argue that the clause is symptomatic of a fatal flaw in the Western understanding, which they attribute to the influence of Augustine and, by extension, to that of Thomas Aquinas.

, Latin for &quot;and (from) the Son&quot;, was added in Western Christianity to the Latin text of the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed, which also varies from the original Greek text in having the additional phrase (God from God) and in using the singular &quot;I believe&quot; (, ) instead of the original &quot;We believe&quot; (), which Oriental Orthodoxy preserves. The Assyrian Church of the East, which is in communion neither with the Eastern Orthodox Church nor with Oriental Orthodoxy, uses &quot;We believe&quot;.

 states that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son as well as from the Father, a doctrine accepted by the Catholic Church, by Anglicanism and by Protestant churches in general.
Christians of these groups generally include it when reciting the Nicene Creed. Nonetheless, these groups recognize that is not part of the original text established at the First Council of Constantinople in 381, and they do not demand that others too should use it when saying the Creed. The Catholic Church does not add the phrase corresponding to () to the Greek text of the Creed, including in the Roman Rite of Latin Church Catholics.

At the 879–880 Council of Constantinople the Eastern Orthodox Church anathematized the phrase, &quot;as a novelty and augmentation of the Creed&quot;, and in their 1848 encyclical the Eastern Patriarchs spoke of it as a heresy. It was qualified as such by some of the Eastern Orthodox Church&#x27;s saints, including Photios I of Constantinople, Mark of Ephesus, and Gregory Palamas, who have been called the Three Pillars of Orthodoxy. The Eastern church believes by the Western church inserting the unilaterally (without consulting or holding council with the East) into the Creed, that the Western Church broke communion with the East.

Eastern Orthodox theologians such as Vladimir Lossky criticize the focus of Western theology of God in &quot;God in uncreated essence&quot; as misguided, which he alleges is a modalistic and therefore a speculative expression of God that is indicative of the Sabellian heresy. Eastern Orthodox theologian Michael Pomazansky argues that, in order for the Holy Spirit to proceed from the Father and the Son in the Creed, there would have to be two sources in the deity (double procession), whereas in the one God there can only be one source of divinity, which is the Father hypostasis of the Trinity, not God&#x27;s essence per se. In contrast, Bishop Kallistos Ware suggests that the problem is more in the area of semantics than of basic doctrinal differences:
====Experience of God versus scholasticism====
Lossky argues the difference in East and West is because of the Catholic Church&#x27;s use of pagan metaphysical philosophy (and scholasticism) rather than actual experience of God called , to validate the theological dogmas of Catholic Christianity. For this reason, Lossky states that Eastern Orthodox and Catholics have become &quot;different men&quot;. Other Eastern Orthodox theologians such as Romanides and Metropolitan Hierotheos of Nafpaktos have made similar pronouncements. According to the Orthodox teachings, can be achieved through ascetic practices like hesychasm, which was condemned as a heresy by Barlaam of Seminara.

Eastern Orthodox theologians charge that, in contrast to Eastern Orthodox theology, western theology is based on philosophical discourse which reduces humanity and nature to cold mechanical concepts.

Eastern Orthodox theologians argue that the mind (reason, rationality) is the focus of Western theology, whereas, in Eastern theology, the mind must be put in the heart, so they are united into what is called nous; this unity as heart is the focus of Eastern Orthodox Christianity, involving the unceasing prayer of the heart. In Orthodox theology, in the Eastern ascetic traditions, one of the goals of ascetic practice is to obtain sobriety of consciousness, awakeness (nepsis). For humankind, this is reached via the healing of the whole person, encompassing the soul/heart. When a person&#x27;s heart is reconciled with their mind, this is referred to as a healing of the nous or the &quot;eye, focus of the heart or soul&quot;.

Part of this process is the healing and reconciliation of humankind&#x27;s reason ( or ) with the heart or soul. While the human spirit and body are energies vivified by the soul, Orthodoxy teaches sin, suffering and sorrow are caused by the heart and mind being in conflict. According to Orthodox theology, a lack of noetic understanding (sickness) can be neither circumvented nor satisfied by rational or discursive thought (i.e. systematization). Denying the needs of the human heart (the needs of the soul) is seen to cause various negative or destructive manifestations such as addiction, atheism and evil thoughts. A cleaned, healed or restored &quot;nous&quot; creates the condition of sobriety, or nepsis of the mind.

=====Uncreated light=====
Orthodox theologians assert that the theological division of East and West culminated into a direct theological conflict known as the Hesychasm controversy during several councils at Constantinople between 1341 and 1351. They argue that this controversy highlighted the sharp contrast between what is embraced by the Catholic Church as proper (or orthodox) theological dogma and how theology is validated by the Eastern Orthodox. The essence of the disagreement is that in the East a person cannot be a true theologian or teach the knowledge of God without having experienced God, as defined as the vision of God (). At the heart of the issue was the teaching of the Essence-Energies distinctions (which states that while creation can never know God&#x27;s uncreated essence, it can know his uncreated energies) by Gregory Palamas.

====Original sin, free will, and the Immaculate Conception====

=====Augustine&#x27;s doctrine of original sin=====
Some Eastern Orthodox polemicists claim that Eastern Orthodox do not accept Augustine&#x27;s teaching of original sin. His interpretation of ancestral sin is rejected in the East as well. Nor is Augustine&#x27;s teaching accepted in its totality in the West. The Catholic Church rejects traducianism and affirms creationism of the soul. Its teaching on original sin is largely based on but not identical with that of Augustine, and is opposed to the interpretation of Augustine advanced by Martin Luther and John Calvin. Its teaching departs from Augustine&#x27;s ideas in some respects.

Another Eastern Orthodox view is expressed by Christos Yannaras, who described Augustine as &quot;the fount of every distortion and alteration in the Church&#x27;s truth in the West&quot;. This view is ahistorical. In fact, Augustine&#x27;s teaching on original sin was solemnly affirmed by the ecumenical Council of Ephesus, and the ecumenical Second Council of Constantinople numbered Saint Augustine among the great doctors of the Church, alongside Athanasius of Alexandria, Hilary of Poitiers, Basil of Caesarea, Gregory of Nazianzus, Gregory of Nyssa, St. Ambrose, Theophilus, John Chrysostom, Cyril of Alexandria, and Pope Leo the Great. The late modern denial by some Eastern Orthodox writers of the supposedly &quot;Western&quot; teaching on original sin is regarded by some traditionalist Eastern Orthodox as a form of modernism.

===== Eastern Orthodox teaching on original sin =====
What the Eastern Orthodox Church accepts is that ancestral sin corrupted their existence (their bodies and environment) that each person is born into and thus we are born into a corrupted existence (by the ancestral sin of Adam and Eve) and that &quot;original sin is hereditary. It did not remain only Adam and Eve&#x27;s. As life passes from them to all of their descendants, so does original sin. All of us participate in original sin because we are all descended from the same forefather, Adam.&quot; The teaching of the Eastern Orthodox Church is that, as a result of Adam&#x27;s sin, &quot;hereditary sin flowed to his posterity; so that everyone who is born after the flesh bears this burden, and experiences the fruits of it in this present world.&quot;

Similarly, what the Catholic Church holds is that the sin of Adam that we inherit, and for the remission of which even babies who have no personal sin are baptized, is called &quot;sin&quot; only in an analogical sense since it is not an act committed like the personal sin of Adam and Eve, but a fallen state contracted by the transmission of a human nature deprived of original holiness and justice.

Both East and West hold that each person is not called to atone for the actual sin committed by Adam and Eve. 

According to the Western Church, &quot;original sin does not have the character of a personal fault in any of Adam&#x27;s descendants&quot;, and the Eastern Church teaches that &quot;by these fruits and this burden we do not understand [actual] sin&quot;. The Orthodox and the Catholics believe that people inherit only the spiritual sickness (in which all suffer and sin) of Adam and Eve, caused by their ancestral sin (what has flowed to them), a sickness leaving them weakened in their powers, subject to ignorance, suffering from the domination of death, and inclined to sin.

=====Immaculate Conception=====
The Catholic doctrine of the Immaculate Conception, which claims that God protected the Virgin Mary from original sin through no merit of her own, was dogmatically defined by Pope Pius IX in 1854. Orthodox theology proclaims that Mary was chosen to bear Christ, having first found favor of God by her purity and obedience.

====Sin, purgatory, and hell====

=====Purgatory=====
Another point of theological contention between the western and eastern churches is the doctrine of purgatory (as it was shown at the Second Council of Lyon and the Council of Ferrara–Florence). It was developed in time in Western theology, according to which &quot;all who die in God&#x27;s grace and friendship, but still imperfectly purified, are indeed assured of their eternal salvation; but after death they undergo purification, so as to achieve the holiness necessary to enter the joy of heaven.&quot; However, some Eastern theologians, while agreeing that there is beyond death a state in which believers continue to be perfected and led to full divinization, consider that it is a state not of punishment but of growth. They hold that suffering cannot purify sin, since they have a different view of sin and consider suffering as a result of a spiritual sickness. Western theology usually considers sin not only as a sickness that weakens and impedes but also as something that merits punishment.

The Eastern Orthodox Church holds that &quot;there is a state beyond death where believers continue to be perfected and led to full divinization&quot;. Although some Orthodox have described this intermediate state as &quot;purgatory&quot;, others distinguish it from aspects associated with it in the West: at the Council of Ferrara–Florence, the Orthodox Bishop Mark of Ephesus argued that there are in it no purifying fires.

Some Orthodox Christians also subscribe to the belief of aerial toll houses, which states that souls are tested by demons while on their way to Heaven. This concept is not found in Roman Catholicism.

=====Damnation=====
The traditional Orthodox teaching is that those who reject Christ will suffer his absence. According to the Confession of Dositheus, &quot;persons go immediately to joy in Christ or to the torments of punishment&quot;. In Orthodox doctrine, there is no place without God. In eternity there is no hiding from God. In Catholic theology, God is present everywhere not only by his power but in himself. Hell is a state of self-selected separation from God.

Eastern theology considers the desire to sin to be the result of a spiritual sickness (caused by Adam and Eve&#x27;s pride), which needs to be cured. One such theologian gives his interpretation of Western theology as follows: &quot;According to the holy Fathers of the Church, there is not an uncreated Paradise and a created Hell, as the Franco–Latin tradition teaches&quot;. The Eastern Church believes that hell and heaven exist with reference to being with God, and that the very same divine love (God&#x27;s uncreated energies) which is a source of bliss and consolation for the righteous (because they love God, His love is heaven for them) is also a source of torment (or a &quot;Lake of Fire&quot;) for sinners. The Western Church speaks of heaven and hell as states of existence rather than as places, while in Eastern Orthodoxy there is no hell per se, there is a &quot;hell&quot; in the absence of God&#x27;s grace. To quote St John of Damascus: &quot;God does not punish but each one decides on his receiving of God, whose reception is joy and his absence a hell (Gr. )&quot;.

=== Governance ===
The Byzantine Empire was a theocracy; the emperor was the supreme authority in both church and state. &quot;The king is not God among men but the Viceroy of God. He is not the incarnate but is in a special relation with the . He has been specially appointed and is continually inspired by God, the friend of God, the interpreter of the Word of God. His eyes look upward, to receive the messages of God. He must be surrounded with the reverence and glory that befits God&#x27;s earthly copy; and he will &#x27;frame his earthly government according to the pattern of the divine original, finding strength in its conformity with the monarchy of God.

In the East, endorsement of caesaropapism, the subordination of the church to the religious claims of the dominant political order, was most fully evident in the Byzantine Empire at the end of the first millennium, while in the West, where the decline of imperial authority left the Church relatively independent, there was a growth in the power of the papacy. As a result of the Muslim conquests of the territories of the patriarchates of Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem, only two rival powerful centres of ecclesiastical authority, Constantinople and Rome, remained. Until this happened, Rome often tried to act as a neutral mediator in disputes among the Eastern patriarchates.

In Eastern Christendom, the teaching of papal supremacy is said to be based on the pseudo-Isidorian Decretals, documents attributed to early popes but actually forged, probably in the second quarter of the 9th century, with the aim of defending the position of bishops against metropolitans and secular authorities. The Orthodox East contests the teaching that Peter was the Patriarch of Rome, a title that the West too does not give him. Early sources such as St. Irenaeus can be interpreted as describing Pope Linus as the first bishop of Rome and Pope Cletus the second.

The &quot;Oxford Dictionary of Popes&quot; states: &quot;In the late 2nd or early 3rd cent. the tradition identified Peter as the first bishop of Rome. This was a natural development once the monarchical episcopate, i.e. the government of the local church by a single bishop, as distinct from a group of presbyter-bishops, finally emerged in Rome in the mid-2nd cent. The earlier tradition, however, which placed Peter and Paul in a class apart as the pioneers who together established the Roman church and its ministry, was never lost sight of.&quot;

St. Peter was according to tradition bishop of Antioch at one point, and was then succeeded by Evodius and Ignatius. The Eastern Orthodox do not hold the primacy of the Pope of Rome over the Eastern church; they teach that the Pope of Rome is the first among equals. The first seven Ecumenical Councils were held in the East and called by the Eastern Emperors; the Roman pontiff never presided over any of them.

==History==


The schism between the Western and Eastern Mediterranean Christians resulted from a variety of political, cultural and theological factors which transpired over centuries. Historians regard the mutual excommunications of 1054 as the terminal event. It is difficult to agree on a date for the event where the start of the schism was apparent. It may have started as early as the Quartodeciman controversy at the time of Victor of Rome (c. 180). Orthodox apologists point to this incident as an example of claims by Rome to the papal primacy and its rejection by Eastern Churches.

Sporadic schisms in the common unions took place under Pope Damasus I in the 4th and 5th centuries. Disputes about theological and other questions led to schisms between the Churches in Rome and Constantinople for 37 years from 482 to 519 (the Acacian Schism). Most sources agree that the separation between East and West is clearly evident by the Photian schism in 863 to 867.

===Claims of the See of Rome===
While the church at Rome claimed a special authority over the other churches, the extant documents of that era yield &quot;no clear-cut claims to, or recognition, of papal primacy.&quot;

Towards the end of the 2nd century, Victor, the Bishop of Rome, attempted to resolve the Quartodeciman controversy. The question was whether to celebrate Easter concurrently with the Jewish Passover, as Christians in the Roman province of Asia did, or to wait until the following Sunday, as was decreed by synods held in other Eastern provinces, such as those of Palestine and Pontus, the acts of which were still extant at the time of Eusebius, and in Rome. The pope attempted to excommunicate the churches in Asia, which refused to accept the observance on Sunday. Other bishops rebuked him for doing so. Laurent Cleenewerck comments:

Despite Victor&#x27;s failure to carry out his intent to excommunicate the Asian churches, many Catholic apologists point to this episode as evidence of papal primacy and authority in the early Church, citing the fact that none of the bishops challenged his right to excommunicate but instead questioned the wisdom and charity of his action. Anglican apologists question the premise that Victor even asserted what he imagined to be supremacy:

The opinion of the bishop of Rome was often sought, especially when the patriarchs of the Eastern Mediterranean were locked in fractious dispute. However, the bishop of Rome&#x27;s opinion was by no means accepted automatically. The bishops of Rome never obviously belonged to either the Antiochian or the Alexandrian schools of theology, and usually managed to steer a middle course between whatever extremes were being propounded by theologians of either school. Because Rome was remote from the centers of Christianity in the eastern Mediterranean, it was frequently hoped its bishop would be more impartial. For instance, in 431, Cyril, the patriarch of Alexandria, appealed to Pope Celestine I, as well as the other patriarchs, charging Constantinople Patriarch Nestorius with heresy, which was dealt with at the Council of Ephesus. He nevertheless believed Rome&#x27;s capacity to excommunicate Nestorius to only be effective in the West.

In 342, Pope Julius I wrote: &quot;The custom has been for word to be written first to us [in the case of bishops under accusation, and notably in apostolic churches], and then for a just sentence to be passed from this place&quot;. This was also decreed by the Council of Sardica, which declared Saint Athanasius to be the lawful bishop of Alexandria.

In 382 a synod in Rome protested against the raising of Constantinople to a position above that of Alexandria and spoke of Rome as &quot;the apostolic see&quot;. Pope Siricius (384–399) claimed for papal decretals the same binding force as decisions of synods, Pope Innocent I (401–417) said that all major judicial cases should be reserved for the see of Rome, and Pope Boniface I (418–422) declared that the church of Rome stands to &quot;the churches throughout the world as the head to its members&quot; and that bishops everywhere, while holding the one same episcopal office, must &quot;recognise those to whom, for the sake of ecclesiastical discipline, they should be subject&quot;.

Celestine I () considered that the condemnation of Nestorius by his own Roman synod in 430 was sufficient, but consented to the general council as &quot;of benefit in manifesting the faith&quot;. Pope Leo I and his successors rejected canon 28 of the Council of Chalcedon, as a result of which it was not officially recorded even in the East until the 6th century. The Acacian schism, when, &quot;for the first time, West lines up against East in a clear-cut fashion&quot;, ended with acceptance of a declaration insisted on by Pope Hormisdas (514–523) that &quot;I hope I shall remain in communion with the apostolic see in which is found the whole, true, and perfect stability of the Christian religion&quot;. Yet, &quot;the
vast majority of the Eastern Bishops subscribed quite a different Formula.&quot;

Earlier, in 494, Pope Gelasius I (492–496) wrote to Byzantine emperor, Anastasius, distinguishing the power of civil rulers from that of the bishops (called &quot;priests&quot; in the document), with the latter supreme in religious matters; he ended his letter with: &quot;And if it is fitting that the hearts of the faithful should submit to all priests in general who properly administer divine affairs, how much the more is obedience due to the bishop of that see which the Most High ordained to be above all others, and which is consequently dutifully honoured by the devotion of the whole Church.&quot; Pope Nicholas I (858–867) made it clear that he believed the power of the papacy extended &quot;over all the earth, that is, over every church&quot;.

===Claims of the See of Constantinople===
In 330, Emperor Constantine moved the imperial capital to Byzantium, which later became Constantinople. The centre of gravity in the empire was fully recognised to have completely shifted to the eastern Mediterranean. Rome lost the Senate to Constantinople and lost its status and gravitas as imperial capital.

The bishop of Byzantium was under the authority of the metropolitan of Heraclea when Constantine moved there. Thereafter, the bishop&#x27;s connection with the imperial court meant that he was able to free himself from ecclesiastical dependency on Heraclea and in little more than half a century to obtain recognition of next-after-Rome ranking from the First Council of Constantinople (381), held in the new capital. It decreed: &quot;The Bishop of Constantinople, however, shall have the prerogative of honour after the Bishop of Rome; because Constantinople is New Rome&quot;, thus raising it above the sees of Alexandria and Antioch. This has been described as sowing the seed for the ecclesiastical rivalry between Constantinople and Rome that was a factor leading to the schism between East and West. The website of the Orthodox Church in America says that the Bishop of Byzantium was elevated to Patriarch already in the time of Constantine.

Disunion in the Roman Empire contributed to disunion in the Church. Theodosius the Great, who in 380 established Nicene Christianity as the official religion of the Roman Empire (see Edict of Thessalonica), was the last Emperor to rule over a united Roman Empire. Following the death of Theodosius in 395, the Empire was divided for the final time into western and eastern halves. In the 4th century, the Roman emperor (reigning in Constantinople) started to control the Church in his territory.

The patriarchs of Constantinople often tried to adopt a commanding position over the other patriarchs, provoking their resistance. For example, in 431 Patriarch Cyril of Alexandria impeached for heresy Patriarch Nestorius of Constantinople.

Alexandria&#x27;s objections to Constantinople&#x27;s promotion, which led to a constant struggle between the two sees in the first half of the 5th century, were supported by Rome, which proposed the theory that the most important sees were the three Petrine ones, of Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria, with Rome in the first place.

However, the power of the patriarch of Constantinople continued to grow. Eastern Orthodox state that the 28th canon of the Council of Chalcedon (451) explicitly proclaimed the equality of the Bishops of Rome and Constantinople, and that it established the highest court of ecclesiastical appeal in Constantinople. The patriarch of the imperial capital succeeded in his efforts to become the leading bishop in the Byzantine Empire: he &quot;headed a vast curia and other bishops who resided in Constantinople constituted a permanent synod, which became the real governing body of the church&quot;.

Patriarch John IV of Constantinople, who died in 595, assumed the title of &quot;Ecumenical Patriarch&quot;.

The idea that with the transfer of the imperial capital from Rome to Constantinople, primacy in the Church was also transferred, is found in undeveloped form as early as John Philoponus (c. 490 – c. 570). It was enunciated in its most advanced form by Photios I of Constantinople (c. 810 – c. 893). Constantinople, as the seat of the ruler of the empire and therefore of the world, was the highest among the patriarchates and, like the emperor, had the right to govern them.

===Council of Nicaea (325)===


After the Roman Emperor Constantine the Great legalized Christianity (with the Edict of Milan), he summoned the First Ecumenical Council at Nicaea in 325. The bishops at the council confirmed the position of the metropolitan sees of Rome and Alexandria as having authority outside their own province, and also the existing privileges of the churches in Antioch and the other provinces. These sees were later called Patriarchates. These were given an order of precedence: Rome, as the capital of the empire, was naturally given first place, then came Alexandria and Antioch. In a separate canon the Council also approved the special honor given to Jerusalem over other sees subject to the same metropolitan.

===First Council of Constantinople (381)===

Roman dominate Emperor Theodosius I convened the second ecumenical council (Constantinople I) at the imperial capital city in 381. The council elevated the see of Constantinople to a position ahead of the other chief metropolitan sees, except that of Rome, thus raising it above the sees of Alexandria and Antioch. This action has been described as sowing the seed for the ecclesiastical rivalry between Constantinople and Rome which was ultimately a factor leading to the schism between East and West.

 The council mentioned the churches in the civil dioceses of Asia, Pontus, and Thrace, decreeing that the synod of each province should manage the ecclesiastical affairs of that province alone, except for the privileges already recognized for the sees of Alexandria and Antioch.

Generally, no Western bishops attended the council, though Ascholius of Thessalonica (a city under Roman jurisdiction at that time) did attend and was tasked by Pope Damasus to &quot;insure that an utterly blameless bishop&quot; be elected for Constantinople. The Latin Church appears to have initially accepted the canons of this council as evidenced to one of them being cited by a Roman legate during the Council of Chalcedon and all extant sources include these canons.

===Chalcedon (451)===
Rome&#x27;s Tome of Leo (449) was highly regarded and formed the basis for the Council of Chalcedon formulation. But it was not universally accepted and was even called &quot;impious&quot; and &quot;blasphemous&quot; by those who condemned the council that approved and accepted it. The next ecumenical council corrected a possible imbalance in Pope Leo&#x27;s presentation. Although the Bishop of Rome was well respected even at this early date, the East holds that the concept of the primacy of the Roman See and Papal Infallibility were only developed much later.

The disputed canon 28 of the Council of Chalcedon in 451, confirming the authority already held by Constantinople, granted its archbishop jurisdiction over Pontus and Thrace.

The council also ratified an agreement between Antioch and Jerusalem, whereby Jerusalem held jurisdiction over three provinces, numbering it among the five great sees. As thus interpreted, there were now five patriarchs presiding over the Church within the Byzantine Empire, in the following order of precedence: the Patriarch of Rome, the Patriarch of Constantinople, the Patriarch of Alexandria, the Patriarch of Antioch and the Patriarch of Jerusalem.

Although Leo I, whose delegates were absent when this resolution was passed, recognized the council as ecumenical and confirmed its doctrinal decrees, he rejected its canon 28 on the ground that it contravened the sixth canon of Nicaea and infringed the rights of Alexandria and Antioch.

This canon would remain a constant source of friction between East and West until the mutual excommunications of 1054 made it irrelevant in that regard; but controversy about its applicability to the authority of the patriarchate of Constantinople still continues.

The same disputed canon also recognized the authority of Constantinople over bishops of dioceses &quot;among the barbarians&quot;, which has been variously interpreted as referring either to all areas outside the Byzantine Empire or only to those in the vicinity of Pontus, Asia and Thrace or to non-Greeks within the empire.

Canon 9 of the Council also declared: &quot;If a bishop or clergyman should have a difference with the metropolitan of the province, let him have recourse to the Exarch of the Diocese, or to the throne of the Imperial City of Constantinople, and there let it be tried.&quot; This has been interpreted as conferring on the see of Constantinople a greater privilege than what any council ever gave Rome, or as of much lesser significance than that.

===Separation of the West from the Roman Empire===

In 476, when the last emperor of the western part of the Roman Empire was deposed and the western imperial insignia were sent to Constantinople, there was once again a single Roman Emperor. However, he had little power in the West, which was ruled almost entirely by various Germanic tribes. In the opinion of Randall R. Cloud, the permanent separation of the Greek East from the Latin West was &quot;the fundamental reason for the estrangement that soon followed between the Greek and the Latin Christians&quot;.

The dominant language of the West was Latin, while that of the East was Greek. Soon after the fall of the West to invaders, the number of individuals who spoke both languages dwindled, and communication between East and West grew much more difficult. With linguistic unity gone, cultural unity began to crumble as well. The two halves of the Church were naturally divided along similar lines; they developed different rites and had different approaches to religious doctrines. Although the schism was still centuries away, its outlines were already perceptible.

In the areas under his control, Justinian I established caesaropapism as the constitution of the Church in a scheme according to which the emperor &quot;had the right and duty of regulating by his laws the minutest detail of worship and discipline, and also of dictating the theological opinions to be held in the Church&quot;. According to the &quot;Westminster Dictionary of Theological Terms&quot;, this caesaropapism was &quot;a source of contention between Rome and Constantinople that led to the schism of 1054&quot;. Explicit approval of the emperor in Constantinople was required for consecration of bishops within the empire. During the period called the Byzantine Papacy, this applied to the bishops of Rome, most of whom were of Greek or Syrian origin. Resentment in the West against the Byzantine emperor&#x27;s governance of the Church is shown as far back as the 6th century, when &quot;the tolerance of the Arian Gothic king was preferred to the caesaropapist claims of Constantinople&quot;. The origins of the distinct attitudes in West and East are sometimes traced back even to Augustine of Hippo, who &quot;saw the relationship between church and state as one of tension between the &#x27;city of God&#x27; and the &#x27;city of the world&#x27;&quot;, and Eusebius, who &quot;saw the state as the protector of the church and the emperor as God&#x27;s vicar on earth&quot;.

===Decline of three patriarchates===
By 661, Muslim Arabs had taken over the territories assigned to the patriarchates of Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem, which thereafter were never more than partially and temporarily recovered. In 732, Emperor Leo III the Isaurian, in revenge for the opposition of Pope Gregory III to the emperor&#x27;s iconoclast policies, transferred Sicily, Calabria and Illyria from the patriarchate of Rome (whose jurisdiction until then extended as far east as Thessalonica) to that of Constantinople. The Constantinople Patriarchate, after expanding eastward at the time of the Council of Chalcedon to take in Pontus and the Roman province of Asia, which at that time were still under the emperor&#x27;s control, thus expanded equally to the west and was practically coextensive with the Byzantine Empire.

===Council in Trullo (Quinisext, 692)===
The West&#x27;s rejection of the Quinisext Council of 692 led to pressure from the Eastern Empire on the West to reject many Latin customs as non-Orthodox. The Latin practices that had got the attention of the other Patriarchates and that had been condemned by this Council included the practice of celebrating Mass on weekdays in Lent (rather than having Pre-Sanctified Liturgies); fasting on Saturdays throughout the year; omitting the &quot;Alleluia&quot; in Lent; depicting Christ as a lamb; using unleavened bread.

Larger disputes were revealed regarding Eastern and Western attitudes toward celibacy for priests and deacons, with the Council affirming the right of married men to become priests (though forbidding priests to marry and forbidding bishops to live with their wives) and prescribing deposition for anyone who attempted to separate a clergyman other than a bishop from his wife, or for any cleric other than a bishop who dismissed his wife.

Pope Sergius I, who was of Syrian ancestry, rejected the council. Emperor Justinian II ordered his arrest, but this was thwarted.

In 694, in Visigothic Spain, the council was ratified by the Eighteenth Council of Toledo at the urging of the king, Wittiza. Fruela I of Asturias reversed the decision of Toledo sometime during his reign (757–768).

===Papal supremacy and Pentarchy===

The primary causes of the schism were disputes over conflicting claims of jurisdiction, in particular over papal authority—Pope Leo IX claimed he held authority over the four Eastern patriarchs—and over the insertion of the Filioque clause into the Nicene Creed by the Western patriarch in 1014. Eastern Orthodox today state that Council of Chalcedon canon 28 explicitly proclaimed the equality of the Bishops of Rome and Constantinople and that it established the highest court of ecclesiastical appeal in Constantinople. Council of Ephesus canon 7 declared:
Eastern Orthodox today state that this canon of the Council of Ephesus explicitly prohibited modification of the Nicene Creed drawn up by the first Ecumenical Council in 325, the wording of which, it is claimed, but not the substance, had been modified by the second Ecumenical Council, making additions such as &quot;who proceeds from the Father&quot;.

Eastern Orthodox argue that the First Council of Ephesus canon 7 explicitly prohibited modification of the Nicene Creed by any man (not by ecumenical church council) drawn up by the first Ecumenical Council in 325. In reality, the Council made no exception for an ecumenical council or any other body of bishops, and the Greeks participating in the Council of Florence emphatically denied that even an ecumenical council had the power to add anything to the creed.

The creed quoted in the Acts of the Council of Ephesus of 431 (the third ecumenical council) is that of the first ecumenical council without the modifications that the second ecumenical council, held in Constantinople in 381, is understood to have made to it, such as the addition of &quot;who proceeds from the Father&quot;. Eastern Orthodox theologians state this change of the wording of the churches&#x27; original creed was done to address various teachings outside of the church—specifically, that of Macedonius I of Constantinople, which the council claimed was a distortion of the church&#x27;s teaching on the Holy Spirit. This was not a change of the orthodoxy of the churches&#x27; original creed.

Thus the word in the seventh canon of the later Council of Ephesus is understood as meaning &quot;different&quot; or &quot;contradictory&quot; and not &quot;another&quot; in the sense of mere explanatory additions to the already existing creed. Some scholars hold that the additions attributed to the First Council of Constantinople were adopted only with the 451 Council of Chalcedon, 20 years after that of Ephesus, and even that the Council of Ephesus, in which Alexandrian influence was dominant, was by this canon excluding the Constantinopolitan Creed, which eventually annexed the name and fame of the creed adopted at Nicaea.

===Filioque and primacy issues (867–879)===
Three councils were held, two by Constantinople, one by Rome. Rome attempted to replace a seated Patriarch with one amenable to the Filioque dispute. The Orthodox responded by denouncing the replacement and excommunicating the pope convening the Roman council, denouncing the pope&#x27;s attempt to control affairs outside the purview of Rome, and denouncing the addition of Filioque as a heresy. Each church recognizes its own council(s) as legitimate and does not recognize the other&#x27;s council(s).

===Mutual excommunication of 1054===

In 1053 Leo of Ohrid, at the instigation, according to J. B. Bury, of Patriarch Michael Cerularius of Constantinople, wrote to Bishop John of Trani a letter, intended for all the Latin bishops, including the pope, in which he attacked Western practices such as using unleavened bread for the Eucharist, and fasting rules that differed from those in Constantinople, while Cerularius himself closed all Latin churches in Constantinople.

In response, Leo IX wrote the letter &quot;In terra pax&quot; of 2 September 1053, addressed to Cerularius and Leo of Ohrid, in which he speaks at length of the privileges granted through Saint Peter to the see of Rome. In one of the 41 sections of his letter he also speaks of privileges granted by the emperors, quoting from the &quot;Donation of Constantine&quot; document, which he believed to be genuine (section 20). Some scholars say that this letter was never actually dispatched, but was set aside and that the papal reply actually sent was the softer but still harsh letter &quot;Scripta tuae&quot; of January 1054.

The advance of the Norman conquest of southern Italy constituted a threat to the possessions of both the Byzantine Empire and the papacy, each of which sought the support of the other. Accordingly, conciliatory letters, the texts of which have not been preserved, were written to the pope by the emperor and Cerularius. In his January 1054 reply to the emperor, &quot;Quantas gratias&quot;, Leo IX asks for his assistance against the Normans and complains of what the pope saw as Caerularius&#x27;s arrogance. In his reply to Caerularius, he upbraided the patriarch for trying to subject the patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch to himself and for adopting the title of Ecumenical Patriarch and insisted on the primacy of the see of Rome.
These two letters were entrusted to a delegation of three legates, headed by the undiplomatic cardinal Humbert of Silva Candida, and also including Frederick of Lorraine, who was papal secretary and Cardinal-Deacon of Santa Maria in Domnica, and Peter, Archbishop of Amalfi. They were given friendship and support by the emperor but were spurned by the patriarch. Finally, on 16 July 1054, three months after Pope Leo&#x27;s death in April 1054 and nine months before the next pope took office, they laid on the altar of Hagia Sophia, which was prepared for the celebration of the Divine Liturgy, a bull of excommunication of Cerularius and his supporters. At a synod held on 20 July 1054, Cerularius in turn excommunicated the legates. In reality, only Michael may have been excommunicated along with his then-living adherents.

===East and West since 1054===
There was no single event that marked the breakdown. Rather, the two churches slid into and out of schism over a period of several centuries, punctuated with temporary reconciliations. Efforts were made in subsequent centuries by emperors, popes and patriarchs to heal the rift between the churches. However, a number of factors and historical events worked to widen the separation over time. It is estimated that in 1054, a slim majority of Christians worldwide were Eastern Christians; most of the rest were Western Christians. Few of these would have noticed any difference as noted by Timothy Ware: &quot;Even after 1054 friendly relations between East and West continued. The two parts of Christendom were not yet conscious of a great gulf of separation between them. ... The dispute remained something of which ordinary Christians in East and West were largely unaware&quot;.

At the time of the excommunications, many contemporary historians, including Byzantine chroniclers, did not consider the event significant. Relations continued as usual, for instance endownments made towards churches in the East such as the Holy Sepulchre were kept in place and Pope Gregory VII confirmed the proprietorship of the Patriarch of Jerusalem over a church in Le Marche in the Pyrenees. 

When Emperor Alexios Komnenos asked in the 1080s whether a canonical decision had been made to break relations with Rome, the participants of the synod of Constantinople said no. Interactions in the 12th century between the Latin crusaders and the indigenous population show that rather than the former considering the latter as heretics or schismatics, they incorporated local hierarchies into their own.

===Sectarian tensions in the Byzantine Empire in the 11th–12th centuries===
Starting from the late 11th century, the dependency of the Byzantine Empire on the navies of the Republic of Venice and, to a lesser extent, the Republic of Genoa and the Republic of Pisa, led to the predominance of Catholic merchants in Byzantium—which had received major trading concessions since the 1080s—subsequently causing economic and social upheaval. Together with the perceived arrogance of the Italians, it fueled popular resentment amongst the middle and lower classes both in the countryside and in the cities.

By the second half of the 12th century, the practically uncontrollable rivalry among competitors from the different city-states devolved to the point that Italians were raiding the quarters of other Italians in the capital, and retaliatory draconian measures by the Byzantine authorities led to the deterioration of inter-religious relations in the city.

When in 1182 the regency of the empress mother, Maria of Antioch, an ethnic French notorious for the favouritism shown to Latin merchants and the big aristocratic land-owners, was deposed by Andronikos I Komnenos in the wake of popular support, the new emperor allowed mobs to massacre the hated foreigners. Henceforth Byzantine foreign policy was invariably perceived as sinister and anti-Latin in the West. Byzantine theologian Theodore Balsamon wrote in 1190 that no Latin should be given sacraments unless he first declares that he will abstain from Latin dogmas and customs and conform to Eastern practices. However, he was still criticized for excessive harshness by contemporaries such as Archbishop Demetrios Chomatenos, who pointed out that Latins had not been condemned as heretics and were not in complete schism, although he did not state whether Latins should be given Communion or vice versa.

===Fourth Crusade (1204) and other military conflicts===
Motivated in part by lingering resentment over the massacre of the Latins in Constantinople 22 years earlier, ill-fated dynamics in the organization of the crusade (originally intended to recapture Jerusalem), and Alexios Angelos&#x27; request that his father&#x27;s rule be reestablished in Constantinople, the fourth crusader army arrived in Constantinople in April of 1203. Latin crusaders and Venetian merchants sacked Constantinople itself (1204), looting the Church of Holy Wisdom and various other Orthodox holy sites, and converting them to Latin Catholic worship. The Norman Crusaders also destroyed the Imperial Library of Constantinople. Various holy artifacts from these Orthodox holy places were taken to the West. The crusaders also appointed a Latin Patriarch of Constantinople. The conquest of Constantinople and the final treaty established the Latin Empire of the East and the Latin Patriarch of Constantinople (with various other Crusader states). Later some religious artifacts were sold in Europe to finance or fund the Latin Empire in Byzantium – as when Emperor Baldwin II of Constantinople () sold the relic of the Crown of Thorns while in France trying to raise new funds to maintain his hold on Byzantium. In 1261 the Byzantine emperor, Michael VIII Palaiologos brought the Latin Empire to an end. However, the Western attack on the heart of the Byzantine Empire is seen as a factor that led eventually to its conquest by Ottoman Muslims in the 15th century. Many scholars believe that the 1204 sacking of Constantinople contributed more to the schism than the events of 1054.

In northern Europe, the Teutonic Knights, after their 12th- and 13th-century successes in the Northern Crusades, attempted (1240) to conquer the Eastern Orthodox Russian Republics of Pskov and Novgorod, an enterprise somewhat endorsed by Pope Gregory IX (). One of the major defeats the Teutonic Knights suffered was the Battle of the Ice in 1242. Catholic Sweden also undertook several campaigns against Orthodox Novgorod. There were also conflicts between Catholic Poland and Orthodox Russia, which helped solidify the schism between East and West.

===Second Council of Lyon (1272)===
The Second Council of Lyon was convoked to act on a pledge by Michael VIII to reunite the Eastern church with the West. Wishing to end the Great Schism that divided Rome and Constantinople, Gregory X had sent an embassy to Michael VIII, who had reconquered Constantinople, putting an end to the remnants of the Latin Empire in the East, and he asked Latin despots in the East to curb their ambitions.

On 29 June (the Feast of Saints Peter and Paul, a patronal feast of the Popes), Gregory X celebrated a Mass in St John&#x27;s Church, where both sides took part. The council declared that the Roman church possessed &quot;the supreme and full primacy and authority over the universal Catholic Church.&quot;

The union effected was &quot;a sham and a political gambit&quot;, a fiction maintained by the emperor to prevent westerners from recovering the city of Constantinople, which they had lost just over a decade before, in 1261. It was fiercely opposed by clergy and people and never put into effect, in spite of a sustained campaign by Patriarch John XI of Constantinople (John Bekkos), a convert to the cause of union, to defend the union intellectually, and vigorous and brutal repression of opponents by Michael. In 1278 Pope Nicholas III, learning of the fictitious character of Greek conformity, sent legates to Constantinople, demanding the personal submission of every Orthodox cleric and adoption of the &quot;Filioque&quot;, as already the Greek delegates at Lyon had been required to recite the Creed with the inclusion of &quot;Filioque&quot; and to repeat it two more times. Emperor Michael&#x27;s attempts to resolve the schism ended when Pope Martin IV, seeing that the union was only a sham, excommunicated Michael VIII in 1281 in support of Charles of Anjou&#x27;s attempts to mount a new campaign to retake the Eastern Roman provinces lost to Michael. Michael VIII&#x27;s son and successor Andronicus II repudiated the union, and Bekkos was forced to abdicate, being eventually exiled and imprisoned until his death in 1297.

===Council of Ferrara–Florence (1439)===

In the 15th century, the eastern emperor John VIII Palaiologos, pressed hard by the Ottoman Turks, was keen to ally himself with the West, and to do so he arranged with Pope Eugene IV for discussions about the reunion to be held again, this time at the Council of Ferrara-Florence. After several long discussions, the emperor managed to convince the Eastern representatives to accept the Western doctrines of Filioque, Purgatory and the supremacy of the Papacy. On 6 June 1439, an agreement was signed by all the Eastern bishops present but one, Mark of Ephesus, who held that Rome continued in both heresy and schism. It seemed that the Great Schism had been ended. However, upon their return, the Eastern bishops found their agreement with the West broadly rejected by the populace and by civil authorities (with the notable exception of the Emperors of the East who remained committed to union until the Fall of Constantinople two decades later). The union signed at Florence has never been accepted by the Eastern churches.

===Fall of Constantinople (1453) and thereafter===
At the time of the Fall of Constantinople to the invading Ottoman Empire in May 1453, Orthodox Christianity was already entrenched in Russia, whose political and de facto religious centre had shifted from Kyiv to Moscow. The Russian Church, a part of the Church of Constantinople until the mid-15th century, was granted full independence (autocephaly) and elevated to the rank of Patriarchate in 1589. The Russian political and ecclesiastical elite came to view Moscow as the Third Rome, a legitimate heir to Constantinople and Byzantium.

Under Ottoman rule, the Orthodox Church acquired the status of an autonomous millet, specifically the Rum Millet. The Ecumenical Patriarch became the ruler (millet başı) of all the Orthodox Christian subjects of the empire, including non-Greeks. Upon conquering Constantinople, Mehmed II assumed the legal function of the Byzantine emperors and appointed Patriarch Gennadius II. The sultans enhanced the temporal powers of the Greek orthodox hierarchy that came to be politically beholden solely to the Ottoman sultan and, along with other Ottoman Greek nobles, came to run the Balkan Orthodox domains of the Ottoman Empire.
In Russia, the anti-Catholic sentiments came to be entrenched by the Polish intervention during the Time of Troubles in the early 17th century, which was seen as an attempt to convert Moscow to Catholicism. The modern Russian national holiday, Unity Day, was established on the day of church celebration in honour of the Our Lady of Kazan icon, which is believed to have miraculously saved Moscow from outright Polish conquest in 1612. Patriarch Hermogenes of Moscow was executed by the Poles and their supporters during this period (see also Polish–Lithuanian–Muscovite Commonwealth).

In the 16th and 17th centuries, there were various attempts at unions between the Roman Church and various groups within Eastern Orthodoxy.
The final separation between the Catholic Church on one hand and the Eastern Orthodox Churches on the other came only in the 18th century:
in 1729, the Roman Church under Pope Benedict XIII prohibited communion with Orthodox Churches, and in 1755, the patriarchs of Alexandria, Jerusalem and Constantinople in retaliation declared the final interruption of sacral communion with the Roman Church and declared Catholicism heretical.

===First Vatican Council (1870)===
The doctrine of papal primacy was further developed at the First Vatican Council, which declared that &quot;in the disposition of God the Roman church holds the preeminence of ordinary power over all the other churches&quot;. This council also affirmed the dogma of papal infallibility, declaring that the infallibility of the Christian community extends to the pope himself when he defines a doctrine concerning faith or morals to be held by the whole Church. This new dogma, as well as the dogma of the Immaculate Conception, promulgated in &quot;Ineffabilis Deus&quot; a few years prior, are unequivocally rejected by the Eastern Church as heretical.

===Nullification of mutual anathemas (1965)===
A major event of the Second Vatican Council (Vatican II), was the issuance by Pope Paul VI and Orthodox Patriarch Athenagoras I of Constantinople of the Catholic–Orthodox Joint Declaration of 1965. At the same time, they lifted the mutual excommunications dating from the 11th century. The act did not result in the restoration of communion.

==Eastern Catholic Churches==
The Eastern Catholic Churches, historically referred to as &quot;uniate&quot; by the Orthodox, consider themselves to have reconciled the East and West Schism by having accepted the primacy of the Bishop of Rome while retaining some of the canonical rules and liturgical practices in line with the Eastern tradition such as the Byzantine Rite that is prevalent in the Orthodox Churches. Some Eastern Orthodox charge that joining in this unity comes at the expense of ignoring critical doctrinal differences and past atrocities.

There have been periodic conflicts between the Orthodox and Eastern Catholics in Ukraine and Belarus, then under Polish rule, and later also in Transylvania (see the Romanian Greek Catholic Church United with Rome). Pressure and government-sponsored reprisals were used against Eastern Catholic Churches such as the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church in the Russian Empire and later in the Soviet Union. Since the late 1980s, the Moscow Patriarchate (the Russian Orthodox Church) has criticised the methods of restoration of the &quot;uniate&quot; church structures in Ukraine as well as what it called Catholic proselytism in Russia.

In 1993, a report written by the Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue Between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church during its 7th plenary session at the Balamand School of Theology in Lebanon stated: &quot;Because of the way in which Catholics and Orthodox once again consider each other in their relationship to the mystery of the Church and discover each other once again as Sister Churches, this form of &#x27;missionary apostolate&#x27; described above, and which has been called &#x27;uniatism&#x27;, can no longer be accepted either as a method to be followed nor as a model of the unity our Churches are seeking&quot;. At the same time, the document inter alia stated:
* Concerning the Oriental Catholic Churches, it is clear that they, as part of the Catholic Communion, have the right to exist and to act in answer to the spiritual needs of their faithful.
* The Oriental Catholic Churches who have desired to re-establish full communion with the See of Rome and have remained faithful to it, have the rights and obligations which are connected with this communion. The principles determining their attitude towards Orthodox Churches are those which have been stated by the Second Vatican Council and have been put into practice by the Popes who have clarified the practical consequences flowing from these principles in various documents published since then. These Churches, then, should be inserted, on both local and universal levels, into the dialogue of love, in mutual respect and reciprocal trust found once again, and enter into the theological dialogue, with all its practical implications.

In February 2016, Pope Francis and Patriarch Kirill of the Russian Orthodox Church (ROC), had a meeting in Cuba and signed a joint declaration that stated inter alia: &quot;It is our hope that our meeting may also contribute to reconciliation wherever tensions exist between Greek Catholics and Orthodox. It is today clear that the past method of &#x27;uniatism&#x27;, understood as the union of one community to the other, separating it from its Church, is not the way to re-establish unity. Nonetheless, the ecclesial communities which emerged in these historical circumstances have the right to exist and to undertake all that is necessary to meet the spiritual needs of their faithful, while seeking to live in peace with their neighbours. Orthodox and Greek Catholics are in need of reconciliation and of mutually acceptable forms of co-existence.&quot; Meanwhile, in the interview published on the eve of the meeting in Cuba, Metropolitan Hilarion Alfeyev, the chairman of the Department of External Church Relations and a permanent member of the Holy Synod of the ROC, said that tensions between the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church and the ROC&#x27;s Ukrainian Orthodox Church had been recently heightened mainly due to the Russo-Ukrainian war. The declaration was sharply criticised by Sviatoslav Shevchuk, the Primate of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, who said that his flock felt &quot;betrayed&quot; by the Vatican.

==Recent efforts at reconciliation==

===Joint Theological Commission===
Inspired by Vatican II that adopted the &quot;Unitatis Redintegratio&quot; decree on ecumenism in 1964 as well as the change of heart toward Ecumenism on the part of the Moscow Patriarchate that had occurred in 1961, the Vatican and 14 universally recognised autocephalous Orthodox Churches established the Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue Between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church that first met in Rhodes in 1980 and is an ongoing endeavour.

===Other moves toward reconciliation===
On a number of occasions, Pope John Paul II recited the Nicene Creed with patriarchs of the Eastern Orthodox Church in Greek according to the original text. Both he and his successor, Pope Benedict XVI, have recited the Nicene Creed jointly with Patriarchs Demetrius I and Bartholomew I in Greek without the &quot;Filioque&quot; clause, &quot;according to the usage of the Byzantine Churches&quot;. This accords with the Catholic Church&#x27;s practice of including the clause when reciting the Creed in Latin, but not when reciting it in Greek.

In June 1995, Patriarch Bartholomew I, of Constantinople, visited Vatican City for the first time, and joined in the historic inter-religious day of prayer for peace at Assisi. John Paul II and Bartholomew I explicitly stated their mutual &quot;desire to relegate the excommunications of the past to oblivion and to set out on the way to re-establishing full communion&quot;.
In May 1999, John Paul II was the first pope since the Great Schism to visit an Eastern Orthodox country: Romania. Upon greeting John Paul II, the Romanian Patriarch Teoctist stated: &quot;The second millennium of Christian history began with a painful wounding of the unity of the Church; the end of this millennium has seen a real commitment to restoring Christian unity.&quot; John Paul II visited other heavily Orthodox areas such as Ukraine, despite lack of welcome at times, and he said that healing the divisions between Western and Eastern Christianity was one of his fondest wishes.

In June 2004, Bartholomew I&#x27;s visit to Rome for the Feast of Saints Peter and Paul (29 June) afforded him the opportunity for another personal meeting with John Paul II, for conversations with the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity and for taking part in the celebration for the feast day in St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica.

The Patriarch&#x27;s partial participation in the Eucharistic liturgy at which the Pope presided followed the program of the past visits of Patriarch Dimitrios (1987) and Patriarch Bartholomew I himself: full participation in the Liturgy of the Word, a joint proclamation by the Pope and by the Patriarch of the profession of faith according to the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed in Greek and as the conclusion, the final Blessing imparted by both the Pope and the Patriarch at the Altar of the Confessio. The Patriarch did not fully participate in the Liturgy of the Eucharist involving the consecration and distribution of the Eucharist itself.

==Prospects for reconciliation==

Despite efforts on the part of Catholic popes and Orthodox patriarchs to heal the schism, only limited progress towards reconciliation has been made over the last half-century. One stumbling block is the fact that the Orthodox and the Catholics have different perceptions of the nature of the divide. The official Catholic teaching is that the Orthodox are schismatic, meaning that there is nothing heretical about their theology, and their unwillingness to accept the supremacy of the Pope is presented in Catholic teaching as chiefly an ecclesiological issue, not so much a theological one. The Orthodox object to the Catholic doctrines of purgatory, substitutionary atonement, the immaculate conception, and papal supremacy, among others, as heretical doctrines. With respect to primacy of the pope, the two churches agree that the pope, as Bishop of Rome, has primacy although they continue to have different interpretations of what that primacy entails.

The Catholic Church&#x27;s attitude was expressed by John Paul II in the image of the Church &quot;breathing with her two lungs&quot;. He meant that there should be a combination of the more rational, juridical, organization-minded &quot;Latin&quot; temperament with the intuitive, mystical and contemplative spirit found in the East.

In the Orthodox view, the Bishop of Rome (i.e. the Pope) would have universal primacy in a reunited Christendom, as &quot;primus inter pares&quot; without the power of jurisdiction.

===Ecclesiological reconciliation===

The Eastern Orthodox insist that the primacy is largely one of honor, the Pope being &quot;first among equals&quot; &quot;primus inter pares&quot;. The Catholic Church, on the other hand, insists on the doctrine of supremacy. It is widely understood that, if there is to be reconciliation, both sides will have to compromise on this doctrine. Although some commentators have proposed ways in which such compromise can be achieved, there is no official indication that such compromise is being contemplated.

In his book &quot;Principles of Catholic Theology&quot;, Pope Benedict XVI (then Cardinal Ratzinger) assessed the range of &quot;possibilities that are open to Christian ecumenism.&quot; He characterized the &quot;maximum demand&quot; of the West as the recognition by the East of and submission to the &quot;primacy of the bishop of Rome in the full scope of the definition of 1870...&quot; The &quot;maximum demand&quot; of the East was described as a declaration by the West of the 1870 doctrine of papal primacy as erroneous along with the &quot;removal of the Filioque from the Creed and including the Marian dogmas of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.&quot; Ratzinger asserted that &quot;(n)one of the maximum solutions offers any real hope of unity.&quot; Ratzinger wrote that &quot;Rome must not require more from the East than had been formulated and what was lived in the first millennium.&quot; He concluded that &quot;Reunion could take place in this context if, on the one hand, the East would cease to oppose as heretical the developments that took place in the West in the second millennium and would accept the Catholic Church as legitimate and orthodox in the form she had acquired in the course of that development, while on the other hand, the West would recognize the Church of the East as orthodox in the form she has always had.&quot;

The declaration of Ravenna in 2007 re-asserted the belief that the bishop of Rome is indeed the &quot;protos&quot;, although future discussions are to be held on the concrete ecclesiological exercise of papal primacy.

===Theological reconciliation===

Some scholars such as Jeffrey Finch assert that &quot;the future of East–West rapprochement appears to be overcoming the modern polemics of neo-scholasticism and neo-Palamism&quot;.

These doctrinal issues center around the Orthodox perception that the Catholic theologians lack the actual experience of God called &quot;theoria&quot; and thereby fail to understand the importance of the heart as a noetic or intuitive faculty. It is what they consider to be the Catholic Church&#x27;s reliance on pagan metaphysical philosophy and rational methods such as scholasticism rather than on the intuitive experience of God (theoria) that causes Orthodox to consider the Catholic Church heretical. Other points of doctrinal difference include a difference regarding human nature as well as a difference regarding original sin, purgatory, and the nature of Hell.

One point of theological difference is embodied in the dispute regarding the inclusion of the &quot;Filioque&quot; in the Nicene Creed. In the view of the Catholic Church, what it calls the legitimate complementarity of the expressions &quot;from the Father&quot; and &quot;from the Father and the Son&quot; does not provide it does not become rigid, affect the identity of faith in the reality of the same mystery confessed. The Orthodox, on the other hand, view inclusion of the phrase to be almost heretical (see also the Trinity section).

More importantly, the Orthodox see the Filioque as just the tip of the iceberg and really just a symptom of a much more deeply rooted problem of theology, one so deeply rooted that they consider it to be heretical and even, by some characterizations, an inability to &quot;see God&quot; and know God. This heresy is allegedly rooted in Frankish paganism, Arianism, Platonist and Aristotelian philosophy and Thomist rational and objective Scholasticism. In opposition to what they characterize as pagan, heretical and &quot;godless&quot; foundations, the Orthodox rely on intuitive and mystical knowledge and vision of God (&quot;theoria&quot;) based on hesychasm and . Catholics accept as valid the Eastern Orthodox intuitive and mystical understanding of God and consider it complementary to the rational Western reflection.

====Sacraments====
Most Orthodox Churches through economy do not require baptism in the Orthodox Church for one who has been previously baptized in the Catholic Church. Most Orthodox jurisdictions, based on that same principle of economy, allow a sacramental marriage between an Orthodox Christian and some non-Orthodox Christians.
The Catholic Church allows its clergy to administer the sacraments of Penance, the Eucharist and Anointing of the Sick to members of the Eastern Orthodox Church, if these spontaneously ask for the sacraments and are properly disposed. It also allows Catholics who cannot approach a Catholic minister to receive these three sacraments from the clergy of the Eastern Orthodox Church, whenever necessity requires or a genuine spiritual advantage commends it, and provided the danger of error or indifferentism is avoided. Catholic canon law allows marriage between a Catholic and an Orthodox. The Orthodox Church will only administer the sacraments to Christians who are not Orthodox if there is an emergency.

The Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches authorizes the local Catholic bishop to permit a Catholic priest, of whatever rite, to bless the marriage of Orthodox faithful who being unable without great difficulty to approach a priest of their own Church, ask for this spontaneously. In exceptional circumstances Catholics may, in the absence of an authorized priest, marry before witnesses. If a priest who is not authorized for the celebration of the marriage is available, he should be called in, although the marriage is valid even without his presence. The Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches specifies that, in those exceptional circumstances, even a &quot;non-Catholic&quot; priest (and so not necessarily one belonging to an Eastern Church) may be called in.

===Criticism of reconciliation efforts===

The efforts of Orthodox patriarchs towards reconciliation with the Catholic Church has been strongly criticized by some elements of Eastern Orthodoxy, such as the Metropolitan of Kalavryta, Greece, in November 2008.

In 2010, Patriarch Bartholomew I issued an encyclical lauding the ongoing dialogue between the Orthodox Church and other Christian churches and lamenting that the dialogues between the two churches were being criticized in &quot;an unacceptably fanatical way&quot; by some who claim to be defenders of Orthodoxy despite the fact that these dialogues are being conducted &quot;with the mutual agreement and participation of all local Orthodox Churches&quot;. The Patriarch warned that &quot;such opponents raise themselves above episcopal synods and risk creating schisms&quot;. He further accused some critics of distorting reality to &quot;deceive and arouse the faithful&quot; and of depicting theological dialogue not as a pan-Orthodox effort, but an effort of the Ecumenical Patriarchate alone. As an example, he pointed to &quot;false rumors that union between the Roman Catholic and Orthodox Churches is imminent&quot; claiming that the disseminators of such rumors were fully aware that &quot;the differences discussed in these theological dialogues remain numerous and require lengthy debate&quot;. The Patriarch re-emphasized that &quot;union is not decided by theological commissions but by Church Synods&quot;.

== References ==
===Notes===
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
=== Further reading ===

* Bremer, Thomas &quot;The &quot;West&quot; as the Archetypal Enemy in the Theological and Philosophical Discourse of Orthodox Christianity&quot;, EGO – European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2017, retrieved: March 8, 2021 (pdf).
* Henry Chadwick. &quot;East and West: The Making of a Rift in the Church: From Apostolic Times until the Council of Florence&quot;. Oxford University Press, 2003.
* Chrysostom Frank. &quot;Orthodox–Catholic Relations: An Orthodox Reflection&quot;. 1998
* Joseph P. Farrell. &quot;God, History, &amp; Dialectic: The Theological Foundations of the Two Europes and Their Cultural Consequences&quot;. Bound edition 1997. Electronic edition 2008.
* John Romanides, &quot;The Cure of the Neurobiological Sickness of Religion, the Hellenic Civilization of the Roman Empire, Charlemagne&#x27;s Lie of 794 and His Lie Today&quot;
* Eugene Webb. &quot;In Search of The Triune God: The Christian Paths of East and West&quot;. University of Missouri Press, 2014.

==External links==
* Encyclopædia Britannica: &quot;Schism of 1054&quot;
* Joint Catholic-Orthodox Declaration of Pope Paul VI and Ecumenical Patriarch Athenagoras I, 7 December 1965
* BBC Radio 4 round table: &quot;In Our Time: Schism&quot; (16 October 2003) (audio)
* .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="4" end="20" title="East–West Schism" label="East–West Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="40" end="52" title="East–West Schism" label="Great Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="60" end="74" title="East–West Schism" label="Schism of 1054"/>
<link wikidata="Q378097" start="92" end="101" title="communion (Christian)" label="communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="114" end="129" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="138" end="161" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330364" start="186" end="212" title="Eastern Orthodox – Roman Catholic ecclesiastical differences" label="ecclesiastical differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330366" start="217" end="237" title="Theological differences between the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church" label="theological disputes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601774" start="250" end="275" title="Greek East and Latin West" label="Greek East and Latin West"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="356" end="385" title="procession of the Holy Spirit" label="procession of the Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="398" end="406" title="leavened" label="leavened"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702275" start="410" end="426" title="unleavened bread" label="unleavened bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="449" end="458" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q181543" start="460" end="470" title="iconoclasm" label="iconoclasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="490" end="501" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="505" end="526" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="539" end="543" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132455" start="560" end="582" title="Papal supremacy" label="universal jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q211004" start="605" end="626" title="See of Constantinople" label="See of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q226106" start="646" end="655" title="pentarchy" label="pentarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q68482" start="739" end="759" title="Michael I Cerularius" label="Michael I Cerularius"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="823" end="837" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q740369" start="852" end="864" title="papal legate" label="papal legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58559" start="873" end="879" title="Leo IX" label="Leo IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="976" end="996" title="ecumenical patriarch" label="ecumenical patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="1160" end="1177" title="Byzantine emperor" label="Byzantine emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594" start="1179" end="1204" title="Constantine IX Monomachos" label="Constantine IX Monomachos"/>
<link wikidata="Q74011" start="1221" end="1254" title="Norman conquest of southern Italy" label="Norman conquest of southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308999" start="1274" end="1286" title="Leo of Ohrid" label="Leo of Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1568" end="1575" title="Byzantine Empire" label="eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1580" end="1595" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="western empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="1608" end="1615" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q68335" start="1690" end="1714" title="Humbert of Silva Candida" label="Humbert of Silva Candida"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="1716" end="1722" title="O.S.B." label="O.S.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q25210856" start="1785" end="1799" title="Excommunication (Catholic Church)" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="1832" end="1846" title="excommunicated" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="2543" end="2549" title="Heresy in Christianity" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="2696" end="2704" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246569" start="2794" end="2816" title="Massacre of the Latins" label="Massacre of the Latins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154485" start="2915" end="2946" title="Sack of Thessalonica (1185)" label="Sacking of Thessalonica in 1185"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750892" start="2952" end="2991" title="Siege of Constantinople (1204)" label="capture and pillaging of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="3003" end="3017" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3049" end="3065" title="Patriarch#Other historical Latin patriarchates" label="Latin patriarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="3104" end="3109" title="Latin Church" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="3129" end="3144" title="Crusader states" label="Crusader states"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="3346" end="3358" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q68359" start="3384" end="3397" title="Athenagoras I" label="Athenagoras I"/>
<link wikidata="Q211517" start="3412" end="3420" title="anathema" label="anathema"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="3901" end="3918" title="Oriental Orthodox" label="Oriental Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="3936" end="3954" title="Church of the East" label="Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="4000" end="4019" title="Old Catholic Church" label="Old Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q153043" start="4205" end="4226" title="Feast of Saints Peter and Paul" label="Saints Peter and Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="4241" end="4245" title="Holy See" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q152662" start="4250" end="4262" title="Feast of Saint Andrew" label="Saint Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q741240" start="4694" end="4717" title="Nectarios of Pentapolis" label="Nectarios of Pentapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q321032" start="4742" end="4761" title="Council of Florence" label="Council of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q457939" start="4802" end="4818" title="Jaroslav Pelikan" label="Jaroslav Pelikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294384" start="5936" end="5963" title="Eastern Orthodox theologian" label="Eastern Orthodox theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q190240" start="6574" end="6581" title="Cyprian" label="Cyprian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6598" end="6615" title="Nicholas Afansiev" label="Nicholas Afansiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750381" start="6855" end="6885" title="Clerical celibacy (Catholic Church)" label="celibacy among Western priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="7673" end="7682" title="eucharist" label="eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="7819" end="7830" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="7915" end="7923" title="Eusebius of Caesarea" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q189854" start="8122" end="8135" title="Metropolitan bishop" label="metropolitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="8137" end="8148" title="archbishops" label="archbishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q171692" start="8152" end="8161" title="patriarch" label="patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751358" start="9146" end="9158" title="collegiality" label="collegiality"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="9233" end="9244" title="Confederation" label="confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="9264" end="9269" title="synod" label="synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q353956" start="9783" end="9797" title="Henri de Lubac" label="Henri de Lubac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="9972" end="9988" title="Joseph Ratzinger" label="Joseph Ratzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="10063" end="10085" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q649263" start="10967" end="11003" title="Papal primacy" label="primacy of Roman and papal authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q275016" start="11259" end="11284" title="Papal infallibility" label="pope&amp;#x27;s infallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q311547" start="12558" end="12569" title="catholicity" label="catholicity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12609" end="12618" title="Religious text#Christianity" label="Scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055765" start="12647" end="12661" title="Holy Tradition" label="Holy Tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="12732" end="12735" title="Episcopal see" label="see"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="12950" end="12957" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q181543" start="13033" end="13043" title="iconoclasm" label="iconoclast"/>
<link wikidata="Q31755" start="13094" end="13114" title="Leo III the Isaurian" label="Leo III the Isaurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q187201" start="13204" end="13228" title="Second Council of Nicaea" label="Second Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417553" start="13296" end="13310" title="Libri Carolini" label="Libri Carolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="13328" end="13339" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q103292" start="13453" end="13466" title="Pope Adrian I" label="Pope Adrian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q649263" start="13940" end="13959" title="Papal primacy" label="primacy of the Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="14477" end="14484" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q965165" start="14540" end="14554" title="John Romanides" label="John Romanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="14742" end="14756" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="14862" end="14893" title="Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed" label="Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="15099" end="15117" title="Oriental Orthodoxy" label="Oriental Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q203179" start="15133" end="15160" title="Assyrian Church of the East" label="Assyrian Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="15390" end="15405" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="15410" end="15421" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="15429" end="15448" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q179826" start="15634" end="15665" title="First Council of Constantinople" label="First Council of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q730757" start="15863" end="15873" title="Roman Rite" label="Roman Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="15877" end="15889" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q862543" start="15909" end="15942" title="Fourth Council of Constantinople (Eastern Orthodox)" label="879–880 Council of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q243187" start="16219" end="16246" title="Photios I of Constantinople" label="Photios I of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q738727" start="16248" end="16263" title="Mark of Ephesus" label="Mark of Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q243787" start="16269" end="16284" title="Gregory Palamas" label="Gregory Palamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292798" start="16579" end="16594" title="Vladimir Lossky" label="Vladimir Lossky"/>
<link wikidata="Q856561" start="16718" end="16728" title="modalism" label="modalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293300" start="16801" end="16810" title="Sabellianism" label="Sabellian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4371647" start="16847" end="16865" title="Michael Pomazansky" label="Michael Pomazansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722505" start="17193" end="17207" title="Kallistos Ware" label="Kallistos Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q965165" start="17751" end="17760" title="John Romanides" label="Romanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q12729995" start="17778" end="17788" title="Hierotheos (Vlachos)" label="Hierotheos"/>
<link wikidata="Q782278" start="17792" end="17801" title="Nafpaktos" label="Nafpaktos"/>
<link wikidata="Q629589" start="17920" end="17929" title="hesychasm" label="hesychasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q384263" start="17966" end="17985" title="Barlaam of Seminara" label="Barlaam of Seminara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294384" start="18045" end="18070" title="Eastern Orthodox theology" label="Eastern Orthodox theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q835041" start="18398" end="18402" title="nous" label="nous"/>
<link wikidata="Q647582" start="18495" end="18514" title="prayer of the heart" label="prayer of the heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="18553" end="18560" title="ascetic" label="ascetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338290" start="18661" end="18667" title="nepsis" label="nepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="18998" end="19004" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q835041" start="19241" end="19247" title="Nous" label="noetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551089" start="19355" end="19370" title="systematization" label="systematization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791388" start="19616" end="19624" title="sobriety" label="sobriety"/>
<link wikidata="Q5746591" start="19810" end="19831" title="Hesychasm controversy" label="Hesychasm controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399472" start="20343" end="20371" title="Essence-Energies distinction" label="Essence-Energies distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="20701" end="20710" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184186" start="20730" end="20742" title="original sin" label="original sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752573" start="20766" end="20779" title="ancestral sin" label="ancestral sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456261" start="20912" end="20924" title="traducianism" label="traducianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430216" start="20937" end="20948" title="creationism (soul)" label="creationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="21115" end="21128" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="21133" end="21144" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q984098" start="21260" end="21277" title="Christos Yannaras" label="Christos Yannaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q205227" start="21559" end="21591" title="Second Council of Constantinople" label="Second Council of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="21666" end="21690" title="Athanasius of Alexandria" label="Athanasius of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44344" start="21692" end="21710" title="Hilary of Poitiers" label="Hilary of Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q44258" start="21712" end="21729" title="Basil of Caesarea" label="Basil of Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q44011" start="21731" end="21751" title="Gregory of Nazianzus" label="Gregory of Nazianzus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191734" start="21753" end="21769" title="Gregory of Nyssa" label="Gregory of Nyssa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43689" start="21771" end="21782" title="St. Ambrose" label="St. Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q43706" start="21796" end="21811" title="John Chrysostom" label="John Chrysostom"/>
<link wikidata="Q44079" start="21813" end="21832" title="Cyril of Alexandria" label="Cyril of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43954" start="21838" end="21856" title="Pope Leo the Great" label="Pope Leo the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q859557" start="22042" end="22051" title="Modernist Christianity" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="22331" end="22343" title="Adam and Eve" label="Adam and Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q185606" start="24028" end="24049" title="Immaculate Conception" label="Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="24087" end="24098" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="24179" end="24186" title="Pius IX" label="Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q10951" start="24511" end="24533" title="Second Council of Lyon" label="Second Council of Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362561" start="25870" end="25887" title="aerial toll house" label="aerial toll house"/>
<link wikidata="Q927368" start="26156" end="26165" title="Dositheos II of Jerusalem" label="Dositheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="27602" end="27618" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44405" start="27625" end="27634" title="theocracy" label="theocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273665" start="28275" end="28288" title="caesaropapism" label="caesaropapism"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="28627" end="28643" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="Muslim conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="28942" end="28953" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760625" start="29014" end="29040" title="pseudo-Isidorian Decretals" label="pseudo-Isidorian Decretals"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="29306" end="29323" title="Patriarch of Rome" label="Patriarch of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="29396" end="29404" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47144" start="29438" end="29448" title="Pope Linus" label="Pope Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80450" start="29481" end="29492" title="Pope Cletus" label="Pope Cletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q865026" start="30096" end="30113" title="bishop of Antioch" label="bishop of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q709251" start="30154" end="30161" title="Saint Evodius" label="Evodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q44170" start="30166" end="30174" title="Ignatius of Antioch" label="Ignatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543393" start="30330" end="30361" title="first seven Ecumenical Councils" label="first seven Ecumenical Councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562510" start="30864" end="30877" title="Quartodeciman" label="Quartodeciman"/>
<link wikidata="Q127989" start="30905" end="30919" title="Pope Victor I" label="Victor of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q130997" start="31121" end="31135" title="Pope Damasus I" label="Pope Damasus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q415434" start="31310" end="31324" title="Acacian Schism" label="Acacian Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813712" start="31414" end="31428" title="Photian schism" label="Photian schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="31855" end="31863" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669578" start="32028" end="32037" title="Roman province of Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329856" start="32042" end="32048" title="Diocese of Pontus" label="Pontus"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="32101" end="32109" title="Eusebius" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q772373" start="33035" end="33045" title="School of Antioch" label="Antiochian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470799" start="33053" end="33064" title="Catechetical School of Alexandria" label="Alexandrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44079" start="33381" end="33386" title="Cyril of Alexandria" label="Cyril"/>
<link wikidata="Q160922" start="33429" end="33445" title="Pope Celestine I" label="Pope Celestine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q185073" start="33514" end="33523" title="Nestorius" label="Nestorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q184332" start="33565" end="33583" title="First Council of Ephesus" label="Council of Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103101" start="33701" end="33714" title="Pope Julius I" label="Pope Julius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277136" start="33955" end="33973" title="Council of Sardica" label="Council of Sardica"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="33996" end="34006" title="Athanasius" label="Athanasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281392" start="34050" end="34069" title="Council of Rome" label="382 a synod in Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147274" start="34188" end="34201" title="apostolic see" label="apostolic see"/>
<link wikidata="Q161443" start="34209" end="34222" title="Pope Siricius" label="Pope Siricius"/>
<link wikidata="Q134694" start="34308" end="34323" title="Pope Innocent I" label="Pope Innocent I"/>
<link wikidata="Q160907" start="34413" end="34428" title="Pope Boniface I" label="Pope Boniface I"/>
<link wikidata="Q43954" start="34935" end="34945" title="Pope Leo I" label="Pope Leo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170531" start="34990" end="35010" title="Council of Chalcedon" label="Council of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160931" start="35267" end="35281" title="Pope Hormisdas" label="Pope Hormisdas"/>
<link wikidata="Q162135" start="35565" end="35580" title="Pope Gelasius I" label="Pope Gelasius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q173470" start="35619" end="35629" title="Anastasius I (emperor)" label="Anastasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q170503" start="36156" end="36171" title="Pope Nicholas I" label="Pope Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="36357" end="36364" title="Roman Emperor" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="36365" end="36376" title="Constantine I" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="36407" end="36416" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="36437" end="36451" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301962" start="36544" end="36565" title="eastern Mediterranean" label="eastern Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="36581" end="36587" title="Roman Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="36675" end="36684" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q189854" start="36716" end="36728" title="metropolitan archbishop" label="metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815679" start="36732" end="36740" title="Perinthus" label="Heraclea"/>
<link wikidata="Q179826" start="37015" end="37046" title="First Council of Constantinople" label="First Council of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q171692" start="37564" end="37573" title="Patriarch" label="Patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="37679" end="37699" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="37724" end="37730" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="Nicene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603670" start="37751" end="37788" title="state church of the Roman Empire" label="official religion of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257878" start="37794" end="37815" title="Edict of Thessalonica" label="Edict of Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110601" start="37999" end="38010" title="Christianity in the 4th century" label="4th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q97279887" start="39200" end="39217" title="Endemic synod" label="a permanent synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603670" start="39263" end="39269" title="state church of the Roman Empire" label="church"/>
<link wikidata="Q442737" start="39288" end="39313" title="John IV of Constantinople" label="John IV of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q317632" start="39558" end="39573" title="John Philoponus" label="John Philoponus"/>
<link wikidata="Q243187" start="39640" end="39667" title="Photios I of Constantinople" label="Photios I of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="39920" end="39941" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q180764" start="39975" end="39989" title="Edict of Milan" label="Edict of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="40008" end="40032" title="First Ecumenical Council" label="First Ecumenical Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q739037" start="40036" end="40042" title="Nicaea" label="Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q427961" start="40108" end="40124" title="metropolitan see" label="metropolitan see"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282276" start="40311" end="40323" title="Patriarchate" label="Patriarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479879" start="40346" end="40365" title="order of precedence" label="order of precedence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185216" start="40543" end="40552" title="Jerusalem in Christianity" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q238399" start="40649" end="40663" title="Dominate" label="Roman dominate"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="40664" end="40671" title="Roman Emperor (Dominate)" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="40672" end="40684" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q179826" start="40698" end="40723" title="second ecumenical council" label="second ecumenical council"/>
<link wikidata="Q26960309" start="41492" end="41501" title="Ascholius" label="Ascholius"/>
<link wikidata="Q170531" start="41841" end="41861" title="Council of Chalcedon" label="Council of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9359935" start="41942" end="41953" title="Tome of Leo" label="Tome of Leo"/>
<link wikidata="Q275016" start="42445" end="42464" title="Papal Infallibility" label="Papal Infallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q226106" start="42825" end="42840" title="Pentarchy" label="five great sees"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="42931" end="42947" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="42991" end="43008" title="Patriarch of Rome" label="Patriarch of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="43014" end="43041" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q622216" start="43047" end="43070" title="Patriarch of Alexandria" label="Patriarch of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q865026" start="43076" end="43096" title="Patriarch of Antioch" label="Patriarch of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q877458" start="43105" end="43127" title="Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Jerusalem" label="Patriarch of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="44569" end="44581" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350094" start="44586" end="44593" title="Deposition of Romulus Augustulus" label="deposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="45065" end="45070" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="45099" end="45104" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285545" start="45445" end="45449" title="Christian liturgy" label="rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="45622" end="45633" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q273665" start="45646" end="45659" title="caesaropapism" label="caesaropapism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079213" start="46254" end="46270" title="Byzantine Papacy" label="Byzantine Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="46512" end="46529" title="Theoderic the Great" label="Arian Gothic king"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="46686" end="46704" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="46865" end="46873" title="Eusebius" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="47045" end="47055" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="taken over"/>
<link wikidata="Q31755" start="47231" end="47251" title="Leo III the Isaurian" label="Leo III the Isaurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q103268" start="47286" end="47302" title="Pope Gregory III" label="Pope Gregory III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018769" start="47325" end="47335" title="iconoclasm (Byzantine)" label="iconoclast"/>
<link wikidata="Q862495" start="47893" end="47910" title="Quinisext Council" label="Quinisext Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="48171" end="48175" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751046" start="48191" end="48195" title="Great Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617740" start="48216" end="48240" title="Divine Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts" label="Pre-Sanctified Liturgies"/>
<link wikidata="Q44602" start="48243" end="48250" title="fasting" label="fasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997110" start="48304" end="48312" title="Alleluia" label="Alleluia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201171" start="48350" end="48354" title="Lamb of God" label="lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094637" start="48458" end="48466" title="clerical celibacy" label="celibacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="48483" end="48489" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q173086" start="48821" end="48835" title="Pope Sergius I" label="Pope Sergius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q42021" start="48895" end="48907" title="Justinian II" label="Justinian II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="48963" end="48973" title="Visigothic" label="Visigothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="48974" end="48979" title="Hispania" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154936" start="49013" end="49041" title="Eighteenth Council of Toledo" label="Eighteenth Council of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q350672" start="49069" end="49076" title="Wittiza" label="Wittiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q351715" start="49078" end="49098" title="Fruela I of Asturias" label="Fruela I of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132455" start="49313" end="49328" title="papal supremacy" label="papal authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q58559" start="49329" end="49340" title="Pope Leo IX" label="Pope Leo IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q171692" start="49389" end="49398" title="patriarch" label="patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q204085" start="49430" end="49445" title="Filioque clause" label="Filioque clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="49455" end="49467" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="49908" end="49932" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="first Ecumenical Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q179826" start="50026" end="50051" title="First Council of Constantinople" label="second Ecumenical Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q321032" start="50470" end="50489" title="Council of Florence" label="Council of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q179826" start="50755" end="50780" title="First Council of Constantinople" label="second ecumenical council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263119" start="51094" end="51124" title="Macedonius I of Constantinople" label="Macedonius I of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q170531" start="51661" end="51681" title="Council of Chalcedon" label="Council of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q204085" start="52108" end="52116" title="Filioque" label="Filioque"/>
<link wikidata="Q204085" start="52351" end="52359" title="Filioque" label="Filioque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308999" start="52528" end="52540" title="Leo of Ohrid" label="Leo of Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q502912" start="52575" end="52585" title="J. B. Bury" label="J. B. Bury"/>
<link wikidata="Q68482" start="52600" end="52618" title="Michael Cerularius" label="Michael Cerularius"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="52699" end="52704" title="Latin Church" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q794414" start="52787" end="52803" title="azymes" label="unleavened bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q238476" start="53293" end="53316" title="Donation of Constantine" label="Donation of Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q74011" start="53602" end="53635" title="Norman conquest of southern Italy" label="Norman conquest of southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884809" start="54017" end="54024" title="Italo-Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q68335" start="54425" end="54449" title="Humbert of Silva Candida" label="Humbert of Silva Candida"/>
<link wikidata="Q58568" start="54470" end="54491" title="Frederick of Lorraine (cardinal)" label="Frederick of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="54521" end="54536" title="Cardinal-Deacon" label="Cardinal-Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060055" start="54540" end="54562" title="Santa Maria in Domnica" label="Santa Maria in Domnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363971" start="54575" end="54595" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Amalfi" label="Archbishop of Amalfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="54843" end="54855" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076567" start="54903" end="54917" title="Divine Liturgy" label="Divine Liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="55625" end="55645" title="Christendom" label="Christians worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="55651" end="55669" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Eastern Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620430" start="56249" end="56260" title="Financial endowment" label="endownments"/>
<link wikidata="Q41600" start="56480" end="56496" title="Alexios I Komnenos" label="Alexios Komnenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="57047" end="57065" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="57095" end="57112" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365493" start="57121" end="57137" title="Republic of Pisa" label="Republic of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10477002" start="57863" end="57877" title="empress mother" label="empress mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q240604" start="57879" end="57895" title="Maria of Antioch" label="Maria of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q41830" start="58022" end="58043" title="Andronikos I Komnenos" label="Andronikos I Komnenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246569" start="58108" end="58137" title="Massacre of the Latins" label="massacre the hated foreigners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060897" start="58261" end="58278" title="Theodore Balsamon" label="Theodore Balsamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283712" start="58538" end="58558" title="Demetrios Chomatenos" label="Demetrios Chomatenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246569" start="58847" end="58869" title="massacre of the Latins" label="massacre of the Latins"/>
<link wikidata="Q37069" start="59010" end="59031" title="Alexios IV Angelos" label="Alexios Angelos&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="59219" end="59233" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="59257" end="59282" title="Hagia Sophia" label="the Church of Holy Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704902" start="59409" end="59443" title="Imperial Library of Constantinople" label="Imperial Library of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296901" start="59555" end="59588" title="Latin Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Latin Patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544805" start="59629" end="59641" title="Partitio terrarum imperii Romaniae" label="final treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q178897" start="59658" end="59682" title="Latin Empire" label="Latin Empire of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="59745" end="59760" title="Crusader states" label="Crusader states"/>
<link wikidata="Q269573" start="59881" end="59909" title="Baldwin II of Constantinople" label="Baldwin II of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59935" end="59950" title="Crown of Thorns#Byzantium" label="Crown of Thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q200033" start="60059" end="60083" title="Michael VIII Palaiologos" label="Michael VIII Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="60424" end="60440" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q51662" start="60494" end="60511" title="Northern Crusades" label="Northern Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="60545" end="60561" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q317078" start="60583" end="60588" title="Pskov Republic" label="Pskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q151536" start="60593" end="60601" title="Novgorod Republic" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q124831" start="60638" end="60653" title="Pope Gregory IX" label="Pope Gregory IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q14689" start="60721" end="60738" title="Battle of the Ice" label="Battle of the Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="60757" end="60763" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073446" start="60787" end="60822" title="Swedish-Novgorodian Wars" label="campaigns against Orthodox Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q591608" start="60840" end="60849" title="List of armed conflicts involving Poland against Russia" label="conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="60867" end="60873" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10951" start="60992" end="61014" title="Second Council of Lyon" label="Second Council of Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="61153" end="61157" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="61162" end="61176" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q178897" start="61299" end="61311" title="Latin Empire" label="Latin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q153043" start="61406" end="61436" title="Feast of Saints Peter and Paul" label="Feast of Saints Peter and Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="61493" end="61497" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521" start="61501" end="61522" title="Lyon Cathedral" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622606" start="62039" end="62064" title="John XI of Constantinople" label="John XI of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q170859" start="62217" end="62234" title="Pope Nicholas III" label="Pope Nicholas III"/>
<link wikidata="Q227719" start="62645" end="62659" title="Pope Martin IV" label="Pope Martin IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q203829" start="62750" end="62766" title="Charles of Anjou" label="Charles of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q37067" start="62900" end="62913" title="Andronikos II Palaiologos" label="Andronicus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q37062" start="63119" end="63140" title="John VIII Palaiologos" label="John VIII Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="63162" end="63175" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottoman Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q167561" start="63247" end="63261" title="Pope Eugene IV" label="Pope Eugene IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q321032" start="63331" end="63358" title="Council of Ferrara-Florence" label="Council of Ferrara-Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q738727" start="63624" end="63639" title="Mark of Ephesus" label="Mark of Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="63678" end="63684" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="63689" end="63695" title="Schism (religion)" label="schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="63985" end="64007" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="Fall of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="64177" end="64199" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="Fall of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="64216" end="64230" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="64292" end="64298" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="64363" end="64367" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="64371" end="64377" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="64383" end="64397" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q191903" start="64497" end="64508" title="autocephaly" label="autocephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q849170" start="64538" end="64550" title="Patriarch of Moscow and all Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Patriarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q96590840" start="64634" end="64644" title="Third Rome" label="Third Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="64704" end="64711" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q845763" start="64775" end="64781" title="Millet (Ottoman Empire)" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382381" start="64800" end="64810" title="Rum Millet" label="Rum Millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371303" start="64855" end="64866" title="Ethnarch" label="millet başı"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="64976" end="64985" title="Mehmed II" label="Mehmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q381211" start="65063" end="65075" title="Gennadius II" label="Gennadius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467740" start="65238" end="65251" title="Ottoman Greek" label="Ottoman Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q645118" start="65252" end="65258" title="Phanariotes" label="nobles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044829" start="65392" end="65411" title="Polish–Muscovite War (1605–1618)" label="Polish intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q94080" start="65423" end="65439" title="Time of Troubles" label="Time of Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355116" start="65567" end="65576" title="Unity Day (Russia)" label="Unity Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q540173" start="65644" end="65661" title="Our Lady of Kazan" label="Our Lady of Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q561645" start="65759" end="65789" title="Patriarch Hermogenes of Moscow" label="Patriarch Hermogenes of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q966749" start="65866" end="65906" title="Polish–Lithuanian–Muscovite Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian–Muscovite Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q155971" start="66221" end="66239" title="Pope Benedict XIII" label="Pope Benedict XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q190857" start="66577" end="66598" title="First Vatican Council" label="First Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q275016" start="66784" end="66803" title="papal infallibility" label="papal infallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662175" start="67067" end="67083" title="Ineffabilis Deus" label="Ineffabilis Deus"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="67241" end="67263" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="67298" end="67310" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q68359" start="67334" end="67365" title="Athenagoras I of Constantinople" label="Athenagoras I of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q645954" start="67373" end="67416" title="Catholic–Orthodox Joint Declaration of 1965" label="Catholic–Orthodox Joint Declaration of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="67597" end="67622" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Eastern Catholic Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q617075" start="67921" end="67935" title="Byzantine Rite" label="Byzantine Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="68203" end="68210" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="68215" end="68222" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="68235" end="68241" title="Poland" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="68266" end="68278" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q856349" start="68288" end="68335" title="Romanian Greek Catholic Church United with Rome" label="Romanian Greek Catholic Church United with Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q472189" start="68438" end="68469" title="Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church" label="Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="68509" end="68521" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="68574" end="68597" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q217170" start="68731" end="68742" title="proselytism" label="proselytism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183660" start="68766" end="68772" title="Balamand declaration" label="report"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269267" start="68788" end="68895" title="Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue Between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church" label="Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue Between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324082" start="68934" end="68961" title="University of Balamand" label="Balamand School of Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="68965" end="68972" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="69271" end="69279" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="uniatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="70410" end="70422" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44187" start="70427" end="70443" title="Patriarch Kirill" label="Patriarch Kirill"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="70499" end="70503" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q22684630" start="70517" end="70534" title="Joint Declaration of Pope Francis and Patriarch Kirill" label="joint declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q311928" start="71337" end="71353" title="Hilarion (Alfeyev)" label="Hilarion Alfeyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339424" start="71375" end="71414" title="Department of External Church Relations" label="Department of External Church Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988896" start="71445" end="71466" title="Holy Synod of the ROC" label="Holy Synod of the ROC"/>
<link wikidata="Q472189" start="71499" end="71530" title="Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church" label="Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q752474" start="71539" end="71575" title="Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate)" label="ROC&amp;#x27;s Ukrainian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="71623" end="71642" title="Russo-Ukrainian war" label="Russo-Ukrainian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767" start="71686" end="71705" title="Sviatoslav Shevchuk" label="Sviatoslav Shevchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q283037" start="71945" end="71967" title="Unitatis Redintegratio" label="Unitatis Redintegratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="71984" end="71993" title="ecumenism" label="ecumenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269267" start="72206" end="72313" title="Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue Between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church" label="Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue Between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="72443" end="72460" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="72509" end="72532" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="72601" end="72618" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q342360" start="72674" end="72685" title="Patriarch Demetrius I of Constantinople" label="Demetrius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q44501" start="72690" end="72703" title="Bartholomew I" label="Bartholomew I"/>
<link wikidata="Q44501" start="72978" end="73001" title="Patriarch Bartholomew I" label="Patriarch Bartholomew I"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="73030" end="73042" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q20103" start="73133" end="73139" title="Assisi" label="Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="73446" end="73453" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q472516" start="73506" end="73514" title="Teoctist Arăpaşu" label="Teoctist"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="73778" end="73785" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q153043" start="73990" end="74020" title="Feast of Saints Peter and Paul" label="Feast of Saints Peter and Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q778660" start="74135" end="74183" title="Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity" label="Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="74244" end="74269" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q44501" start="74443" end="74466" title="Patriarch Bartholomew I" label="Patriarch Bartholomew I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="74502" end="74521" title="Liturgy of the Word" label="Liturgy of the Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="74621" end="74652" title="Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed" label="Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="74902" end="74911" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132455" start="75424" end="75445" title="Papal supremacy" label="supremacy of the Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q566" start="75597" end="75606" title="purgatory" label="purgatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632147" start="75608" end="75633" title="substitutionary atonement" label="substitutionary atonement"/>
<link wikidata="Q185606" start="75639" end="75660" title="Immaculate Conception" label="immaculate conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132455" start="75666" end="75681" title="papal supremacy" label="papal supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q309477" start="76373" end="76391" title="primus inter pares" label="primus inter pares"/>
<link wikidata="Q309477" start="76563" end="76581" title="first among equals" label="first among equals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249435" start="78348" end="78370" title="declaration of Ravenna" label="declaration of Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="78918" end="78925" title="theoria" label="theoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q835041" start="78996" end="79002" title="Nous" label="noetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="79154" end="79167" title="scholasticism" label="scholasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q184186" start="79404" end="79416" title="original sin" label="original sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276239" start="79437" end="79451" title="Hell in Christian beliefs" label="nature of Hell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79979" end="79994" title="#Trinity" label="Trinity section"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618075" start="80334" end="80351" title="Frankish mythology" label="Frankish paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="80353" end="80361" title="Arianism" label="Arianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193589" start="80363" end="80372" title="Platonism" label="Platonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q263307" start="80377" end="80389" title="Aristotelianism" label="Aristotelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q328945" start="80405" end="80412" title="Thomism" label="Thomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q629589" start="80651" end="80660" title="hesychasm" label="hesychasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4199063" start="80875" end="80882" title="Economy (religion)" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44501" start="82913" end="82926" title="Bartholomew I" label="Bartholomew I"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543938" wikidata="Q4798345" url="?curid=543938" title="Arthur County">
<text>Arthur County may refer to:
* Arthur County, Nebraska
* the former name of Arthur Land District, Tasmania, Australia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q485058" start="30" end="53" title="Arthur County, Nebraska" label="Arthur County, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799443" start="75" end="95" title="Arthur Land District" label="Arthur Land District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543939" wikidata="Q26189" url="?curid=543939" title="Western Schism">
<text>The Western Schism, also known as the Papal Schism, the Great Occidental Schism, the Schism of 1378, or the Great Schism (), was a split within the Catholic Church lasting from 20 September 1378 to 11 November 1417, in which bishops residing in Rome and Avignon simultaneously claimed to be the true pope, and were eventually joined by a third line of Pisan claimants in 1409. The event was driven by international rivalries, personalities and political allegiances, with the Avignon Papacy in particular being closely tied to the French monarchy.

The papacy had resided in Avignon since 1309, but Pope Gregory XI returned to Rome in 1377. The Catholic Church split in September 1378, when, following Gregory XI&#x27;s death and Urban VI&#x27;s subsequent election, a group of French cardinals declared his election invalid and elected Clement VII, who claimed to be the true pope. After several attempts at reconciliation, the Council of Pisa (1409) declared that both rivals were illegitimate and elected a third purported pope. The schism was finally resolved when the Pisan claimant Antipope John XXIII called the Council of Constance (1414–1418). The Council arranged for the renunciation of both Roman pope Gregory XII and Pisan antipope John XXIII. The Avignon antipope Benedict XIII was excommunicated, while Pope Martin V was elected and reigned from Rome.

The split is sometimes referred to as the Great Schism, although this term is usually reserved for the East–West Schism of 1054 between the churches remaining in communion with the See of Rome and those remaining with the Eastern Orthodox Church.

== History ==
Under pressure from Philip IV of France, the papacy had, since 1309, resided in Avignon, a papal enclave surrounded by France. Initiated by Pope Clement V, the Avignon Papacy had developed a reputation for corruption that estranged much of Western Christendom. This reputation was attributed to perceptions of strong French influence, the papal curia&#x27;s efforts to extend its powers of patronage, and attempts to increase its revenues. The last Avignon pope, Gregory XI, at the entreaty of relatives, friends, and his retinue, decided to return to Rome on 17 January 1377. Gregory, however, announced his intention to reverse his decision and return to Avignon just after the Easter celebrations of 1378.

Before he could return to Avignon, Gregory XI died in the Vatican palace on 27 March 1378. The Romans put into operation a plan to use intimidation and violence (&quot;impressio et metus&quot;) to ensure the election of a Roman pope. The pope and his curia had returned to Rome after seventy years in Avignon, and the Romans were prepared to do everything in their power to keep them there. On 8 April 1378, the cardinals elected Bartolomeo Prignano, the archbishop of Bari, as Pope Urban VI.

== Two popes ==

The majority of the cardinals who had elected Urban VI quickly regretted their decision and removed themselves to Anagni. Meeting at Fondi, thirteen cardinals elected Count Robert of Geneva as Pope Clement VII on 20 September 1378. The dissident cardinals argued that the election of Urban VI was invalid because it had been out of fear of the rioting Roman crowds. Unable to maintain himself in Anagni, and following the defeat of his forces at the battle of Marino, Clement VII fled to Naples, which was ruled by one of his supporters, Queen Joanna I of Naples. Despite being met regally by Joanna, Clement was met with the populace chanting, &quot;Viva Papa Urbano&quot; (Long Live Pope Urban) and &quot;Muoia l&#x27;Anticristo&quot; (Death to the Antichrist), which convinced him to leave. He took a ship to Avignon and reestablished the papal court there. Charles V of France, who seems to have been irked beforehand by the choice of the Roman pontiff, soon became his greatest protector. Besides France, Clement eventually succeeded in winning to his cause Castile, Aragon, Navarre, a great part of the Latin East, and Scotland. Years later, Owain Glyndŵr&#x27;s rebellion in Wales also recognized the Avignon antipope Benedict XIII. John I of Portugal, the founder of the House of Aviz, who took the throne with English signed the Treaty of Windsor in 1386 and firmly sided with Urban VI. Unlike their relatives, the Angevin kings of Hungary (Louis I and Mary) supported Rome. Joanna I of Naples, who sided with Clement VII was deposed and replaced Charles III in 1381. Though, Charles III would later take the throne from Mary and her husband Sigismund and get excommunicated for this by Urban VI.

=== Consequences ===
In the intense partisanship that was characteristic of the Middle Ages, the schism engendered a fanatical hatred noted by Johan Huizinga:when the town of Bruges went over to the &quot;obedience&quot; of Avignon, a great number of people left to follow their trade in a city of Urbanist allegiance..[..].. In the 1382, the oriflamme, which might only be unfurled in a holy cause, was taken up against the Flemings, because they were Urbanists, that is, infidels.Sustained by such national and factional rivalries, the schism continued after the deaths of both Urban VI in 1389 and Clement VII in 1394. Boniface IX was crowned in Rome in 1389, and Benedict XIII, who was elected against the wishes of Charles VI of France, reigned in Avignon from 1394. When Pope Boniface died in 1404, the eight cardinals of the Roman conclave offered to refrain from electing a new pope if Benedict would resign; but when Benedict&#x27;s legates refused on his behalf, the Roman party then proceeded to elect Pope Innocent VII. Discussions continued instead with Innocent, but quickly stalled and by February 1405, and Benedict&#x27;s envoys had returned to Avignon. Benedict quickly excommunicated Innocent and with an army started marching towards Rome, in May 1405. He occupied Genoa for a year and awaited French military support, which never came. Innocent died 6 November 1406, and the Roman cardinals elected Angelo Correr as Gregory XII.

The suggestion for a church council to resolve the Schism, first made in 1378, was not adopted initially, because canon law required that a pope call a council. Eventually theologians like Pierre d&#x27;Ailly and Jean Gerson, adopted arguments that permitted the Church to call a council to resolve this issue, while Francesco Zabarella argued that a council could only be convoked by an emperor.

== Three popes ==
Pope Benedict and Gregory agreed to abdicate their respective papacies in December 1406. However, Benedict stated that he wanted to negotiate a solution first. Gregory sent an ambassador to the St. Victor abbey in Marseille, where Benedict was staying. On the other hand, Gregory preferred Savona, and Benedict concurred. They balked at the last moment, and both groups of cardinals abandoned their preferred leaders. The Council of Pisa met in 1409 under the auspices of the cardinals to try solving the dispute. At the fifteenth session, on 5 June 1409, the Council of Pisa attempted to depose both the Roman pope and Avignon antipope as schismatical, heretical, perjured and scandalous, but proceeded to inflame the problem even further by electing Peter Philargi, the cardinal archbishop of Milan, as Alexander V. He reigned briefly in Pisa from June 26, 1409, to his death in 1410, when he was succeeded by, Baldassare Cossa as John XXIII, who achieved limited support.

=== Council of Constance ===

In 1414, Council of Constance was convened by the Pisan pope John XXIII to resolve the schism once and for all. The council was also endorsed by the Roman pope Gregory XII, giving it greater legitimacy. On 6 April 1415, the council issued &quot;Haec sancta&quot;, stating that the council is the Church&#x27;s highest governing body and has the authority to remove popes. &quot;Haec sancta&quot; is today considered invalid by the Catholic Church, on the basis that Gregory XII was the legitimate pope at the time and the decree was passed by the council in a session before his confirmation; further, since it was not used to remove him, it was not actually used to remove the pope.

The council, advised by the theologian Jean Gerson, secured the resignation of Gregory XII and the detention and removal of John XXIII. The Avignon antipope Benedict XIII, who refused to step down, was excommunicated on 27 July 1417, having lost all his supporters in the process. The Council elected Pope Martin V in 1417, essentially ending the schism.

Benedict XIII, recognized by King Martin of Aragon in 1397, chose to ignore pleas for his resignation. Benedict died 23 May 1423: to succeed him three cardinals elected Gil Sanchez Munoz y Carbon as Clement VIII. Clement VIII resigned in 1429 and recognized Martin V, putting a definite end to the last remnants of the Avignon Papacy.

== Aftermath ==
Conciliarism gained impetus due to the Schism. This new reformist movement held that a general council is superior to the pope on the strength of its capability to resolve ecclesiastical issues. Theorists such as Jean Gerson explained that the priests and the church itself are the sources of the papal power and, thus, the church should be able to correct, punish, and, if necessary, depose a pope.

On 18 January 1460, Pope Pius II issued the bull Execrabilis which forbids any attempt to appeal papal judgements by general councils.

There was also a marked decline in discipline within the church. Scholars note that the Western Schism effectively eroded the church&#x27;s authority and its capacity to proclaim the gospel. This dissension and loss of unity ultimately culminated in the Protestant Reformation of the 16th century.

== Official list of popes ==

For the next five centuries, the Catholic Church recognized the Roman popes as the legitimate line from 1378 to 1409, followed by the Pisan popes from 1409 to 1415. All Avignon popes after 1378 are considered to be antipopes. This recognition is reflected in the numbering of popes Alexander VI, VII, and VIII, who numbered themselves consecutively after their Pisan namesake Alexander V.

The recognition of the Pisan popes made the continued legitimacy of the Roman pope Gregory XII doubtful for 1409–1415. The &quot;Annuario Pontificio&quot; for 1860 listed the Pisan popes as true popes from 1409 to 1415, but it acknowledged that Gregory XII&#x27;s reign ended in either 1409 or 1415.

The Western Schism was, in practice, reinterpreted in 1958 when Angelo Giuseppe Roncalli chose to reuse the ordinal XXIII upon his election as Pope John XXIII, citing &quot;twenty-two [sic] Johns of indisputable legitimacy.&quot; (There had actually been twenty undisputed Johns due to antipopes and numbering errors.) Although Roncalli&#x27;s declaration of assuming the name specified that his decision was made &quot;apart from disputes about legitimacy&quot;, this passage was subsequently excised from the version appearing in the &quot;Acta Apostolicae Sedis&quot;, and the Pisan popes Alexander V and John XXIII have since been classified as antipopes by the Roman Curia. The reinterpretation is reflected in modern editions of the &quot;Annuario Pontificio&quot;, which extend Gregory XII&#x27;s reign to 1415. The line of Roman popes is now retroactively recognized by the Catholic Church as the sole legitimate line during the Western Schism. However, Popes Alexander VI through VIII have not been renumbered, leaving a gap in the numbering sequence.

According to John F. Broderick (1987):

=== Papal Recognition ===
==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
*
*
*
*
*266
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*Lindberg, Carter. The European Reformations. Available from: Yuzu, (3rd Edition). Wiley Global Research (STMS), 2020.

==External links==

*The Age of the Great Western Schism
*Catholic Encyclopedia article</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="4" end="18" title="Western Schism" label="Western Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="38" end="50" title="Western Schism" label="Papal Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="56" end="79" title="Western Schism" label="Great Occidental Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="85" end="99" title="Western Schism" label="Schism of 1378"/>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="108" end="120" title="Western Schism" label="Great Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q65083733" start="131" end="136" title="Schism in Christianity" label="split"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="148" end="163" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="225" end="231" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q665037" start="245" end="249" title="Diocese of Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q360149" start="254" end="261" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="300" end="304" title="pope" label="pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q658891" start="352" end="357" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Pisa" label="Pisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="531" end="546" title="Kingdom of France" label="French monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202558" start="564" end="582" title="Avignon papacy" label="resided in Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q169594" start="599" end="614" title="Pope Gregory XI" label="Pope Gregory XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q171626" start="730" end="745" title="Pope Urban VI" label="Urban VI&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q320371" start="837" end="848" title="Antipope Clement VII" label="Clement VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349804" start="929" end="944" title="Council of Pisa" label="Council of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q294599" start="1088" end="1107" title="Antipope John XXIII" label="Antipope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q154001" start="1119" end="1139" title="Council of Constance" label="Council of Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043499" start="1182" end="1194" title="Papal renunciation" label="renunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q227694" start="1214" end="1225" title="Pope Gregory XII" label="Gregory XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q310371" start="1278" end="1291" title="Antipope Benedict XIII" label="Benedict XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q169612" start="1318" end="1331" title="Pope Martin V" label="Pope Martin V"/>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="1410" end="1422" title="Western Schism" label="Great Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="1471" end="1495" title="East–West Schism" label="East–West Schism of 1054"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="1549" end="1560" title="See of Rome" label="See of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="1590" end="1613" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="1650" end="1669" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="1727" end="1734" title="Enclave and exclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1749" end="1755" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="1770" end="1784" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q202558" start="1790" end="1804" title="Avignon Papacy" label="Avignon Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="1878" end="1889" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q247979" start="1975" end="1980" title="Curia (Roman Catholic Church)" label="curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169594" start="2093" end="2103" title="Pope Gregory XI" label="Gregory XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="2182" end="2186" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="2752" end="2761" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q541341" start="2795" end="2813" title="archbishop of Bari" label="archbishop of Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q171626" start="2818" end="2831" title="Pope Urban VI" label="Pope Urban VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q116404" start="2965" end="2971" title="Anagni" label="Anagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q128084" start="2984" end="2989" title="Fondi" label="Fondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q320371" start="3044" end="3060" title="Antipope Clement VII" label="Pope Clement VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q235381" start="3395" end="3413" title="Joanna I of Naples" label="Joanna I of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q167782" start="3712" end="3731" title="Charles V of France" label="Charles V of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="3914" end="3921" title="Crown of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="3923" end="3929" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="3931" end="3938" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="3976" end="3984" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q317279" start="3999" end="4012" title="Owain Glyndŵr" label="Owain Glyndŵr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126360" start="4020" end="4029" title="Glyndŵr rebellion" label="rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="4033" end="4038" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q201575" start="4091" end="4109" title="John I of Portugal" label="John I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q747516" start="4130" end="4143" title="House of Aviz" label="House of Aviz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105495" start="4149" end="4164" title="1383–1385 Portuguese interregnum" label="took the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q717346" start="4189" end="4214" title="Treaty of Windsor (1386)" label="Treaty of Windsor in 1386"/>
<link wikidata="Q939200" start="4275" end="4282" title="Capetian House of Anjou" label="Angevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056854" start="4292" end="4299" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1301–1526)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q53998" start="4301" end="4308" title="Louis I of Hungary" label="Louis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q154412" start="4313" end="4317" title="Mary, Queen of Hungary" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q235381" start="4335" end="4353" title="Joanna I of Naples" label="Joanna I of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q311861" start="4407" end="4418" title="Charles III of Naples" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q57124" start="4502" end="4511" title="Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q276280" start="4701" end="4715" title="Johan Huizinga" label="Johan Huizinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="4733" end="4739" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q843290" start="4901" end="4910" title="oriflamme" label="oriflamme"/>
<link wikidata="Q242485" start="4983" end="4991" title="Flemings" label="Flemings"/>
<link wikidata="Q165561" start="5180" end="5191" title="Boniface IX" label="Boniface IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q310371" start="5225" end="5238" title="Antipope Benedict XIII" label="Benedict XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q227713" start="5576" end="5588" title="Pope Innocent VII" label="Innocent VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q51645" start="6030" end="6044" title="Ecumenical Council" label="church council"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="6123" end="6132" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q318580" start="6198" end="6217" title="Pierre d&amp;#x27;Ailly" label="Pierre d&amp;#x27;Ailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338205" start="6326" end="6345" title="Francesco Zabarella" label="Francesco Zabarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349804" start="6847" end="6862" title="Council of Pisa" label="Council of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q262884" start="7230" end="7241" title="Antipope Alexander V" label="Alexander V"/>
<link wikidata="Q294599" start="7358" end="7368" title="Antipope John XXIII" label="John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q154001" start="7440" end="7460" title="Council of Constance" label="Council of Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q294599" start="7492" end="7502" title="Antipope John XXIII" label="John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q227694" start="7591" end="7602" title="Gregory XII" label="Gregory XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567664" start="7676" end="7687" title="Haec sancta synodus" label="Haec sancta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567664" start="7803" end="7826" title="Haec sancta synodus" label="&amp;quot;Haec sancta&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q281179" start="8155" end="8166" title="Jean Gerson" label="Jean Gerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q310371" start="8273" end="8286" title="Antipope Benedict XIII" label="Benedict XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="8318" end="8332" title="excommunicated" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q169612" start="8417" end="8430" title="Pope Martin V" label="Pope Martin V"/>
<link wikidata="Q332681" start="8501" end="8522" title="Martin of Aragon" label="King Martin of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q348629" start="8671" end="8683" title="Antipope Clement VIII" label="Clement VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q202558" start="8791" end="8805" title="Avignon Papacy" label="Avignon Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163981" start="8824" end="8836" title="Conciliarism" label="Conciliarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q281179" start="9037" end="9048" title="Jean Gerson" label="Jean Gerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q101437" start="9245" end="9257" title="Pope Pius II" label="Pope Pius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="9615" end="9637" title="Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q108316" start="9972" end="9984" title="Pope Alexander VI" label="Alexander VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q127254" start="9986" end="9989" title="Pope Alexander VII" label="VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q101294" start="9995" end="9999" title="Pope Alexander VIII" label="VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q75248" start="10209" end="10228" title="Annuario Pontificio" label="Annuario Pontificio"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="10445" end="10469" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Angelo Giuseppe Roncalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200241" start="10667" end="10697" title="Pope John numbering" label="antipopes and numbering errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q343141" start="10923" end="10945" title="Acta Apostolicae Sedis" label="Acta Apostolicae Sedis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543940" wikidata="Q1413413" url="?curid=543940" title="KWin">
<text>KWin is a window manager for the X Window System and a Wayland compositor. It is released as a part of KDE Plasma, for which it is the default window manager. KWin can also be used on its own or with other desktop environments.

KWin can be configured by scripting using QML or QtScript, both of which are based on ECMAScript.

== History ==

== Look and feel ==
There are many window decorations for KWin, including the current default Breeze (shown below), the previous default Oxygen, Microsoft Windows-like Redmond, and Keramik.
== Compositing ==
Currently available compositing backends include OpenGL 1.2, OpenGL 2.0, OpenGL 3.1 and OpenGL ES 2.0.

=== Included effects ===

As of KDE 4.3 the following effects are built-in:

==== Accessibility ====

==== Appearance ====

==== Candy ====

==== Focus ====

==== Tools====

==== Window management ====
==See also==

*Comparison of X window managers

==References==
== External links ==
* KWin release notes for KDE4.0
* Decorations for KWin 4</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1413413" start="0" end="4" title="KWin" label="KWin"/>
<link wikidata="Q216653" start="10" end="24" title="window manager" label="window manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q178481" start="33" end="48" title="X Window System" label="X Window System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55" end="73" title="Wayland (display server protocol)#Wayland compositors" label="Wayland compositor"/>
<link wikidata="Q107664269" start="103" end="113" title="KDE Plasma" label="KDE Plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q205020" start="206" end="225" title="desktop environment" label="desktop environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q961543" start="271" end="274" title="QML" label="QML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562193" start="278" end="286" title="QtScript" label="QtScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q259138" start="315" end="325" title="ECMAScript" label="ECMAScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q835016" start="378" end="395" title="window decoration" label="window decoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="488" end="505" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686790" start="872" end="903" title="Comparison of X window managers" label="Comparison of X window managers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543944" wikidata="Q7740009" url="?curid=543944" title="The Holmes Show">
<text>The Holmes Show is a Canadian television sketch comedy series that premiered on CTV on September 24, 2002. The 22-episode series stars Jessica Holmes, Roman Danylo and Kurt Smeaton. Filming took place at the CTV studios in June and August 2002. Each scene was shot twice with the second scene usually involving more improvisation. Other comedians featured include Raoul Bhaneja, Aurora Browne, James Cunningham, Jane Luk, Winston Spear, Shoshana Sperling and Scott Yaphe.

==See also==

*&quot;Comedy Inc.&quot;
*&quot;Air Farce Live&quot;

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3983009" start="21" end="40" title="Television in Canada" label="Canadian television"/>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="41" end="54" title="sketch comedy" label="sketch comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="80" end="83" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177664" start="135" end="149" title="Jessica Holmes (comedian)" label="Jessica Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440845" start="151" end="163" title="Roman Danylo" label="Roman Danylo"/>
<link wikidata="Q125703068" start="168" end="180" title="Kurt Smeaton" label="Kurt Smeaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293733" start="364" end="377" title="Raoul Bhaneja" label="Raoul Bhaneja"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822500" start="379" end="392" title="Aurora Browne" label="Aurora Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476337" start="459" end="470" title="Scott Yaphe" label="Scott Yaphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151457" start="488" end="511" title="Comedy Inc. (Canadian TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Comedy Inc.&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002170" start="519" end="533" title="Air Farce Live" label="Air Farce Live"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543946" wikidata="Q6801199" url="?curid=543946" title="McGarry, Ontario">
<text>McGarry is an incorporated township in Timiskaming District in Northeastern Ontario, Canada. It includes the communities of Virginiatown and Kearns. The township borders with Quebec to the east, along Highway 66 between Kirkland Lake and Rouyn-Noranda. The northern border of the township forms part of the border between Timiskaming District and Cochrane District. Highway 66 was rerouted in 2017 because of concerns that aging mine shafts under the road could cause it to collapse.

J. T. Kearns (after whom one of the communities was named) staked a claim in 1906, which became the Chesterville gold mine (1938–1952). An shaft connected 20 levels, and its 500-ton stamp mill produced a total of 458,880 ounces of gold. The Kerr-Addison Gold mine started in 1936, and employed 1,456 people by 1959. In 1960, the mine produced the most gold in the Western Hemisphere, and the 10 millionth ounce of gold was produced in 1982.

==History==

Gold in the area was originally reported in the late 1800s by Chief Ignace Tonené of the Temagami First Nation. He staked a claim near the north arm of Larder Lake but claimed it was stolen. He reported it, but Indian Affairs was unable to help. Tonené&#x27;s claim was jumped by European settlers and later developed into the Kerr-Addison Mine. Adjacent to the Kerr-Addison Mine, the Chesterville gold mine was developed, operating from 1939 until 1952.

Virginiatown was built to house the Kerr Addison workers.

On December 21, 1972, masked thieves successfully robbed the Virginiatown Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce on the Kerr Addison miners&#x27; payday. The robbers were never captured.
In 2016, the nearby Tournene Lake (or Lac Tournene in French), was officially re-named as Chief Tonene Lake.

=== Beaverhouse First Nation ===
In 2018, Beaverhouse First Nation submitted a claim to the Government of Ontario, asserting the community is a distinct First Nation and did not sign Treaty 9, or any other treaty. On April 19, 2022, Beaverhouse First Nation was officially recognized as a First Nation under Section 35 of Canada’s Constitution.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, McGarry had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

==Economy==
McGarry&#x27;s economy has historically been supported by the mining industry, and struggled when the mines were not producing.

The Armistice Gold mine was purchased by Bonterra Resources from Kerr Resources in 2016, and gold exploration and modelling was done to update the resource to a National Instrument 43-101 Compliant Resource.

Gold Candle Ltd. and investors purchased the historic Chesterville Gold Mines and Kerr Addison Gold Mines property in 2016, and conducted a feasibility study and gold exploration with Canadian Exploration Services Limited on the old Chesterville Gold Mines and Kerr Addison Gold Mines property.

==Tourism==

McGarry hosts several events, including an annual fish derby at Larder Lake, and a Labour Day weekend music event at the McGarry community centre. Gem Lake Maple Bedrock Provincial Park is located in McGarry Township. Sport fishing is permitted within Gem Lake Maple Bedrock Provincial Park. McGarry Township Forest Conservation Reserve, shared with McFadden Township, is located in McGarry Township.

==Notable people and companies==

=== People ===

* J. T. Kearns
* Ignace Tonené

=== Companies ===

* Deak Resources

==See also==
*List of townships in Ontario
*List of francophone communities in Ontario
*Larder Lake, Ontario
*Mount Cheminis (nearby inselberg)

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6801199" start="0" end="7" title="McGarry, Ontario" label="McGarry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27" end="35" title="Township (Canada)#Ontario" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q385780" start="39" end="59" title="Timiskaming District" label="Timiskaming District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343541" start="63" end="83" title="Northeastern Ontario" label="Northeastern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="175" end="181" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450581" start="201" end="211" title="Highway 66 (Ontario)" label="Highway 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362758" start="220" end="233" title="Kirkland Lake" label="Kirkland Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q141804" start="238" end="251" title="Rouyn-Noranda" label="Rouyn-Noranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105193" start="347" end="364" title="Cochrane District" label="Cochrane District"/>
<link wikidata="Q119206767" start="485" end="497" title="J. T. Kearns" label="J. T. Kearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q119840818" start="585" end="607" title="Chesterville gold mine" label="Chesterville gold mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q334493" start="624" end="629" title="shaft mining" label="shaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q364000" start="667" end="677" title="stamp mill" label="stamp mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q111963052" start="726" end="748" title="Kerr-Addison Mine" label="Kerr-Addison Gold mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q107480244" start="1008" end="1021" title="Ignace Tonené" label="Ignace Tonené"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697972" start="1029" end="1050" title="Temagami First Nation" label="Temagami First Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q111963052" start="1267" end="1284" title="Kerr-Addison Mine" label="Kerr-Addison Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q119840818" start="1325" end="1347" title="Chesterville gold mine" label="Chesterville gold mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q110639952" start="1432" end="1444" title="Kerr Addison Mines Ltd." label="Kerr Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q666694" start="1529" end="1563" title="Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce" label="Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1692" end="1698" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q22518737" start="1728" end="1745" title="Chief Tonene Lake" label="Chief Tonene Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q112072559" start="1790" end="1814" title="Beaverhouse First Nation" label="Beaverhouse First Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="1901" end="1913" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836934" start="1931" end="1939" title="Treaty 9" label="Treaty 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444674" start="2056" end="2066" title="Section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982" label="Section 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="2120" end="2145" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="2159" end="2176" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973768" start="2655" end="2681" title="National Instrument 43-101" label="National Instrument 43-101"/>
<link wikidata="Q22366529" start="3076" end="3087" title="Larder Lake" label="Larder Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q108456662" start="3095" end="3105" title="Labour Day (Canada)" label="Labour Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q119206767" start="3466" end="3478" title="J. T. Kearns" label="J. T. Kearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q107480244" start="3481" end="3494" title="Ignace Tonené" label="Ignace Tonené"/>
<link wikidata="Q121852729" start="3517" end="3531" title="Deak Resources" label="Deak Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643835" start="3547" end="3575" title="List of townships in Ontario" label="List of townships in Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008452" start="3577" end="3619" title="List of francophone communities in Ontario" label="List of francophone communities in Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488840" start="3621" end="3641" title="Larder Lake, Ontario" label="Larder Lake, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q112030363" start="3643" end="3657" title="Mount Cheminis" label="Mount Cheminis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139493" start="3666" end="3675" title="inselberg" label="inselberg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543947" wikidata="Q649317" url="?curid=543947" title="Sashimi bōchō">
<text>Sashimi bōchō, 刺身 — literally &quot;sashimi knife&quot; — is a type of long, thin kitchen knife used in Japanese cuisine to prepare sashimi (sliced raw fish or other seafood).
Similar to the &quot;nakiri bōchō&quot;, the style differs slightly between Tokyo and Osaka. Types of &quot;sashimi bōchō&quot; include: 
* from Osaka has a pointed tip.
* from Tokyo is shorter with a square or flat tip and is usually used to prepare octopus and squid.
* is similar to the &quot;yanagi-ba&quot;, except that the blade is thinner and more flexible. As the name indicates, it is traditionally used to slice very thin fugu pufferfish sashimi and is stored separately from the other knives, due to the very poisonous nature of some of the fish&#x27;s internal organs, particularly the liver containing high levels of tetrodotoxin.

Following the traditional practice of Japanese kitchen knives, the &quot;Sashimi bōchō&quot; are sharpened with only a single-bevelled edge to the blade, a style known as &quot;kataba&quot;. The highest quality &quot;kataba&quot; blades have a slight depression — &quot;urasuki&quot; — on the flat side, which gives better cuts and allows for the cutting of thinner slices than the &quot;ryōba&quot; used for &quot;santoku&quot; and &quot;nakiri&quot; and &quot;gyūtō&quot; 
knives, but requires more skill to use. The sharpened side is usually the right side for a right-hand use of the knife, but knives sharpened on the left side are available for left-hand use. 

The length of the knife is suitable to fillet medium-sized fish and generally are between and long. Specialized commercial knives exist for processing larger fish, such as the top quality large blue-fin tuna with such knives including the &quot;maguro bōchō&quot; and &quot;oroshi hōchō&quot; at almost long or the slightly shorter hancho hōchō.

==See also==
*Kitchen knife
* Japanese kitchen knives
** Chef&#x27;s knife — gyūtō bōchō
** Deba bōchō
** Nakiri bōchō
** Santoku bōchō 
** Usuba bōchō
* List of Japanese cooking utensils

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q649317" start="0" end="13" title="Sashimi bōchō" label="Sashimi bōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q599312" start="82" end="95" title="kitchen knife" label="kitchen knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="104" end="120" title="Japanese cuisine" label="Japanese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q190715" start="132" end="139" title="sashimi" label="sashimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q600396" start="152" end="156" title="Fish as food" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q192935" start="166" end="173" title="seafood" label="seafood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566385" start="197" end="209" title="nakiri bōchō" label="nakiri bōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="252" end="257" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="262" end="267" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118835" start="427" end="434" title="Octopus as food" label="octopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q550774" start="439" end="444" title="squid as food" label="squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q134385" start="608" end="623" title="fugu" label="fugu pufferfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q379842" start="806" end="818" title="tetrodotoxin" label="tetrodotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343409" start="1085" end="1104" title="knife indentations" label="&amp;quot;urasuki&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645496" start="1209" end="1214" title="ryōba" label="ryōba"/>
<link wikidata="Q23764" start="1236" end="1243" title="santoku" label="santoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566385" start="1260" end="1266" title="nakiri" label="nakiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984607" start="1283" end="1288" title="gyūtō" label="gyūtō"/>
<link wikidata="Q289005" start="1528" end="1534" title="Fillet (cut)" label="fillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="1683" end="1696" title="Tuna as food" label="blue-fin tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421416" start="1734" end="1746" title="maguro bōchō" label="maguro bōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421416" start="1763" end="1775" title="oroshi hōchō" label="oroshi hōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421416" start="1821" end="1833" title="hancho hōchō" label="hancho hōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q599312" start="1850" end="1863" title="Kitchen knife" label="Kitchen knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984607" start="1866" end="1889" title="Japanese kitchen knives" label="Japanese kitchen knives"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1893" end="1924" title="Chef&amp;#x27;s knife#gyuto" label="Chef&amp;#x27;s knife — gyūtō bōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111908" start="1928" end="1938" title="Deba bōchō" label="Deba bōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566385" start="1942" end="1954" title="Nakiri bōchō" label="Nakiri bōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q23764" start="1958" end="1971" title="Santoku" label="Santoku bōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473090" start="1976" end="1987" title="Usuba bōchō" label="Usuba bōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575075" start="1990" end="2023" title="List of Japanese cooking utensils" label="List of Japanese cooking utensils"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543949" wikidata="Q227141" url="?curid=543949" title="Ashland County">
<text>Ashland County is the name of two counties in the United States:

*Ashland County, Ohio
*Ashland County, Wisconsin

==See also==
*Ashland (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q227141" start="0" end="14" title="Ashland County" label="Ashland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q403544" start="67" end="87" title="Ashland County, Ohio" label="Ashland County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q494931" start="89" end="114" title="Ashland County, Wisconsin" label="Ashland County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q225332" start="130" end="154" title="Ashland (disambiguation)" label="Ashland (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543950" wikidata="Q1592472" url="?curid=543950" title="Hear'Say">
<text>Hear&#x27;Say were a British pop group. They were created through the ITV reality TV show &quot;Popstars&quot; in February 2001, the first UK series of the international &quot;Popstars&quot; franchise. The group, who were signed to Polydor Records, originally consisted of Danny Foster, Myleene Klass, Kym Marsh, Suzanne Shaw, and Noel Sullivan.

Hear&#x27;Say achieved instant fame, breaking chart records with their debut single &quot;Pure and Simple&quot; and the album &quot;Popstars&quot;. However, their second album failed to match this success.

In January 2002, Marsh left Hear&#x27;Say due to conflicts with Klass and Sullivan. She was replaced by former Boom! member Johnny Shentall a month later. During a summer promotional tour, Hear&#x27;Say were constantly harassed by members of the public. &quot;Lovin&#x27; Is Easy&quot;, the group&#x27;s only single to be released with Shentall, failed to make a commercial impact. Hear&#x27;Say announced their split in October 2002, twenty months after their formation, citing &quot;abuse from the public&quot; as the main reason for their demise. After the band&#x27;s break-up, all members went on to achieve individual success elsewhere in the entertainment industry.

== History ==
===2000–2001: Formation, &quot;Popstars&quot; and &quot;Everybody&quot;===
Over the course of six weeks in late 2000, thousands of hopeful singers attended open television auditions for ITV&#x27;s &quot;Popstars&quot; talent show. The contestants were judged by Nigel Lythgoe, Paul Adam (director of A&amp;R at Polydor Records, who had rights to the finished group), and Nicki Chapman, who had worked with the Spice Girls. The judges reduced the contestants to a group of ten, before visiting each of them at their homes to reveal whether or not they had been selected for the group. The five chosen singers – Danny Foster, Myleene Klass, Kym Marsh, Suzanne Shaw, and Noel Sullivan – formed Hear&#x27;Say. The five unsuccessful finalists went on to form the group Liberty (later renamed Liberty X after a legal dispute). The programme documented Hear&#x27;Say recording and promoting their first single with the series ending on the night the single charted in the UK Singles Chart at number 1. &quot;Popstars&quot; became an instant success, taking in audiences of over 10 million viewers.

In March 2001, Hear&#x27;Say released their first single, &quot;Pure and Simple&quot;, a cover of a little-known album track by Girl Thing. The song went straight to number one on the UK Singles Chart in March 2001, selling just under 550,000 copies. &quot;Pure and Simple&quot; was the fastest-selling debut single at the time, as well as the fastest-selling non-charity single – a record beaten a year later by &quot;Pop Idol&quot; winner Will Young. The track spent two more weeks at number one. With the release of their debut album &quot;Popstars&quot;, Hear&#x27;Say became the first act in UK chart history to simultaneously top the UK Singles Chart and UK Albums Chart with their debut releases. &quot;Popstars&quot; sold 306,631 copies in its first week, breaking yet another record for fastest-selling debut album. The album featured cover versions of &quot;Monday Monday&quot; by the Mamas &amp; the Papas and &quot;Bridge over Troubled Water&quot; by Simon &amp; Garfunkel, alongside original tracks purchased for the group.

Hear&#x27;Say released their second single, &quot;The Way to Your Love&quot;, in June 2001. The song became their second consecutive number-one single. The group were invited to perform at the 80th birthday celebrations of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. Hear&#x27;Say went on to present their own ITV show called &quot;Hear&#x27;Say It&#x27;s Saturday&quot;, which featured performances, comedy sketches and celebrity guests. This followed on from a mini-series named &quot;Meet the Popstars&quot; which was intended to allow the public to get to know the group and their music away from the talent show format. In August 2001, Hear&#x27;Say toured the United Kingdom. They initially announced five dates which quickly sold out, causing the band to schedule thirty more dates. However, the new dates struggled to sell out as hundreds of tickets remained unsold. The group also released a live DVD.

Whilst on tour, the group began recording their second studio album, &quot;Everybody&quot;. In November 2001, just nine months after the release of their debut album, Hear&#x27;Say released &quot;Everybody&quot;. The album was preceded by a single of the same name. The single debuted at number four, while the album crept into the chart at number 24. &quot;Everybody&quot; went on to sell just one fifth as many copies as &quot;Popstars&quot;. Despite the second album&#x27;s lack of success, it did achieve Gold status by the BPI but over a decade after its release and plans were made for an arena tour but these were later cancelled.

===2001–2002: Line-up changes, decline and break-up===
Tabloids began reporting that Kym Marsh, who had gained attention due to her relationship with former &quot;EastEnders&quot; actor Jack Ryder, had left the band following feuds with bandmate Myleene Klass. A representative for Hear&#x27;Say denied the reports, stating: &quot;Everybody who is involved with Hear&#x27;Say will be sitting down this week to discuss the future. Kym Marsh is still with the band.&quot; However, in January 2002, Kym Marsh announced that she was leaving Hear&#x27;Say, later revealing she often fought with Klass and Noel Sullivan. Auditions were held to find Marsh&#x27;s replacement.

The audition process was televised in segments of &quot;This Morning&quot;, an ITV daily morning show, mirroring the procedure during which the original members of Hear&#x27;Say were chosen. Johnny Shentall, husband of Steps singer Lisa Scott-Lee, won the auditions, joining the group on 5 February 2002. Controversy erupted when it was found out that Shentall had previously been a member of short-lived pop group Boom! and a back-up dancer for Hear&#x27;Say. In March 2002, Hear&#x27;Say cancelled their planned arena tour to allow Shentall time to &quot;settle in&quot; to the group.

Hear&#x27;Say began recording their third album. During the summer of 2002, the group toured the UK radio roadshows circuit, where they were constantly booed and abused by members of the public, with a performance in Brighton being cut short due to the animosity concerned – evidence of the degree of public animosity that had built up. During the tour, the group&#x27;s vehicle was threatened by an apparently armed man at a motorway service area on the M1 motorway in Leicestershire. The man, later arrested, claimed to have been playing a prank on the group. In August 2002, Hear&#x27;Say released their only single with Shentall, entitled &quot;Lovin&#x27; Is Easy&quot;. The track had a new sophisticated feel in an attempt to regenerate interest in the group&#x27;s music. The single became Hear&#x27;Say&#x27;s lowest charting single to date when it peaked at number six. Media reports suggested that Polydor Records wanted the single to at least reach the UK Top 5. Following the disappointing sales of the single, it was thought that they would be dropped by the label, though no official word came from Polydor.

Hear&#x27;Say split up on 1 October 2002, citing &quot;abuse from the public&quot; as the main reason. The group admitted to being a fad that had passed. Hear&#x27;Say&#x27;s popularity had been eclipsed by that of Liberty X, a band composed of the five other finalists of &quot;Popstars&quot;.

==Discography==
===Albums===
===Singles===
==Filmography==
*&quot;Popstars&quot; (2001)
*&quot;ITV Panto: Dick Whittington&quot; (2002)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1592472" start="0" end="13" title="Hear&amp;#x27;Say" label="Hear&amp;#x27;Say"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="70" end="73" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153203" start="96" end="104" title="Popstars (British TV series)" label="Popstars"/>
<link wikidata="Q569376" start="176" end="184" title="Popstars" label="Popstars"/>
<link wikidata="Q196600" start="191" end="200" title="Media franchise" label="franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q155152" start="232" end="247" title="Polydor Records" label="Polydor Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220362" start="273" end="285" title="Danny Foster (musician)" label="Danny Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q48737" start="287" end="300" title="Myleene Klass" label="Myleene Klass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618820" start="302" end="311" title="Kym Marsh" label="Kym Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650964" start="313" end="325" title="Suzanne Shaw" label="Suzanne Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047219" start="331" end="344" title="Noel Sullivan" label="Noel Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261144" start="437" end="452" title="Pure and Simple (song)" label="Pure and Simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229627" start="479" end="487" title="Popstars (Hear&amp;#x27;Say album)" label="Popstars"/>
<link wikidata="Q15053681" start="665" end="670" title="Boom! (group)" label="Boom!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267690" start="678" end="693" title="Johnny Shentall" label="Johnny Shentall"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="1428" end="1431" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153203" start="1445" end="1453" title="Popstars (British TV series)" label="Popstars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803708" start="1504" end="1517" title="Nigel Lythgoe" label="Nigel Lythgoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q155152" start="1553" end="1568" title="Polydor Records" label="Polydor Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028458" start="1613" end="1626" title="Nicki Chapman" label="Nicki Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="1652" end="1663" title="Spice Girls" label="Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220362" start="1852" end="1864" title="Danny Foster (musician)" label="Danny Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q48737" start="1866" end="1879" title="Myleene Klass" label="Myleene Klass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618820" start="1881" end="1890" title="Kym Marsh" label="Kym Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650964" start="1892" end="1904" title="Suzanne Shaw" label="Suzanne Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047219" start="1910" end="1923" title="Noel Sullivan" label="Noel Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823053" start="2029" end="2038" title="Liberty X" label="Liberty X"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261144" start="2398" end="2413" title="Pure and Simple (song)" label="Pure and Simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q976862" start="2462" end="2472" title="Girl Thing" label="Girl Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="2518" end="2534" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956148" start="2698" end="2712" title="charity single" label="charity single"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502417" start="2753" end="2761" title="Pop Idol" label="Pop Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q348906" start="2775" end="2785" title="Will Young" label="Will Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229627" start="2877" end="2885" title="Popstars (Hear&amp;#x27;Say album)" label="Popstars"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="2995" end="3010" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639216" start="3202" end="3215" title="Monday, Monday" label="Monday Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q211277" start="3225" end="3250" title="the Mamas &amp;amp; the Papas" label="the Mamas &amp;amp; the Papas"/>
<link wikidata="Q913700" start="3261" end="3287" title="Bridge over Troubled Water (song)" label="Bridge over Troubled Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q484918" start="3297" end="3318" title="Simon &amp;amp; Garfunkel" label="Simon &amp;amp; Garfunkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773943" start="3422" end="3442" title="The Way to Your Love" label="The Way to Your Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="3595" end="3627" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q607514" start="5076" end="5086" title="EastEnders" label="EastEnders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5924317" start="5099" end="5109" title="Jack Ryder (actor)" label="Jack Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786162" start="5639" end="5651" title="This Morning (TV programme)" label="This Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267690" start="5774" end="5789" title="Johnny Shentall" label="Johnny Shentall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457831" start="5802" end="5807" title="Steps (group)" label="Steps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782424" start="5815" end="5829" title="Lisa Scott-Lee" label="Lisa Scott-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q15053681" start="5998" end="6003" title="Boom! (group)" label="Boom!"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875" start="6626" end="6637" title="M1 motorway" label="M1 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427002" start="7427" end="7430" title="fad" label="fad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823053" start="7509" end="7518" title="Liberty X" label="Liberty X"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153203" start="7656" end="7664" title="Popstars (British TV series)" label="Popstars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975116" start="7685" end="7694" title="ITV Panto" label="ITV Panto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7696" end="7712" title="Richard Whittington#Dick Whittington—stage character" label="Dick Whittington"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543952" wikidata="Q4805403" url="?curid=543952" title="Ashley County">
<text>Ashley County may refer to:

* Ashley County, Arkansas, a county in Arkansas
* Ashley County, New Zealand, a county on the South Island of New Zealand
* Ashley County, Missouri, the former name of Texas County, Missouri, from 1843 to 1845</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q61026" start="31" end="54" title="Ashley County, Arkansas" label="Ashley County, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805401" start="79" end="105" title="Ashley County, New Zealand" label="Ashley County, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q477870" start="153" end="176" title="Ashley County, Missouri" label="Ashley County, Missouri"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543955" wikidata="Q672490" url="?curid=543955" title="Deme">
<text>In Ancient Greece, a deme or &#x27; (, plural: demoi&quot;&quot;&#x27;, δήμοι) was a suburb or a subdivision of Athens and other city-states. Demes as simple subdivisions of land in the countryside existed in the 6th century BC and earlier, but did not acquire particular significance until the reforms of Cleisthenes in 508 BC. In those reforms, enrollment in the citizen-lists of a deme became the requirement for citizenship; prior to that time, citizenship had been based on membership in a phratry, or family group. At this same time, demes were established in the main city of Athens itself, where they had not previously existed; in all, at the end of Cleisthenes&#x27; reforms, Athens was divided into 139 demes. Three other demes were created subsequently: Berenikidai (224/223 BC), Apollonieis (201/200 BC), and Antinoeis (AD 126/127). The establishment of demes as the fundamental units of the state weakened the &quot;gene&quot;, or aristocratic family groups, that had dominated the phratries.

A deme functioned to some degree as a polis in miniature, and indeed some demes, such as Eleusis and Acharnae, were in fact significant towns. Each deme had a &quot;demarchos&quot; who supervised its affairs; various other civil, religious, and military functionaries existed in various demes. Demes held their own religious festivals and collected and spent revenue.

Demes were combined within the same area to make &quot;trittyes&quot;, larger population groups, which in turn were combined to form the ten tribes, or &quot;phylai,&quot; of Athens. Each tribe contained one &quot;trittys&quot; from each of three regions: the city, the coast, and the inland area.

==Cleisthenes&#x27; reforms and modifications==

===First period: 508 – 307/306 BC===

Cleisthenes divided the landscape in three zones—urban (&quot;asty&quot;), coastal (&quot;paralia&quot;) and inland (&quot;mesogeia&quot;)—and the 139 demes were organized into 30 groups called &quot;trittyes&quot; (&quot;thirds&quot;), ten for each of the zones and into ten tribes, or &quot;phylai&quot;, each composed of three &quot;trittyes&quot;, one from the coast, one from the city, and one from the inland area.

Cleisthenes also reorganized the Boule, created with 400 members under Solon, so that it had 500 members, 50 from each tribe, each deme having a fixed quota.

The ten tribes were named after legendary heroes and came to have an official order:

===Second period: 307/306 – 224/223 BC===
In 307/306 – 224/223 BC the system was reorganized with the creation of two Macedonian Phylai (XI. Antigonis and XII. Demetrias), named after Demetrius I of Macedon and Antigonus I Monophthalmus, and an increase in the membership of the Boule to 600. Each of the ten tribes, except Aiantis, provided three demes (not necessarily one for trittyes); the missing contribution of Aiantis was covered by two demes of Leontis and one from Aigeis.

===Third period: 224/223 – 201/200 BC===
The Egyptian Phyle XIII. Ptolemais, named after Ptolemy III Euergetes was created in 224/223 BC and the Boule was again increased, this time to 650 members, the twelve tribes giving each a demos. A new village was created and named Berenikidai after Ptolemy&#x27;s wife Berenice II of Egypt.

===Fourth period: 201/200 BC – 126/127 AD===
In 201/200 BC the Macedonian Phylae were dissolved and the villages (except the two given to Ptolemais) went back to their original tribes. In the spring of 200 BC Tribe XIV. Attalis, named after Attalus I, was created following the same scheme used for the creation of the Egyptian Phyle: each tribe contributed a deme and a new deme, Apollonieis, was created in honour of Apollonis, wife of Attalus I of Pergamum. As a consequence there were again 12 tribes and 600 members of the Boule. From this period onward, quotas were no longer assigned to the demes for the 50 Boule members from each tribe.

===Fifth period: 126/127 – third century===
The last modification was the creation in 126/127 of XV. Hadrianis, named after the Emperor Hadrian, following the same scheme: each tribe contributed a deme and a new deme, Antinoeis, was created in honour of Hadrian&#x27;s favourite, Antinous. Each tribe contributed 40 members to the Boule.

==Representation in the Boule==

In the first three periods there it a more detailed system of fixed quotas which essentially remained unchanged. There is no evidence for a single general reapportionment of quotas within each of the first three periods, while there are evident small quota-variations between the first and the second periods.

More precisely in:
:307/306 BC, 24 demes increased of 1 bouleutes, 13 of 2, 5 or 3, 6 of 4 and 1 (Lower Paiania) of 11 and there is not a single example of a decreased quota.
:224/223 BC 4 demes increased of 1 bouletes

As regards the last two periods, the material illustrates the complete collapse of the quota-system from 201/200 BC.

==Spurious and Late Roman demes==
Some deme lists suggest extensions to the list of 139+3 Demes by adding 43 additional names, some of which have been considered by scholars as Attic demes. The criticism performed by John S. Traill shows that 24 are the result of error, ancient or modern, or of misinterpretation and 19 are well known chiefly from inscriptions of the second and third centuries AD, i.e. in the fifth period, and thus for political purposes they were originally dependent on legitimate Cleisthenic demes.

==Homonymous and divided demes==
There were six pairs of homonymous demes:
*Halai Araphenides (VII.Kekropis) and Halai Aixonides (II.Aigeis)
*Oion Dekeleikon (VIII.Hippothontis; later XIII.Ptolemais, XIV.Attalis) and Oion Kerameikon (IV.Leontis; affiliated with XII.Demetrias in the Macedonian period)
*Eitea: there were two demes of that name, but no modifier is known. One is associated to V.Acamantis, later XI.Antigonis and XV.Hadrianis; the other is associated to X.Antiochis
*Oinoe and Oinoe: again no modifier is known; one deme was associated to VIII.Hippothontis, later XII.Demetrias and XIII.Ptolemais; the other was associated to IX.Aiantis, later XIV.Attalis and XV.Hadrianis.
*Kolonai: again no modifier is known; one deme was associated to IV.Leontis; the other to X.Antiochis, later XI.Antigonis and XIII.Ptolemais.
*Eroiadai: again no modifier is known for these two demes associated to VIII.Hippothontis and X.Antiochis.

There were six divided demes, one composed of three parts:
*Agryle, Upper Agryle and Lower Agryle (I.Erechtheis); one of them, but there is no prosopographical information for identifying which, was transferred to XI.Antigonis and went back at the end of the Macedonian period; later one of them (again it is uncertain which) was transferred to XIV.Attalis.
*Lamptrai, Upper Lamptrai and Coastal/Lower Lamptrai (I.Erechtheis); Upper Lamptrai was transferred to XI.Antigonis and went back at the end of the Macedonian period.
*Pergase, Upper and Lower (I.Erechtheis); one of them (no prosopographical information allows to decide which) was transferred to XI.Antigonis and went back at the end of the Macedonian period.
*Ankyle: no special designations of either section are preserved, although they are presumed to have the regular &quot;Upper and Lower&quot; forms. One section, perhaps Upper Ankale, was transferred to XI.Antigonis and went back at the end of the Macedonian period.
*Paiania, Upper Paiania and Lower Paiania (III.Pandionis); Upper Paiania, was transferred to XI.Antigonis and went back at the end of the Macedonian period.
*Potamos has three sections, Upper Potamos, Lower Potamos and Potamos Deiradiotes (IV.Leontes); during the Macedonian period, Potamos Deiradiotes belonged to XI.Antigonis and Lower Potamos to XII.Demetrias.

==List of Athenian demes according to tribes/phylai (φυλαί)==

===The ten Cleisthenic tribes===






===The Macedonian tribes===


===The later tribes===


==The ten tribes of Thurii==
When the city was settled under the support of Pericles and the command of Lampon and Xenocritus the population was organized in ten tribes, following the Athenian organization: there were tribes for the population of 1. Arcadia, 2. Achaea, 3. Elis, 4. Boeotia, 5. Delphi, 6. Dorians, 7. Ionians, 8. population of Euboea, 9. the islands and 10. Athenians.

== Later usage ==

The term &quot;deme&quot; () survived into the Hellenistic and Roman eras. By the time of the Byzantine Empire, the term was used to refer to one of the four chariot racing factions, the Reds, the Blues, the Greens and the Whites.

In modern Greece, the term is used to denote one of the municipalities.

== Footnotes ==
== References ==
*Fine, John V. A. &quot;The Ancient Greeks: A critical history&quot; (Harvard University Press, 1983). .
*Hornblower, Simon, and Anthony Spawforth, ed., &quot;The Oxford Classical Dictionary&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2003). .
*Meritt, B. D. &quot;The Athenian Year&quot;. Berkeley, 1961.
*Suzanne, Bernard (1998). &quot;plato-dialogues.org&quot;, &quot;Attic Tribes and Demes&quot;. Retrieved August 1, 2006.
*Whitehead, David. &quot;The Demes of Attica 508/7–ca. 250 BC: A Political and Social Study&quot; (Princeton University Press, 1986).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="3" end="17" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q672490" start="21" end="25" title="Deme" label="deme"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="112" end="118" title="Classical Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q207634" start="306" end="317" title="Cleisthenes" label="Cleisthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552552" start="495" end="502" title="phratry" label="phratry"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="686" end="692" title="Classical Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502484" start="930" end="934" title="genos" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q148837" start="1046" end="1051" title="polis" label="polis"/>
<link wikidata="Q204905" start="1097" end="1104" title="Eleusis" label="Eleusis"/>
<link wikidata="Q576319" start="1109" end="1117" title="Acharnae" label="Acharnae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705259" start="1173" end="1182" title="demarchos" label="demarchos"/>
<link wikidata="Q923805" start="1432" end="1440" title="trittys" label="trittyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q607608" start="1535" end="1541" title="phylai" label="phylai"/>
<link wikidata="Q207634" start="1763" end="1774" title="Cleisthenes" label="Cleisthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750414" start="1825" end="1829" title="asty" label="asty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363474" start="1853" end="1860" title="Paralia (trittys)" label="paralia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333384" start="1886" end="1894" title="mesogeia" label="mesogeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q607608" start="2056" end="2062" title="phyle" label="phylai"/>
<link wikidata="Q729128" start="2218" end="2223" title="Boule (ancient Greece)" label="Boule"/>
<link wikidata="Q133337" start="2256" end="2261" title="Solon" label="Solon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17615855" start="2571" end="2580" title="Antigonis (tribe)" label="Antigonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17615855" start="2590" end="2599" title="Demetrias (tribe)" label="Demetrias"/>
<link wikidata="Q59734" start="2614" end="2636" title="Demetrius Poliorcetes" label="Demetrius I of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q200401" start="2641" end="2666" title="Antigonus I Monophthalmus" label="Antigonus I Monophthalmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12883987" start="2980" end="2989" title="Ptolemais (tribe)" label="Ptolemais"/>
<link wikidata="Q39602" start="3003" end="3024" title="Ptolemy III Euergetes" label="Ptolemy III Euergetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q737848" start="3225" end="3245" title="Berenice" label="Berenice II of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12874194" start="3468" end="3475" title="Attalis" label="Attalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q110745" start="3489" end="3498" title="Attalus I" label="Attalus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q17615878" start="3996" end="4005" title="Hadrianis" label="Hadrianis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="4031" end="4038" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19921935" start="4113" end="4122" title="Antinoeis" label="Antinoeis"/>
<link wikidata="Q171876" start="4175" end="4183" title="Antinous" label="Antinous"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526134" start="5515" end="5532" title="Halai Araphenides" label="Halai Araphenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424324" start="5552" end="5567" title="Halai Aixonides" label="Halai Aixonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q12882098" start="5581" end="5596" title="Oion Dekeleikon" label="Oion Dekeleikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464934" start="5656" end="5671" title="Oion Kerameikon" label="Oion Kerameikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19360100" start="5742" end="5747" title="Eitea (disambiguation)" label="Eitea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17524320" start="5921" end="5926" title="Oenoe (Attica)" label="Oinoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423604" start="5931" end="5936" title="Oenoe (Marathon)" label="Oinoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q57222631" start="6129" end="6136" title="Colonae (Attica) (disambiguation)" label="Kolonai"/>
<link wikidata="Q19592027" start="6271" end="6279" title="Eroiadai (disambiguation)" label="Eroiadai"/>
<link wikidata="Q18015503" start="6438" end="6444" title="Agryle" label="Agryle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416286" start="6446" end="6458" title="Upper Agryle" label="Upper Agryle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416285" start="6463" end="6475" title="Lower Agryle" label="Lower Agryle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18015500" start="6737" end="6745" title="Lamptrai" label="Lamptrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412389" start="6747" end="6761" title="Upper Lamptrai" label="Upper Lamptrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422779" start="6766" end="6788" title="Coastal Lamptrai" label="Coastal/Lower Lamptrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q18015504" start="6904" end="6911" title="Pergase" label="Pergase"/>
<link wikidata="Q19341278" start="7098" end="7104" title="Ankyle" label="Ankyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18015501" start="7364" end="7371" title="Paeania" label="Paiania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3411612" start="7373" end="7386" title="Upper Paiania" label="Upper Paiania"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479004" start="7391" end="7404" title="Lower Paiania" label="Lower Paiania"/>
<link wikidata="Q18015506" start="7521" end="7528" title="Potamus (Attica)" label="Potamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464987" start="7549" end="7562" title="Upper Potamos" label="Upper Potamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464996" start="7564" end="7577" title="Lower Potamos" label="Lower Potamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464976" start="7582" end="7601" title="Potamos Deiradiotes" label="Potamos Deiradiotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q602564" start="7905" end="7911" title="Thurii" label="Thurii"/>
<link wikidata="Q80398" start="7961" end="7969" title="Pericles" label="Pericles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569087" start="7989" end="7995" title="Lampon" label="Lampon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8000" end="8010" title="Xenocritus" label="Xenocritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898802" start="8135" end="8142" title="Arcadia (ancient region)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495811" start="8147" end="8153" title="Achaea" label="Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536845" start="8158" end="8162" title="ancient Elis" label="Elis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="8167" end="8174" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="8179" end="8185" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q203711" start="8190" end="8197" title="Dorians" label="Dorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q465331" start="8202" end="8209" title="Ionians" label="Ionians"/>
<link wikidata="Q173096" start="8228" end="8234" title="Euboea" label="Euboea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="8384" end="8400" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164462" start="8448" end="8462" title="chariot racing" label="chariot racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349648" start="8578" end="8592" title="Municipalities of Greece" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="8698" end="8722" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543969" wikidata="Q324539" url="?curid=543969" title="Sam Sheppard">
<text>Samuel Holmes Sheppard ( – ) was an American osteopath. He was convicted of the 1954 murder of his pregnant wife, Marilyn Reese Sheppard, but the conviction was eventually overturned by the U.S. Supreme Court, which cited a &quot;carnival atmosphere&quot; at the trial. Sheppard was acquitted at a retrial in 1966.

==Early life and education==

Sheppard was born in Cleveland, Ohio, the youngest of three sons of Richard Allen Sheppard, D.O. He attended Cleveland Heights High School where he was an excellent student and was active in American football, basketball, and track; he was class president for three years. Sheppard met his future wife, Marilyn Reese, while in high school. Although several small Ohio colleges offered him athletic scholarships, Sheppard chose to follow the lead of his father and older brothers and pursued a career in osteopathic medicine. He enrolled at Hanover College in Indiana to study pre-osteopathic medical courses, then took supplementary courses at the Case Institute of Technology in Cleveland during the Summer of 1943. Sheppard finished his medical education at the Los Angeles Osteopathic School of Physicians and Surgeons (now University of California Irvine) and was awarded the Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.) medical degree.

Sheppard completed his internship and a residency in neurosurgery at Los Angeles County General Hospital. He married Marilyn Reese on February 21, 1945, in Hollywood, California. A few years later he returned to Ohio and joined his father&#x27;s growing medical practice at Bay View Hospital.

== Murder of Marilyn Reese Sheppard ==
On the night of Saturday, July 3, 1954, Sheppard and Marilyn were entertaining neighbors at their lakefront home (which was eventually demolished in 1993). While they were watching the movie &quot;Strange Holiday&quot;, Sheppard fell asleep on the daybed in the living room. Marilyn walked the neighbors out.

In the early morning hours of July 4, 1954, Marilyn Sheppard was bludgeoned to death in her bed with an unknown instrument. The bedroom was covered with blood spatter and drops of blood were found on floors throughout the house. Some items from the house, including Sam Sheppard&#x27;s wristwatch, keychain and key, and fraternity ring, appeared to have been stolen. They were later found in a canvas bag in shrubbery behind the house. According to Sheppard, he was sleeping soundly on a daybed when he heard the cries from his wife. He ran upstairs where he saw a &quot;white biped form&quot; in the bedroom and then he was knocked unconscious. When he awoke, he saw the person downstairs, chased the intruder out of the house down to the beach where they tussled and Sheppard was knocked unconscious again.

At 5:40 am, a neighbor received an urgent phone call from Sheppard who pleaded for him to come to his home. When the neighbor and his wife arrived, Sheppard was found shirtless and his pants were wet with a bloodstain on the knee. Authorities arrived shortly thereafter. Sheppard seemed disoriented and in shock. The family dog was not heard barking to indicate an intruder, and their seven-year-old son, Sam Reese &quot;Chip&quot; Sheppard, was asleep in the adjacent bedroom throughout the incident.

== First trial ==

=== Media ===
Sheppard&#x27;s trial began October 18, 1954, and lasted nine weeks. The murder investigation and the trial were notable for the extensive publicity. Some newspapers and other media in Ohio were accused of bias against Sheppard and inflammatory coverage of the case, and were criticized for immediately labeling him the only viable suspect. A federal judge later criticized the media, &quot;If ever there was a trial by newspaper, this is a perfect example. And the most insidious example was the &quot;Cleveland Press&quot;. For some reason that newspaper took upon itself the role of accuser, judge, and jury.&quot;

It appeared that the local media influenced the investigators. On July 21, 1954, the &quot;Cleveland Press&quot; ran a front-page editorial titled &quot;Do It Now, Dr. Gerber&quot;, which called for a public inquest. Hours later, Dr. Samuel Gerber, the coroner investigating the murder, announced that he would hold an inquest the next day. The &quot;Cleveland Press&quot; ran another front-page editorial titled &quot;Why Isn&#x27;t Sam Sheppard in Jail?&quot; on July 30, which was titled in later editions, &quot;Quit Stalling and Bring Him In!&quot; That night, Sheppard was arrested for a police interrogation.

The local media ran salacious front-page stories inflammatory to Sheppard that contained no supporting facts or were later disproved. During the trial, a popular radio show broadcast a report about a New York City woman who claimed to be his mistress and the mother of his illegitimate child. Since the jury was not sequestered, two of the jurors admitted to the judge that they heard the broadcast but the judge did not dismiss them. From interviews with some of the jurors years later, it is likely that jurors were contaminated by the press before the trial and perhaps during it. The U.S. Supreme Court later stated that the trial was surrounded by a &quot;carnival atmosphere&quot;.

===Susan Hayes===
Susan Hayes was a 24-year-old laboratory technician at Bayview Hospital in Bay village, who had an affair with Sheppard. The prosecution attempted to show that Hayes was the motive for murder.

===Defense strategy===
Sheppard&#x27;s attorney, William Corrigan, argued that Sheppard had severe injuries and that these injuries were inflicted by the intruder. Corrigan based his argument on the report made by neurosurgeon Charles Elkins who examined Sheppard and found he had suffered a cervical concussion, nerve injury, many absent or weak reflexes (most notably on the left side of his body), and injury in the region of the second cervical vertebra in the back of the neck. Elkins stated that it was impossible to fake or simulate the missing reflex responses.

The defense further argued the crime scene was extremely bloody, yet the only blood evidence appearing on Sheppard was a bloodstain on his trousers. Corrigan also argued two of Marilyn&#x27;s teeth had been broken and that the pieces had been pulled from her mouth, suggesting she had possibly bitten her assailant. He told the jury that Sheppard had no open wounds. Some observers have questioned the accuracy of claims that Marilyn Sheppard lost her teeth while biting her attacker, arguing that her missing teeth are more consistent with the severe beating she received to her face and skull. However, criminologist Paul L. Kirk later said that if the beating had broken Mrs. Sheppard&#x27;s teeth, pieces would have been found inside her mouth, and her lips would have been severely damaged, which was not the case.

Sheppard took the stand in his own defense, testifying that he had been sleeping downstairs on a daybed when he awoke to his wife&#x27;s screams.

Sheppard ran back downstairs and chased what he described as a &quot;bushy-haired intruder&quot; or &quot;form&quot; down to the Lake Erie beach below his home, before being knocked out again. The defense called eighteen character witnesses for Sheppard, and two witnesses who said that they had seen a bushy-haired man near the Sheppard home on the day of the crime.

===Verdict===
On December 21, after deliberating for four days, the jury found Sheppard guilty of second-degree murder. He was sentenced to life in prison.

===Family deaths===
On January 7, 1955, shortly after his conviction, the incarcerated Sheppard was told that his mother, Ethel Sheppard, had died from a self-inflicted gunshot. Eleven days later, Sheppard&#x27;s father, Richard Sheppard, died of a bleeding gastric ulcer and stomach cancer. Sheppard was permitted to attend both funerals but was required to wear handcuffs.

On February 13, 1963, while F. Lee Bailey was pursuing the appeals process, Sheppard&#x27;s former father-in-law, Thomas S. Reese, died by suicide in an East Cleveland, Ohio, motel. Reese&#x27;s wife had died in 1929 when their daughter Marilyn was in grade school.

===Incarceration===
In 1959, Sheppard voluntarily took part in cancer studies by the Sloan Kettering Institute for Cancer Research, allowing live cancer cells to be injected into his body.

==Appeals and retrial==
===Appeals===
Sheppard&#x27;s attorney William Corrigan spent six years making appeals but all were rejected. On July 30, 1961, Corrigan died and F. Lee Bailey took over as Sheppard&#x27;s chief counsel. Bailey&#x27;s petition for a writ of &quot;habeas corpus&quot; was granted on July 15, 1964, by a United States district court judge who called the 1954 trial a &quot;mockery of justice&quot; that shredded Sheppard&#x27;s Fourteenth Amendment right to due process. The State of Ohio was ordered to release Sheppard on bond and gave the prosecutor 60 days to bring charges against him, otherwise the case would be dismissed permanently. The State of Ohio appealed the ruling to the U.S. Court of Appeals Court for the Sixth Circuit, which on March 4, 1965, reversed the federal judge&#x27;s ruling. Bailey appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which agreed to hear the case in &quot;Sheppard v. Maxwell&quot;. On June 6, 1966, the Supreme Court, by an 8-to-1 vote, struck down the murder conviction. The decision noted, among other factors, that a &quot;carnival atmosphere&quot; had permeated the trial, and that the trial judge, Edward J. Blythin, who had died in 1958, was biased against Sheppard because Blythin had refused to sequester the jury, did not order the jury to ignore and disregard media reports of the case, and when speaking to newspaper columnist Dorothy Kilgallen shortly before the trial started said, &quot;Well, he&#x27;s guilty as hell. There&#x27;s no question about it.&quot;

Sheppard served 10 years of his sentence. Three days after his 1964 release, he married Ariane Tebbenjohanns, a German divorcee who had corresponded with him during his imprisonment. The two had been engaged since January 1963. Tebbenjohanns endured her own bout of controversy shortly after the engagement had been announced, confirming that her half-sister was Magda Ritschel, the wife of Nazi propaganda chief Joseph Goebbels. Tebbenjohanns emphasized that she held no Nazi views. On October 7, 1969, Sheppard and Tebbenjohanns divorced.

=== Retrial ===
Jury selection began October 24, 1966, and opening statements began eight days later. Media interest in the trial remained high, but this jury was sequestered. The prosecutor presented essentially the same case as was presented twelve years earlier. Bailey aggressively sought to discredit each prosecution witness during cross-examination. When Coroner Samuel Gerber testified about a murder weapon that he described as a &quot;surgical weapon&quot;, Bailey led Gerber to admit that they never found a murder weapon and had nothing to tie Sheppard to the murder. In his closing argument, Bailey scathingly dismissed the prosecution&#x27;s case against Sheppard as &quot;ten pounds of hogwash in a five-pound bag&quot;.

Unlike the original trial, neither Sheppard nor Susan Hayes took the stand, a strategy that proved to be successful. After deliberating for 12 hours, the jury returned on November 16 with a &quot;not guilty&quot; verdict. The trial was important to Bailey&#x27;s rise to prominence among American criminal defense lawyers. It was during this trial that Paul Kirk presented the blood spatter evidence he collected in Sheppard&#x27;s home in 1955 that suggested that the murderer was left-handed (Sheppard was right-handed), which proved crucial to his acquittal.

Three weeks after the trial, Sheppard appeared as a guest on the December 7 episode of &quot;The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson&quot;.

After his acquittal, Sheppard worked with ghostwriter Bill Levy to write the book &quot;Endure and Conquer&quot;, which presented his side of the case and discussed his years in prison. Levy felt conflicted about collaborating with Sheppard because of his belief that Sheppard had committed the crime.

==Professional wrestling career==

Sheppard&#x27;s friend and soon-to-be father-in-law, professional wrestler George Strickland, introduced him to wrestling and trained him for it. He debuted in August 1969 at the age of 45 as &quot;Killer&quot; Sam Sheppard, wrestling Wild Bill Scholl.

Sheppard wrestled over 40 matches before his death in April 1970, including a number of tag team bouts with Strickland as his partner. His notoriety made him a strong draw.

During his wrestling career, Dr. Sheppard used his anatomical knowledge to develop a new submission hold, that he called the &quot;Mandibular Nerve Pinch&quot;. 
The maneuver would go on to be renamed the &quot;Mandible Claw&quot; and utilized and popularized by professional wrestler Mankind in 1996.

== Late medical practice, remarriage, and death ==
After his release from prison, Sheppard opened a medical office in the Columbus suburb of Gahanna, Ohio. On May 10, 1968, Sheppard was granted surgical privileges at the Youngstown Osteopathic Hospital, but &quot;[his] skills as a surgeon had deteriorated, and much of the time he was impaired by alcohol&quot;. Five days after he was granted privileges, he performed a discectomy on a woman and accidentally cut an artery; the patient died the next day. On August 6, he nicked the right iliac artery on a 29-year-old patient who bled to death internally. Sheppard resigned from the hospital staff a few months later after wrongful death suits had been filed by the patients&#x27; families.

Six months before his death, Sheppard married Colleen Strickland. Toward the end of his life, Sheppard was reportedly drinking &quot;as much as two fifths of liquor a day&quot; (1.5 liters). On April 6, 1970, Sheppard was found dead in his home in Columbus, Ohio. Early reports indicated that Sheppard died of liver failure. The official cause of death was Wernicke encephalopathy (a type of brain damage associated with advanced alcoholism). He was buried in Forest Lawn Memorial Gardens in Columbus, Ohio.

===1997 DNA test===
Sheppard&#x27;s body remained buried until September 1997 when he was exhumed for DNA testing as part of the lawsuit brought by his son to clear his father&#x27;s name. His attorney stated that the DNA testing absolved Sheppard of the murder. After the tests, the body was cremated, and the ashes were interred in a mausoleum at Knollwood Cemetery in Mayfield Heights, Ohio, along with those of his murdered wife, Marilyn.

==Civil trial for wrongful imprisonment==

Sheppard&#x27;s son, Samuel Reese Sheppard, has devoted considerable time and effort towards attempting to clear his father&#x27;s reputation.

In 1999, Alan Davis, a lifelong friend of Sheppard and administrator of his estate, sued the State of Ohio in the Cuyahoga County Court of Common Pleas for Sheppard&#x27;s wrongful imprisonment. The case was heard before Judge Ron Suster.

By order of the court, Marilyn Sheppard&#x27;s body was exhumed, in part to determine if the fetus she was carrying had been fathered by Sheppard. Terry Gilbert, an attorney retained by the Sheppard family, told the media that &quot;the fetus in this case had previously been autopsied&quot;, a fact that had never previously been disclosed. This, Gilbert argued, raised questions about the coroner&#x27;s office in the original case possibly concealing pertinent evidence. Due to the passage of time on the fetus&#x27;s tissues, paternity could not be established.

===Richard Eberling===
During the civil trial, plaintiff attorney Terry Gilbert contended that Richard Eberling, an occasional handyman and window washer at the Sheppard home, was the likeliest suspect in Marilyn&#x27;s murder. Eberling found Marilyn attractive and he was very familiar with the layout of the Sheppard home.

In 1959, detectives were questioning Richard Eberling about various burglaries in the area. Eberling confessed to the burglaries and showed the detectives his loot, which included two rings that belonged to Marilyn Sheppard. Eberling stole the rings in 1958, a few years after the murder, from Sam Sheppard&#x27;s brother&#x27;s house, taken from a box marked &quot;Personal Property of Marilyn Sheppard&quot;. In subsequent questioning, Eberling admitted his blood was at the crime scene of Marilyn Sheppard. He stated that he cut his finger while washing windows just prior to the murder and bled while on the premises. As part of the investigation, Eberling took a polygraph test with questions about the murder of Marilyn. The polygraph examiner concluded that Eberling did not show deception in his answers, although the polygraph results were evaluated by other experts years later who found that it was either inconclusive or Eberling was deceptive.

In his testimony in the 2000 civil lawsuit, Bailey stated that he rejected Eberling as a suspect in 1966 because &quot;I thought he passed a good polygraph test.&quot; When it was presented to Bailey that an independent polygraph expert said Eberling either murdered Marilyn or had knowledge of who did, Bailey stated that he probably would have presented Eberling as a suspect in the 1966 retrial.

DNA evidence, which was not available in the two murder trials, played an important role in the civil trial. DNA analysis of blood at the crime scene showed that there was presence of blood from a third person, other than Marilyn and Dr. Sam Sheppard.

With regard to tying the blood to Eberling, the DNA analysis that was allowed to be admitted to the trial was inconclusive. A plaintiff DNA expert was 90% confident that one of the blood spots belonged to Richard Eberling but, according to the rules of the court, this was not admissible. The defense argued that the blood evidence had been tainted in the years since it was collected, and that an important blood spot on the closet door in Marilyn Sheppard&#x27;s room potentially included 83% of the adult white population. The defense also pointed out that the results in 1955 from the older blood typing technique, that the blood collected from the closet door was Type O, while Eberling&#x27;s blood type was Type A.

Throughout his life, Richard Eberling was associated with women who had suspicious deaths and he was convicted of murdering Ethel May Durkin, a wealthy, elderly widow who died without any immediate family. Durkin&#x27;s 1984 murder in Lakewood, Ohio, was uncovered when a court-appointed review of the woman&#x27;s estate revealed that Eberling, Durkin&#x27;s guardian and executor, had failed to execute her final wishes, which included stipulations on her burial.

Durkin&#x27;s body was exhumed and additional injuries were discovered in the autopsy that did not match Eberling&#x27;s previous claims of in-house accidents, including a fall down a staircase in her home. In subsequent legal action, both Eberling and his partner, Obie Henderson, were found guilty in Durkin&#x27;s death. Coincidentally, both of Durkin&#x27;s sisters, Myrtle Fray and Sarah Belle Farrow, had died under suspicious circumstances as well. Fray was killed after being &quot;savagely&quot; beaten about the head and face and then strangled; Farrow died following a fall down the basement steps in the home she shared with Durkin in 1970, a fall in which she broke both legs and both arms.

Although Eberling denied any criminal involvement in the murder of Marilyn Sheppard, Kathy Wagner Dyal, who worked alongside Eberling in caring for Ethel May Durkin, also testified that Eberling had confessed to her in 1983. A fellow convict also reported that Eberling confessed to the crime. The defense called into question the credibility of both witnesses during the 2000 civil trial. Eberling died in an Ohio prison in 1998, where he was serving a life sentence for the 1984 murder of Ethel May Durkin.

===Verdict===
After twelve weeks of trial, 76 witnesses, and hundreds of exhibits, the case went to the eight-person civil jury. The jury deliberated just three hours on April 12, 2000, before returning a unanimous verdict that Samuel Reese Sheppard had failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that his father had been wrongfully imprisoned.

===Invalidation of wrongful imprisonment claim===
On February 22, 2002, the Eighth District Court of Appeals ruled unanimously that the civil case should not have gone to the jury, on the grounds that the statute of limitations had expired, and that a claim for wrongful imprisonment abated with Sam Sheppard&#x27;s death. In August 2002, the Supreme Court of Ohio declined to review the appeals court&#x27;s decision.

===Additional suspect===
A 2002 book theorizes that Marilyn Sheppard was murdered by James Call, an Air Force deserter who passed through Cleveland on a multi-state crime spree at the relevant time. Pages 444-451 show multiple, comparative photographs of Major Call&#x27;s Luger pistol with the blood-stained pillowcase of Marilyn Sheppard. During the original trial, the blood stain patterns were suspected of having been made by a surgical instrument, which F. Lee Bailey disproved during the 1966 retrial.

==Records from the case==
In 2012, William Mason, then Cuyahoga County Prosecutor, designated the Cleveland–Marshall College of Law Library at Cleveland State University as the repository for records and other materials relating to the Sheppard case. The law school has digitized the material, consisting of over 60 boxes of photographs, recordings, and trial exhibits, and posted portions of it online through the school&#x27;s institutional repository.

==In popular culture==
===In literature===
* The 2010 novel &quot;Mr. Peanut&quot; by Adam Ross features Sam Sheppard as a New York City detective investigating a woman&#x27;s death and recounting the details of his wife&#x27;s murder.
* Edward D. Hoch created his famous detective Dr. Sam Hawthorne after him.
* The novel &quot;Crooked River Burning&quot; by Mark Winegardner features the Sheppard murder trial and ends with an epilogue of Sheppard&#x27;s wrestling days and death.
* &quot;Helter Skelter&quot; by Vincent Bugliosi with Curt Gentry several times compares the media fanaticism of the Manson Family murders trial to that of the Sheppard case.
* Max Allan Collins&#x27;s 2020 novel &quot;Do No Harm&quot; is a fictional account of a private investigator investigating the Sheppard case at the request of Eliot Ness and Erle Stanley Gardner.

===In film===
* The 1970 movie &quot;The Lawyer&quot; is a courtroom drama based on the Sheppard murder trial.
* The 1993 film &quot;The Fugitive&quot; is inspired by the case.
* The 2021 Hallmark Movies &amp; Mysteries movie &quot;Reunited and It Feels So Deadly&quot; features the Sheppard Murder trial in the Real Murders Club group.

===Television===
* The television series &quot;The Fugitive&quot; and the 1993 film of the same name have been cited as being loosely based on Sheppard&#x27;s story. This claim has always been denied by their creators.
* The TV series &quot;American Justice&quot; produced an episode based on this case titled &quot;The Sam Sheppard Story&quot;.
* An episode of the &quot;Cold Case&quot; television series titled &quot;Schadenfreude&quot; is based on this case.
* &quot;Guilty or Innocent: The Sam Sheppard Murder Case&quot; (1975), starring George Peppard, is a television movie about this case.
* The &quot;Law &amp; Order&quot; television series episode &quot;Justice&quot; is based on Sam Reese Sheppard&#x27;s mission to clear his father&#x27;s name.
* &quot;My Father&#x27;s Shadow: The Sam Sheppard Story&quot; (1998), starring Peter Strauss, is a television movie about this case.
* The TV series &quot;The New Detectives&quot; aired an episode about the forensic testing of the evidence in this case, both at the time of Sheppard&#x27;s indictment and during the later efforts to vindicate him.
* The TV series &quot;Notorious&quot; produced an episode about this case titled &quot;The Sam Sheppard Story&quot;.
* The &quot;Nova&quot; television series episode &quot;NOVA: The Killer&#x27;s Trail – The Story of Dr. Sam Sheppard&quot; includes a reconstruction of the Sheppard house, examines previously ignored evidence, and offers the opinions of forensic experts.
* The educational television series &quot;Our Living Bill of Rights&quot;, produced by Encyclopædia Britannica Films, covers the Sheppard trial in the episode &quot;Free Press vs. Trial By Jury: The Sheppard Case&quot; (also called &quot;Free Press vs Fair Trial By Jury&quot;). The program contains documentary film footage, interviews with Sheppard and Bailey and a dramatization of the activity in the Sheppard home at the time of the murder. The program may be viewed on this site: http://www.historicfilms.com/tapes/15618 (the opening and closing title sequences are omitted, and is entirely in black and white – the original contained some color footage).
* The BBC Four documentary series &quot;Catching History&#x27;s Criminals: The Forensics Story&quot; episode (S01E02; 2015) &quot;Traces of Guilt&quot; examined the case, with particular regard to bloodstain evidence and bloodstain pattern analysis.
* The Investigation Discovery series &quot;A Crime to Remember&quot; details the evidence and Sam Sheppard&#x27;s story in the Season 3 episode &quot;The Wrong Man&quot;, first aired December 15, 2015.

== See also ==
* List of premature professional wrestling deaths

==References==
==Bibliography==
*Bailey, F. Lee (1971). &quot;The Defense Never Rests&quot;. New York: Stein and Day Publishers.
*
*Holmes, Paul (1961). &quot;The Sheppard Murder Case&quot;. New York: David McKay Company, Inc.
*Pollack, Jack Harrison (1972). &quot;Dr. Sam: An American Tragedy&quot;. Chicago: Henry Regnery Company.
*Seltzer, Louis B. (1956). &quot;The Years Were Good&quot;. Cleveland, Ohio: The World Publishing Company.
*Sheppard, Dr. Sam (1966). &quot;Endure and Conquer&quot;. Cleveland, Ohio: The World Publishing Company.
*Sheppard, Dr. Stephen (1964). &quot;My Brother&#x27;s Keeper&quot;. New York: David McKay Company. Inc.
*

==External links==
* Trials of Sam Sheppard
* Nova: The Killer&#x27;s Trail Complete transcript of the 1999 Nova program and resources.
* FBI file on Sam Sheppard at vault.fbi.gov
* FBI file on Marilyn Sheppard at vault.fbi.gov</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q324539" start="0" end="22" title="Sam Sheppard" label="Samuel Holmes Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107631" start="45" end="54" title="Osteopathic medicine in the United States" label="osteopath"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="190" end="208" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="367" end="376" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132149" start="455" end="484" title="Cleveland Heights High School" label="Cleveland Heights High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287521" start="849" end="869" title="osteopathic medicine" label="osteopathic medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5649375" start="886" end="901" title="Hanover College" label="Hanover College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="905" end="912" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047060" start="994" end="1022" title="Case Institute of Technology" label="Case Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q868421" start="1173" end="1204" title="University of California, Irvine" label="University of California Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287521" start="1226" end="1256" title="Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine" label="Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682058" start="1350" end="1385" title="Los Angeles County General Hospital" label="Los Angeles County General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716367" start="1555" end="1572" title="Bay View Hospital" label="Bay View Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621406" start="1811" end="1826" title="Strange Holiday (1945 film)" label="Strange Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243076" start="1862" end="1868" title="daybed" label="daybed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354953" start="2077" end="2090" title="Blood squirt" label="blood spatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="3455" end="3459" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132211" start="3773" end="3788" title="Cleveland Press" label="Cleveland Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036832" start="4097" end="4104" title="inquest" label="inquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315489" start="4822" end="4833" title="jury sequestration" label="sequestered"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151885" start="6597" end="6609" title="Paul L. Kirk" label="Paul L. Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492" start="7075" end="7084" title="Lake Erie" label="Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q172941" start="7730" end="7743" title="gastric ulcer" label="gastric ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189588" start="7748" end="7762" title="stomach cancer" label="stomach cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15808" start="7836" end="7845" title="handcuffs" label="handcuffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q998878" start="8001" end="8021" title="East Cleveland, Ohio" label="East Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808012" start="8200" end="8245" title="Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center" label="Sloan Kettering Institute for Cancer Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366905" start="8475" end="8488" title="F. Lee Bailey" label="F. Lee Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="8576" end="8589" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="8631" end="8659" title="United States district court" label="United States district court"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="8755" end="8775" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="8811" end="8815" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q250472" start="9014" end="9063" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit" label="U.S. Court of Appeals Court for the Sixth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494539" start="9213" end="9232" title="Sheppard v. Maxwell" label="Sheppard v. Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343621" start="9461" end="9478" title="Edward J. Blythin" label="Edward J. Blythin"/>
<link wikidata="Q273177" start="9696" end="9713" title="Dorothy Kilgallen" label="Dorothy Kilgallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57202" start="10196" end="10210" title="Magda Goebbels" label="Magda Ritschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="10224" end="10228" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="10246" end="10261" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151885" start="11465" end="11474" title="Paul L. Kirk" label="Paul Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478662" start="11489" end="11511" title="bloodstain pattern analysis" label="blood spatter evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057742" start="11768" end="11807" title="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" label="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="11858" end="11869" title="ghostwriter" label="ghostwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="12207" end="12228" title="professional wrestling" label="professional wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066670" start="12496" end="12504" title="tag team" label="tag team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12575" end="12579" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#D" label="draw"/>
<link wikidata="Q196249" start="12671" end="12686" title="professional wrestling hold" label="submission hold"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12793" end="12806" title="Professional wrestling holds#Mandible Claw" label="Mandible Claw"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="12867" end="12874" title="Mick Foley" label="Mankind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924937" start="13026" end="13039" title="Gahanna, Ohio" label="Gahanna, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029776" start="13306" end="13316" title="discectomy" label="discectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q707257" start="13424" end="13436" title="Common iliac artery" label="iliac artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="13876" end="13890" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q970208" start="13938" end="13951" title="liver failure" label="liver failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573307" start="13985" end="14008" title="Wernicke encephalopathy" label="Wernicke encephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="14120" end="14134" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="14239" end="14250" title="DNA testing" label="DNA testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q29098006" start="14486" end="14504" title="Knollwood Cemetery" label="Knollwood Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372404" start="14508" end="14530" title="Mayfield Heights, Ohio" label="Mayfield Heights, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080789" start="14898" end="14919" title="Ohio Courts of Common Pleas" label="Court of Common Pleas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364452" start="14995" end="15005" title="Ron Suster" label="Ron Suster"/>
<link wikidata="Q331055" start="15064" end="15071" title="exhumation" label="exhumed"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="15101" end="15106" title="fetus" label="fetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="15245" end="15250" title="fetus" label="fetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41482" start="15284" end="15293" title="autopsy" label="autopsied"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="17259" end="17262" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188010" start="18211" end="18221" title="ABO blood group system" label="blood type"/>
<link wikidata="Q570990" start="18470" end="18484" title="Lakewood, Ohio" label="Lakewood, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q68676" start="19861" end="19874" title="life sentence" label="life sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q13370881" start="20132" end="20139" title="verdict" label="verdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080806" start="20347" end="20379" title="Ohio District Courts of Appeals" label="Eighth District Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899048" start="20476" end="20498" title="statute of limitations" label="statute of limitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001112" start="20614" end="20635" title="Supreme Court of Ohio" label="Supreme Court of Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q154199" start="20964" end="20976" title="Luger pistol" label="Luger pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132316" start="21299" end="21332" title="Cleveland–Marshall College of Law" label="Cleveland–Marshall College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100801" start="21344" end="21370" title="Cleveland State University" label="Cleveland State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065413" start="21630" end="21654" title="institutional repository" label="institutional repository"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292004" start="21895" end="21909" title="Edward D. Hoch" label="Edward D. Hoch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21986" end="22007" title="Crooked River Burning" label="Crooked River Burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q943273" start="22017" end="22033" title="Mark Winegardner" label="Mark Winegardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710627" start="22148" end="22162" title="Helter Skelter (book)" label="Helter Skelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677403" start="22172" end="22188" title="Vincent Bugliosi" label="Vincent Bugliosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195378" start="22194" end="22205" title="Curt Gentry" label="Curt Gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q690233" start="22317" end="22334" title="Max Allan Collins" label="Max Allan Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q358505" start="22475" end="22485" title="Eliot Ness" label="Eliot Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q357065" start="22490" end="22510" title="Erle Stanley Gardner" label="Erle Stanley Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746462" start="22550" end="22560" title="The Lawyer (film)" label="The Lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q156309" start="22646" end="22658" title="The Fugitive (1993 film)" label="The Fugitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643028" start="22701" end="22732" title="Hallmark Movies &amp;amp; Mysteries" label="Hallmark Movies &amp;amp; Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q137034" start="22898" end="22910" title="The Fugitive (1963 TV series)" label="The Fugitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q156309" start="22925" end="22951" title="The Fugitive (1993 film)" label="1993 film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744286" start="23092" end="23108" title="American Justice" label="American Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q733960" start="23223" end="23232" title="Cold Case (TV series)" label="Cold Case"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23270" end="23283" title="List of Cold Case episodes#Season 2: 2004–2005" label="Schadenfreude"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23321" end="23369" title="Guilty or Innocent: The Sam Sheppard Murder Case" label="Guilty or Innocent: The Sam Sheppard Murder Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q36980" start="23393" end="23407" title="George Peppard" label="George Peppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q321423" start="23460" end="23475" title="Law &amp;amp; Order" label="Law &amp;amp; Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451711" start="23514" end="23521" title="List of Law &amp;amp; Order episodes (season 10)" label="Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q275161" start="23686" end="23699" title="Peter Strauss" label="Peter Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753574" start="23762" end="23780" title="The New Detectives" label="The New Detectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063253" start="23977" end="23986" title="Notorious (2004 TV series)" label="Notorious"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071768" start="24084" end="24088" title="Nova (American TV series)" label="Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q787211" start="24995" end="25003" title="BBC Four" label="BBC Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927896" start="25186" end="25205" title="blood residue" label="bloodstain evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478662" start="25210" end="25237" title="bloodstain pattern analysis" label="bloodstain pattern analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q668203" start="25245" end="25268" title="Investigation Discovery" label="Investigation Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q29097670" start="25282" end="25301" title="A Crime to Remember" label="A Crime to Remember"/>
<link wikidata="Q29915489" start="25459" end="25506" title="List of premature professional wrestling deaths" label="List of premature professional wrestling deaths"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543976" wikidata="Q3487511" url="?curid=543976" title="Vilém Tauský">
<text>Vilém Tauský CBE (20 July 1910, Přerov, Moravia – 16 March 2004, London) was a Czech conductor and composer who, from the advent of the Second World War, lived and worked in the UK, one of a significant group of émigré composers and musicians who settled there.

==Life==
Vilém Tauský was from a musical family: his Viennese mother had sung Mozart at the Vienna State Opera under Gustav Mahler, and her cousin was the operetta composer Leo Fall.

Tauský studied with Leoš Janáček and later became a repetiteur at the Brno Opera. His other teachers included Vilém Petrzelka (composition) and Zdeněk Chalabala (conducting). At the age of nineteen he conducted Puccini&#x27;s &quot;Turandot&quot; in Brno on short notice in place of Chalabala, who had become ill. Tauský was of Jewish ancestry, and the rise of the Nazis forced him to move to France. He later volunteered for service with the Free Czech Army. He eventually reached the UK in 1940 after the fall of France, arriving with other soldiers on a Yugoslav coal ship to Newport, Monmouthshire.

He served musical functions in the Czechoslovak Army in exile, as a military band conductor in France. Bohuslav Martinů composed his &quot;Field Mass&quot; for Tauský and his regimental band, but the fall of France prevented them from giving the premiere. He continued as a band and choir leader in the UK.

During the Coventry Blitz on the night of 14 November 1940, Tausky was based ten miles away in Leamington Spa with the Czech Free Army. His unit was mobilized to search the ruins for survivors. He wrote his &quot;Coventry Meditation&quot; for strings to commemorate the civilian casualties and the destruction of the Cathedral. The work was first performed by the Menges Quartet on 17 March 1942 at a Myra Hess National Gallery Concert in London. The piece was revived in November 2021 by the Jubilee Quartet in Leamington. During the conflict he was awarded a Czech Military Cross, followed by the Czech Order of Merit at the end of the war.

==Opera==
From 1945 to 1949, Tauský was musical director of the Carl Rosa Opera Company, and following several years conducting regional BBC orchestras in Belfast, Glasgow and Manchester he was appointed music director of Welsh National Opera (1951-1956). He made his Covent Garden début with &quot;The Queen of Spades&quot; in January, 1951. On 26 December 1953 he became possibly the only conductor to conduct two operas on the same day, with a performance of Humperdinck&#x27;s &quot;Hansel and Gretel&quot; in the afternoon at Sadler&#x27;s Wells and Giuseppe Verdi&#x27;s &quot;Il trovatore&quot; at Covent Garden in the evening. He was artistic director of the Phoenix Opera touring company from 1966 to 1975.

Tauský introduced many Czech operas to the UK, including Smetana&#x27;s &quot;The Kiss&quot; in 1948, Janáček&#x27;s &quot;Osud&quot; in 1972 and Smetana&#x27;s &quot;The Brandenburgers in Bohemia&quot; in 1994. In 1955 he also conducted all six symphonies by his friend Martinu in London, marking the composer&#x27;s 65th birthday. He also conducted many premieres of UK operas including &quot;A Dinner Engagement&quot; and &quot;Nelson&quot; (Lennox Berkeley, both 1954), &quot;The Violins Of St Jacques&quot; (Malcolm Williamson, 1966) and a studio recording of &quot;Miss Julie&quot; (William Alwyn, 1977). In total Tauský was responsible for twenty-six British opera and operetta premières.

==Light music==
Tauský was the first foreign conductor to conduct the Band of the Coldstream Guards in 100 years and was an instructor/adjudicator at Kneller Hall for some years, as well as an adjudicator at the annual Brass Band competitions. He was principal conductor of the BBC Concert Orchestra from 1956 to 1966. He regularly appeared with this orchestra on the BBC Light Programme&#x27;s long-running weekly show &quot;Friday Night is Music Night&quot;. Between 1966 and 1992, he was the director of opera and head of the conducting course at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama. As a composer, his most popular success was the Harmonica Concertino he wrote for Tommy Reilly in 1973, which was also used for a ballet in New York.

Andrew Lamb points out that, following his ten years with the BBC Concert Orchestra during which he raised its profile and range considerably, he was forever after branded as a light music specialist. He &quot;never regained the profile he had previously enjoyed in more serious music, for which he was eminently qualified&quot;.

In 1979, Tauský published his memoirs under the title &quot;Vilém Tauský Tells his Story&quot;, which his wife Peggy Mallett co-authored. That same year, he was honoured as a Freeman of the City of London. In 1981, he was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE). He and Mallett published the book &quot;Leoš Janáček: Leaves from his Life&quot; in 1982. Tauský and Mallett were married from 1948 until her death in 1982. He was the stepfather of her two sons, who both died before her. He is survived by his companion of his later years, Brenda Rayson.

==Selected works==
* 1925 - Cello Sonata No 1
* 1930 - &quot;Symfonieta&quot; for orchestra
* 1930 - Three Songs for soprano &amp; piano
* 1932-8 - Three operettas (for Brno Opera House): &quot;Marcella&quot;, &quot;Keep Smiling&quot;, &quot;Little Girl in Blue&quot;
* 1934 - &quot;Christopher Columbus&quot;, play with music
* 1935 -&quot;The Lost World&quot;, music for documentary film
* 1939 - Variations for Piano on an Original Theme
* 1940 - Two Military Marches: &quot;The Czechs are Marching&quot;, &quot;Call to Arms&quot;
* 1941 - &quot;Coventry: A Meditation for String Quartet&quot; 
* 1942 - Variations on a Welsh Tune, piano
* 1943 - &quot;Interim Balance&quot;, music for documentary film
* 1945 - &quot;Rhapsody on Tunes by Smetana&quot; for piano &amp; orchestra
* 1950 - Concert Overture for Brass Band
* 1957 - &quot;Fantasia da Burlesca&quot; for violin &amp; orchestra
* 1964 - Cello Sonata No 2
* 1965 - &quot;Essay&quot; for solo viola
* 1965 - String Quartet
* 1973 - Concertino for Harmonica, Strings, Harp &amp; Percussion (written for Tommy Reilly)
* 1975 - &quot;Ballade&quot; for cello and piano
* 1978 - &quot;From Our Village&quot;, three movement suite for orchestra
* 1980 - Suite for Violin &amp; Piano
* 1998 - Serenade for Strings

== See also ==
* List of émigré composers in Britain

==References==
==External links==
* BBC Concert Orchestra history page
* &quot;Coventry: A Meditation for String Quartet&quot;, performed by Ensemble Modern
* Vilem Tausky by Derek Allen (1952), National Portrait Gallery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3487511" start="0" end="12" title="Vilém Tauský" label="Vilém Tauský"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="13" end="16" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="CBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q470380" start="32" end="38" title="Přerov" label="Přerov"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="40" end="47" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="65" end="71" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="79" end="84" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="136" end="152" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q86752902" start="212" end="228" title="List of émigré composers from Nazi Europe who settled in Britain" label="émigré composers"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="341" end="347" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="380" end="393" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q78585" start="436" end="444" title="Leo Fall" label="Leo Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q184933" start="467" end="479" title="Leoš Janáček" label="Leoš Janáček"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="517" end="521" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q168969" start="591" end="607" title="Zdeněk Chalabala" label="Zdeněk Chalabala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311" start="658" end="665" title="Giacomo Puccini" label="Puccini"/>
<link wikidata="Q207990" start="679" end="687" title="Turandot" label="Turandot"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="697" end="701" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="812" end="817" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="840" end="846" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018845" start="1026" end="1033" title="Newport Docks" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q223258" start="1154" end="1170" title="Bohuslav Martinů" label="Bohuslav Martinů"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875586" start="1370" end="1384" title="Coventry Blitz" label="Coventry Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q546635" start="1454" end="1468" title="Leamington Spa" label="Leamington Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138070" start="1676" end="1685" title="Coventry Cathedral" label="Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q269848" start="1760" end="1769" title="Myra Hess" label="Myra Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q180788" start="1770" end="1786" title="National Gallery" label="National Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040728" start="2067" end="2090" title="Carl Rosa Opera Company" label="Carl Rosa Opera Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="2158" end="2165" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="2167" end="2174" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="2179" end="2189" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q577000" start="2225" end="2245" title="Welsh National Opera" label="Welsh National Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q55019" start="2271" end="2284" title="Covent Garden" label="Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q221047" start="2302" end="2321" title="The Queen of Spades (opera)" label="The Queen of Spades"/>
<link wikidata="Q55010" start="2465" end="2476" title="Engelbert Humperdinck (composer)" label="Humperdinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099668" start="2490" end="2507" title="Hänsel und Gretel (opera)" label="Hansel and Gretel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317" start="2558" end="2572" title="Giuseppe Verdi" label="Giuseppe Verdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q203470" start="2586" end="2598" title="Il trovatore" label="Il trovatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q48173" start="2777" end="2784" title="Smetana" label="Smetana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195062" start="2798" end="2806" title="The Kiss (opera)" label="The Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q184933" start="2822" end="2829" title="Janáček" label="Janáček"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133498" start="2843" end="2847" title="Osud" label="Osud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211710" start="2887" end="2916" title="The Brandenburgers in Bohemia" label="The Brandenburgers in Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223258" start="2991" end="2998" title="Martinu" label="Martinu"/>
<link wikidata="Q55602995" start="3115" end="3134" title="A Dinner Engagement" label="A Dinner Engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990338" start="3151" end="3157" title="Nelson (opera)" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q514975" start="3165" end="3180" title="Lennox Berkeley" label="Lennox Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q644392" start="3233" end="3251" title="Malcolm Williamson" label="Malcolm Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6876882" start="3291" end="3301" title="Miss Julie (Alwyn opera)" label="Miss Julie"/>
<link wikidata="Q541685" start="3309" end="3322" title="William Alwyn" label="William Alwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107953" start="3499" end="3516" title="Coldstream Guards" label="Coldstream Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421942" start="3567" end="3579" title="Kneller Hall" label="Kneller Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217163" start="3695" end="3716" title="BBC Concert Orchestra" label="BBC Concert Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="3785" end="3804" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Light Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503544" start="3843" end="3870" title="Friday Night is Music Night" label="Friday Night is Music Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="3924" end="3929" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419737" start="3971" end="4006" title="Guildhall School of Music and Drama" label="Guildhall School of Music and Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q521776" start="4090" end="4102" title="Tommy Reilly (harmonica player)" label="Tommy Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="4741" end="4768" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q86752902" start="6353" end="6388" title="List of émigré composers who came to live and work in Britain" label="List of émigré composers in Britain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543984" wikidata="Q6381" url="?curid=543984" title="Sarlat-la-Canéda">
<text>Sarlat-la-Canéda (; ), commonly known as Sarlat, is a commune in the southwestern French department of Dordogne, a part of Nouvelle-Aquitaine. Sarlat and La Canéda were distinct towns until merged into one commune in March 1965.

==Geography==
The town of Sarlat is in a region known in France as Périgord Noir. It lies in the southeastern part of the Dordogne department, 7 km north of the river Dordogne.

Sarlat railway station offers train services to Bergerac, Bordeaux and Périgueux.

The commune is also served by Brive Vallée de la Dordogne airport (50 km), Bergerac Roumanière airport (70 km) and two bus lines.

==History==
Sarlat is a medieval town that developed around a large Benedictine abbey of Carolingian origin. The medieval Sarlat Cathedral is dedicated to Saint Sacerdos. This abbey appears in records as early as 1081 and was one of the few in the region that was not raided by the Vikings. The name for the abbey church was Saint Sacerdos by 1318; in the 20th century, it would become a cathedral under Pope John XXIII.

Because modern history has largely passed it by, Sarlat has remained preserved and one of the towns most representative of 14th-century France. Its historic centre, with 77 protected monuments, was added to France&#x27;s Tentative List for future nomination as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2002. The excellent state of preservation owed a debt to writer, resistance fighter and politician André Malraux, who, as Minister of Culture (1960–1969), restored the town and many other sites of historic significance throughout France. The centre of the old town consists of impeccably restored stone buildings and is largely car-free.

==Population==

==Economy==
* Agriculture: Agriculture has long been of importance in the Dordogne area around Sarlat. Tobacco has been grown around Sarlat since 1857 and has historically been a major commodity for the area, although it is on the wane. Other agricultural commodities include corn, hay, walnuts, walnut oil, cheeses, wine, cèpes (a species of wild mushroom) and truffles.
*Tourism: Numerous visitors—especially from northern Europe (the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Belgium, Germany, etc.)—come on holiday to Sarlat and the region surrounding it and some have settled there permanently. The months of July and August are traditionally the &quot;haute saison&quot; (high season) for visitors, as is true in much of France outside Paris.
* Foie gras: There are several large foie gras factories including Rougié, and many small producers of foie gras in the area; other farms raise geese and ducks to produce products (confits, pâté, etc.) from these birds. The commune holds an annual three day festival, &quot;Fest&#x27;oie&quot;, in honour of this significant part of its economy which also attracts numerous tourists.

A film festival has been held in the commune every November since 1991. Other events include the Truffle Festival, Christmas Market and Fest’oie in winter, the Ringueta of traditional games, and the Theatre Games Festival.

==Notable inhabitants==
* Étienne de La Boétie (1530–1563), judge and humanist poet remembered as the friend of the Renaissance philosopher Michel de Montaigne
* François Fournier-Sarlovèze (1773–1827), French general of the Napoleonic Wars
* Gauthier de Costes, seigneur de la Calprenède (c.1610–1663), novelist and dramatist
* Gabriel Tarde, judge and sociologist (1843–1904)
* André Malraux (1901–1976), a square and a gallery of paintings bear the name of the former Minister of Culture. This is explained by the fact that he is considered by many Sarladais as the saviour of the historical district of the city. While visiting Sarlat, he realised that the city was in danger of ruin in certain neighbourhoods and that some monuments were being destroyed. The Saved Areas Act was drafted to save the city. 
* Jacques Géry (1917–2007), ichthyologist, died in Sarlat
* Jean Nouvel (born 1945), architect, spent his childhood in Sarlat and transformed the ancient church of Sainte Marie into a covered market with monumental doors.
* Jean-Jacques de Peretti (born 1946), mayor of the city since 1989.

==Cultural references==
The town and region have featured in two major Hollywood films: Ridley Scott&#x27;s &quot;The Duellists&quot; (1978), based on Joseph Conrad&#x27;s Napoleonic tale; and more recently &quot;Timeline&quot; (2003), adapted from Michael Crichton&#x27;s time-travel novel, and set in 14th-century France.

In the cemetery of Sarlat one can admire the pyramid tomb of François Fournier-Sarlovèze, who inspired the story behind &quot;The Duellists&quot;.

Other movies partly shot in Sarlat include: 
*&quot;Ever After: a Cinderella Story&quot; (1998) by Andy Tennant
*&quot;The Musketeer&quot; (2001) by Peter Hyams
*&quot;Jacquou le Croquant&quot; (2007) by Laurent Boutonnat
*&quot;The Messenger: The Story of Joan of Arc&quot; (1999) by Luc Besson

The city also appears in the first instalments of French author Robert Merle&#x27;s saga &quot;Fortune de France&quot;, which tells the story of a fictitious Huguenot, Pierre de Siorac, during the 16th and 17th centuries in France.

==Climate==

== Gallery ==
==See also==
*Communes of the Dordogne département

==References==
==External links==

* Official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6381" start="0" end="16" title="Sarlat-la-Canéda" label="Sarlat-la-Canéda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381" start="41" end="47" title="Sarlat-la-Canéda" label="Sarlat"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="54" end="61" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="89" end="99" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357" start="103" end="111" title="Dordogne" label="Dordogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q18678082" start="123" end="141" title="Nouvelle-Aquitaine" label="Nouvelle-Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q850620" start="297" end="310" title="Périgord" label="Périgord Noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357" start="352" end="360" title="Dordogne" label="Dordogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q208174" start="397" end="405" title="Dordogne (river)" label="Dordogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q402141" start="408" end="430" title="Sarlat railway station" label="Sarlat railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q187911" start="456" end="464" title="Bergerac, Dordogne" label="Bergerac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="466" end="474" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588" start="479" end="488" title="Périgueux" label="Périgueux"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="690" end="701" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="702" end="707" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q133602" start="711" end="722" title="Carolingian" label="Carolingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942447" start="744" end="760" title="Sarlat Cathedral" label="Sarlat Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560586" start="777" end="791" title="Sacerdos of Limoges" label="Saint Sacerdos"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="1026" end="1041" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1307" end="1333" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q151164" start="1436" end="1449" title="André Malraux" label="André Malraux"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1706" end="1717" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357" start="1766" end="1774" title="Dordogne" label="Dordogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="1795" end="1802" title="Tobacco" label="Tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q19740" start="2015" end="2020" title="Boletus edulis" label="cèpes"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="2065" end="2072" title="Tourism" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34807" start="2434" end="2443" title="Foie gras" label="Foie gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="2479" end="2488" title="factories" label="factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="2576" end="2581" title="geese" label="geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736439" start="2586" end="2591" title="ducks" label="ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125320" start="2613" end="2619" title="confit" label="confit"/>
<link wikidata="Q816704" start="2622" end="2626" title="pâté" label="pâté"/>
<link wikidata="Q290227" start="3067" end="3087" title="Étienne de La Boétie" label="Étienne de La Boétie"/>
<link wikidata="Q41568" start="3181" end="3200" title="Michel de Montaigne" label="Michel de Montaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451035" start="3203" end="3230" title="François Fournier-Sarlovèze" label="François Fournier-Sarlovèze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496335" start="3284" end="3329" title="Gauthier de Costes, seigneur de la Calprenède" label="Gauthier de Costes, seigneur de la Calprenède"/>
<link wikidata="Q214917" start="3358" end="3367" title="dramatist" label="dramatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q315372" start="3370" end="3383" title="Gabriel Tarde" label="Gabriel Tarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q151164" start="3421" end="3434" title="André Malraux" label="André Malraux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677989" start="3854" end="3866" title="Jacques Géry" label="Jacques Géry"/>
<link wikidata="Q214317" start="3912" end="3923" title="Jean Nouvel" label="Jean Nouvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166465" start="4076" end="4099" title="Jean-Jacques de Peretti" label="Jean-Jacques de Peretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="4232" end="4244" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212051" start="4258" end="4271" title="The Duellists" label="The Duellists"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="4295" end="4308" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Joseph Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703608" start="4357" end="4365" title="Timeline (2003 film)" label="Timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q172140" start="4393" end="4409" title="Michael Crichton" label="Michael Crichton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451035" start="4530" end="4557" title="François Fournier-Sarlovèze" label="François Fournier-Sarlovèze"/>
<link wikidata="Q619374" start="4669" end="4699" title="Ever After" label="Ever After: a Cinderella Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q527862" start="4716" end="4728" title="Andy Tennant" label="Andy Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q194346" start="4736" end="4749" title="The Musketeer" label="The Musketeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q458766" start="4766" end="4777" title="Peter Hyams" label="Peter Hyams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303634" start="4785" end="4804" title="Jacquou le Croquant" label="Jacquou le Croquant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580403" start="4821" end="4838" title="Laurent Boutonnat" label="Laurent Boutonnat"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4846" end="4885" title="The Messenger: The Story of Joan of Arc" label="The Messenger: The Story of Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q484779" start="4902" end="4912" title="Luc Besson" label="Luc Besson"/>
<link wikidata="Q315949" start="4978" end="4990" title="Robert Merle" label="Robert Merle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078565" start="5009" end="5026" title="Fortune de France" label="Fortune de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="5072" end="5080" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q326678" start="5188" end="5224" title="Communes of the Dordogne département" label="Communes of the Dordogne département"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543987" wikidata="Q226508" url="?curid=543987" title="Hutchinson County">
<text>Hutchinson County is the name of two counties in the United States:

* Hutchinson County, South Dakota 
* Hutchinson County, Texas</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q491702" start="71" end="102" title="Hutchinson County, South Dakota" label="Hutchinson County, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q484542" start="106" end="130" title="Hutchinson County, Texas" label="Hutchinson County, Texas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543989" wikidata="Q229165" url="?curid=543989" title="Huron County">
<text>Huron County is the name of several counties in North America:

* Huron County, Michigan 
* Huron County, Ohio
* Huron County, Ontario</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q74633" start="66" end="88" title="Huron County, Michigan" label="Huron County, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q336167" start="92" end="110" title="Huron County, Ohio" label="Huron County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638493" start="113" end="134" title="Huron County, Ontario" label="Huron County, Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543995" wikidata="Q248818" url="?curid=543995" title="Humphreys County">
<text>Humphreys County is the name of two counties in the United States:

*Humphreys County, Mississippi 
*Humphreys County, Tennessee</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q130009" start="69" end="98" title="Humphreys County, Mississippi" label="Humphreys County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q502397" start="101" end="128" title="Humphreys County, Tennessee" label="Humphreys County, Tennessee"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="543999" wikidata="Q125835" url="?curid=543999" title="Humboldt County">
<text>Humboldt County may refer to:

==Places in the United States==
* Humboldt County, California
* Humboldt County, Iowa
* Humboldt County, Nevada

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
* &quot;Humboldt County&quot; (film), a 2008 film about the marijuana cultivation culture in Humboldt County, California
* &quot;Humboldt County High&quot;, a 2001 album by American hip hop group Potluck

==See also==
* Humboldt (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q125835" start="0" end="15" title="Humboldt County" label="Humboldt County"/>
<link wikidata="Q109651" start="65" end="92" title="Humboldt County, California" label="Humboldt County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q485455" start="95" end="116" title="Humboldt County, Iowa" label="Humboldt County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q495376" start="119" end="142" title="Humboldt County, Nevada" label="Humboldt County, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5940295" start="181" end="215" title="Humboldt County (film)" label="&amp;quot;Humboldt County&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234978" start="308" end="328" title="Humboldt County High" label="Humboldt County High"/>
<link wikidata="Q262901" start="399" end="424" title="Humboldt (disambiguation)" label="Humboldt (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544001" wikidata="Q233029" url="?curid=544001" title="Hughes County">
<text>Hughes County is the name of two counties in the United States:

*Hughes County, Oklahoma 
*Hughes County, South Dakota</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q489327" start="66" end="89" title="Hughes County, Oklahoma" label="Hughes County, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q495629" start="92" end="119" title="Hughes County, South Dakota" label="Hughes County, South Dakota"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544007" wikidata="Q214361" url="?curid=544007" title="Mari people">
<text>The Mari ( ), also formerly known as the Cheremis or Cheremisses, are a Finno-Ugric people in Eastern Europe, who have traditionally lived along the Volga and Kama rivers in Russia. They live mostly in the Mari El republic, with significant minorities in Bashkortostan, Perm Krai, Tatarstan and Udmurtia.

== Name ==
The ethnic name &quot;mari&quot; derives from the Proto-Indo-Iranian root *&quot;márya&quot;-, meaning &#x27;human&#x27;, literally &#x27;mortal&#x27;, which indicates early contacts between Finno-Ugric and Indo-Iranian languages.

== Subgroups ==

There are two main ethnographic subgroups of Mari people: Meadow Mari, who live on the right bank of the Volga river, and Hill (or Mountain) Mari, who live on the left bank. The ethnogenesis of these two subgroups, and formation of distinct dialects, probably took place in the 14th century. Meadow Mari comprise the majority of Mari, and their language variety is more widespread than the Hill Mari language. The 1995 Law on the Languages of the Republic and the Mari El constitution designate the Hill and Meadow varieties to be, along with Russian, the state languages of the republic.

Since the 19th century a third subgroup has been identified, the Eastern Mari. The Eastern dialect has been considered a variant of the Meadow dialect. Eastern Mari comprise the Mari populations living east of the Vyatka and in the Ural region, particularly in Bashkortostan as well as Sverdlovsk Oblast and Perm Krai. This diaspora group formed after the Cheremis Wars in the 16th century, which caused migration to the east.

Some scholars consider the speakers of Northwestern Mari dialects in Kirov and Nizhny Novgorod Oblasts a separate ethnographic group. The number of Northwestern Mari was estimated to be over 7700 people in 2011. In recent decades, assimilation processes have proceeded quickly among this group, and in 2022 only 58.5% of the Mari in Nizhny Novgorod Oblast spoke the Mari language. According to Saarinen (2022), there are only a few hundred Northwestern Mari speakers.

== History ==
=== Early history ===
Some scholars have proposed that two tribes mentioned by the Gothic writer Jordanes in his &quot;Getica&quot; among the peoples in the realm of Gothic king Ermanaric in the fourth century AD can be equated with the Mari people. However, the identification of the &quot;Imniscaris&quot; (or &quot;Sremniscans&quot;) with &quot;Cheremis&quot;, and &quot;Merens&quot; with &quot;Mari&quot; is controversial. As a result, there is no consensus among scholars. The first safely attested mention of the Mari people comes from Khazar sources from the 10th century, where they appear by the exonym &quot;tsarmis&quot;. The old Russian name for the Mari (Cheremis) is derived from this. At that time, the Mari settlement area was along the Volga. Mari folkore mentions a legendary hero named Chotkar and the semi-legendary king Chumblat, who ruled around the year 1100. The Russians first encroached on Mari lands in the 12th century, when Novgorod seized the stronghold of Koksharov in 1174. Around 1200, Vladimir-Suzdal gradually took control of the Volga valley down to the mouth of the river Vetulga, and pressure intensified after the founding of Nizhny Novgorod in 1221. The eastern Mari remained subjects of Volga Bulgaria.

Following the Mongol invasions in the 13th century, the Mari fell under the influence sphere of the Golden Horde. Many Bulgars moved north, and so Bulgar influence on the Mari grew. The new Bulgar capital, Kazan, was founded on ancient Mari lands. In the 14th century, Russian pressure grew with increased raids, while the Mari responded with attacks on territories including Vyatka and even Ustyug. As early as 1372, the Russians established an outpost at Kurmysh. In 1443, the Mari became subjects of the Kazan Khanate. During this time, the Mari experienced some cultural convergence with the ruling Tatars and the Volga Bulgars, which is also seen in Turkic lexical and grammatical influence on the Mari language. The founding of the Russian fortress of Vasilgrad in 1523 exposed the Hill Mari to the Russians directly, while language differences weakened their cooperation with the Meadow Mari.

In 1552, the territory of the Mari was incorporated into the Russian state with the Russian conquest of Kazan under Ivan the Terrible. The Hill Mari assisted with the Russian conquest, while most of the Meadow Mari continued to back the Kazan Tatars. Mari resistance continued in what is known in Russian historiography as the &quot;Cheremis Wars&quot;, which lasted until 1584. The heaviest periods of fighting occurred during 1553–1557, 1570–1572 and 1581–1584. In 1572, the last Siberian khan, Kuchum, sent an army consisting of Bashkirs, Khanty, Mansi and Mari vassals to carry out reconnaissance into the lands held by the Stroganovs and to devastate the settlements there. By the end of the 16th century, resistance was finally quelled, leaving a heavy toll on the Mari population. As a result of the ensuing influx of Russian settlers, and to escape forced Christianization (starting from 1700), the Mari started to settle further east in present-day Bashkortostan. In the following centuries under tsarist Russia, the Mari were able to retain their ethnic and cultural identity, reinforced by repeated waves of returning to their traditional pre-Christian religion.

=== Soviet Union ===
During the Soviet Era, the Mari Section was set up under the auspices of Narkomnats, the Peoples Commissariat for nationalities. Its task was to facilitate the close union of the Mari people with other people, to abolish anti-Russian mistrust and to raise the &quot;class consciousness&quot; of Mari workers. In practice this involved facilitating grain requisitions by the Soviet state, the recruitment of soldiers for the Red Army and the implementation of Bolshevik control of the society.

Until the 1930s, the Mari people had no cultural ties to Russia and were able to maintain its own culture and identity, as cultural interaction with Russia was &quot;limited to the payment of tributes and taxes&quot;. However, intensive Russification policies were introduced during the Soviet era - the Mari language was eliminated from schools and only Russian was taught instead, many Mari people were resettled and sent to work in remote parts of the Soviet Union, and Mari communities were forcibly enlarged under the Soviet policy of eliminating &quot;unpromising villages&quot;, leading to Russian settlement and greatly disempowering the indigenous population. The Mari Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic was subjected to one of the harshest Russification measures in the USSR. Furthermore, Bolshevik policies officially aimed at combating undue influence of nationalism in a multi-nation union, resulted in the murder of leading Mari figures, such as Sergei Čavajn and Olyk Ipai and other teachers, scientists, artists, as well as religious and community leaders.

=== Russian Federation ===

Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the newly created republic of Mari El saw a revival of Mari culture and language. However, following the appointment of Leonid Markelov as Head of the republic in 2001, the government of Mari El has pursued a policy of intense Russification in the region. According to Vasily Pekteyev of the Mari National Theater in Yoshkar-Ola, &quot;[Markelov] hated the Mari people&quot;. He noted that the Mari language is no longer taught in villages or schools and that the republic of Mari El &quot;has already ceased to be an ethnic republic in anything but name. We are just another oblast.&quot; In 2005, the European Commission expressed its concern over reports of repression against ethnic Mari opposition figures, journalists, and government officials that promoted Mari culture and opposed Markelov&#x27;s reappointment as head of the republic that year.

==Language==
The Mari language belongs to the Uralic language family. It is pluricentric with two literary standards: Hill Mari and Meadow-Eastern Mari. Both literary forms have official status in Mari El and are taught in schools. The Meadow-Eastern standard is more widely spoken than the Hill standard, although both are considered endangered. Four main vernacular dialects have been distinguished: Hill Mari, Meadow Mari, Eastern Mari, and Northwestern Mari.

The Mari language began developing independently around 3,000 years ago, and was in contact with Iranian languages by the first millennium CE.

At the 2002 census, 451,033 people stated that they spoke the Mari language.

== Religion ==
Maris have traditionally practiced a shamanistic faith that closely connected the individual with nature. According to those beliefs, nature exerts an influence over people. Nature is seen as a sacred, powerful, and living being with which people are fully intertwined. Nature also serves as a source of absolute good who always helps humans as long as they refrain from harming or opposing it. The indigenous religion of the Mari people is the most important element of their national identity and tradition; speaking of their faith, many Mari intellectuals concluded that &quot;to kill our faith means to kill us&quot;.

The Mari native religion also possesses a pantheon of gods who reside in the heavens, the most important of whom is known as the Great White God (Ош Кугу Юмо, &quot;Osh Kugu Yumo&quot;). Other lesser gods include the god of fire (Тул Юмо, &quot;Tul Yumo&quot;) and the god of wind (Мардеж Юмо, &quot;Mardezh Yumo&quot;). The Mari also believe in a number of half-men, half-gods (керемет, &quot;keremet&quot;) who live on earth. The most revered of these is Chumbulat (Чумбулат), or Chumbylat (Чумбылат), a renowned leader and warrior. Attempts to convert the Maris to Christianity began in the 16th century after their territory was incorporated into the Russian state during the reign of Ivan IV (&quot;the Terrible&quot;). Pressure to convert to Christianity and adopt Russian culture by the tsarist authorities in the 17th and 18th century led to backlash by the Maris as they faced persecution to conform. While the Mari people nominally converted to Russian Orthodoxy in the 16th century, in practice they kept to their old practices relatively unhindered, and the interaction with Christianity spurred growth of syncretic form of religions where Christian system of belief is combined with pagan traditions and rituals. The Eastern Mari in particular were able to preserve the Mari religion due to them living in isolated communities.

Many Mari today still practice paganism in syncretic forms, or purer forms adhering to organized neopagan Mari traditional religion organizations. While most Mari today are members of the Russian Orthodox Church, pagans still comprise a significant minority of around 25%. Mari paganism is divided into three groups - &quot;Chimari&quot; who are non-baptized Mari pagans and try to distance themselves from Christian traditions in favour of mainly pagan traditions, &quot;Marla Vera&quot; (also known as &quot;dual faith&quot;) consisting of baptized Mari who follow pagan traditions while also attending Christian services and celebrating Christian feasts. Lastly, there is a neopagan revivalist movement called &quot;Kugu Sorta&quot; which rejects Christianity altogether in favour of &quot;pure&quot; pagan faith. About 60% of Mari pagans belong to the syncretic &quot;Marla Vera&quot; group, while the remaining 40% is composed of &quot;Chimari&quot; and &quot;Kugu Sorta&quot; pagans.

==Culture==

Mari culture has a many-stringed zither called the kusle and a bagpipe called the shyuvr. Mari musical traditions include lyrics that mention the Volga and reflect the Mari adoration of nature, especially forests and rainbows.

== Genetics ==

The most common Y-chromosomal haplogroup among Mari people is N, which is frequently found within Uralic-speaking peoples and has its roots in East Eurasia. According to the data gathered by Kristiina Tambets and others in their 2018 study, 46.4 percent of Mari men have N-M178, and 8.2 percent belong to the subclade N-P43. R1a is a clearly less yet the second most common Y-DNA haplogroup for Maris, as it is carried by 22.7 percent of them.

A 2002 study about mtDNA haplogroups in the Volga-Ural region found that 40 percent of the Maris belong to the haplogroup H. About one in four carry the haplogroup U (14 percent have the subclade U5 and about 10 percent have U4).

Autosomally, Mari people stand out as an ethnic group in Europe by having a high level of Siberian-related admixture. Tambets and others estimated that it is 35 percent of their ancestry. This Nganasan-like Siberian component is typical for Uralic-speaking groups.

== See also ==
* Mari Ushem

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Bibliography ===
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
* &quot;MariUver&quot;, a blog about Mari culture and issues
* &quot;Ural Mari: There Is No Death&quot;, a project about traditional culture and beliefs of the Ural Mari
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214361" start="4" end="8" title="Mari people" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q214361" start="41" end="49" title="Mari people" label="Cheremis"/>
<link wikidata="Q214361" start="53" end="64" title="Mari people" label="Cheremisses"/>
<link wikidata="Q79890" start="72" end="90" title="Finno-Ugric peoples" label="Finno-Ugric people"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="94" end="108" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="149" end="154" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q79082" start="159" end="163" title="Kama River" label="Kama"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="174" end="180" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446" start="206" end="213" title="Mari El" label="Mari El"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710" start="255" end="268" title="Bashkortostan" label="Bashkortostan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400" start="270" end="279" title="Perm Krai" label="Perm Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481" start="281" end="290" title="Tatarstan" label="Tatarstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422" start="295" end="303" title="Udmurtia" label="Udmurtia"/>
<link wikidata="Q966439" start="367" end="385" title="Proto-Indo-Iranian" label="Proto-Indo-Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q79890" start="508" end="519" title="Finno-Ugric languages" label="Finno-Ugric"/>
<link wikidata="Q33514" start="524" end="546" title="Indo-Iranian languages" label="Indo-Iranian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268035" start="624" end="635" title="Meadow Mari people" label="Meadow Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144673" start="688" end="711" title="Hill Mari people" label="Hill (or Mountain) Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q900396" start="744" end="756" title="ethnogenesis" label="ethnogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906614" start="905" end="927" title="Meadow Mari language" label="their language variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776032" start="956" end="974" title="Hill Mari language" label="Hill Mari language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126567" start="1221" end="1233" title="Eastern Mari people" label="Eastern Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q192495" start="1370" end="1376" title="Vyatka (river)" label="Vyatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322976" start="1388" end="1399" title="Ural (region)" label="Ural region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710" start="1417" end="1430" title="Bashkortostan" label="Bashkortostan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462" start="1442" end="1459" title="Sverdlovsk Oblast" label="Sverdlovsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400" start="1464" end="1473" title="Perm Krai" label="Perm Krai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1512" end="1525" title="Cheremis Wars" label="Cheremis Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q53493410" start="1623" end="1640" title="Northwestern Mari language" label="Northwestern Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387" start="1653" end="1658" title="Kirov Oblast" label="Kirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246" start="1663" end="1678" title="Nizhny Novgorod Oblast" label="Nizhny Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="2164" end="2172" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250583" start="2186" end="2192" title="Getica" label="Getica"/>
<link wikidata="Q28987" start="2245" end="2254" title="Ermanaric" label="Ermanaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q173282" start="2609" end="2615" title="Khazars" label="Khazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q151536" start="3020" end="3028" title="Novgorod Republic" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q83546" start="3086" end="3101" title="Vladimir-Suzdal" label="Vladimir-Suzdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="3132" end="3137" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q467419" start="3176" end="3183" title="Vetluga (river)" label="Vetulga"/>
<link wikidata="Q891" start="3232" end="3247" title="Nizhny Novgorod" label="Nizhny Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q185488" start="3295" end="3309" title="Volga Bulgaria" label="Volga Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q852171" start="3326" end="3342" title="Mongol invasion of Europe" label="Mongol invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="3412" end="3424" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="3518" end="3523" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130481" start="3688" end="3694" title="Vyatka Land" label="Vyatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q111048" start="3704" end="3710" title="Veliky Ustyug" label="Ustyug"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174045" start="3769" end="3776" title="Kurmysh" label="Kurmysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q186537" start="3819" end="3832" title="Kazan Khanate" label="Kazan Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="3915" end="3921" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q185488" start="3930" end="3943" title="Volga Bulgars" label="Volga Bulgars"/>
<link wikidata="Q973685" start="4015" end="4028" title="Mari language" label="Mari language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264992" start="4070" end="4079" title="Vasilsursk" label="Vasilgrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670327" start="4297" end="4322" title="Siege of Kazan" label="Russian conquest of Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996" start="4329" end="4346" title="Ivan the Terrible" label="Ivan the Terrible"/>
<link wikidata="Q138237" start="4710" end="4716" title="Kuchum Khan" label="Kuchum"/>
<link wikidata="Q485348" start="4745" end="4753" title="Bashkirs" label="Bashkirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q476030" start="4755" end="4761" title="Khanty" label="Khanty"/>
<link wikidata="Q467790" start="4763" end="4768" title="Mansi people" label="Mansi"/>
<link wikidata="Q849792" start="4841" end="4851" title="Stroganov family" label="Stroganovs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710" start="5171" end="5184" title="Bashkortostan" label="Bashkortostan"/>
<link wikidata="Q786221" start="5351" end="5385" title="Mari Native Religion" label="traditional pre-Christian religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695906" start="5482" end="5492" title="Narkomnats" label="Narkomnats"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5498" end="5518" title="Government of the Soviet Union#The People&amp;#x27;s Commissariats" label="Peoples Commissariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q231002" start="5523" end="5536" title="Nationality" label="nationalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="5635" end="5641" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066261" start="5675" end="5694" title="class consciousness" label="class consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="5833" end="5841" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="5868" end="5877" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="6140" end="6153" title="Russification" label="Russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q973685" start="6207" end="6220" title="Mari language" label="Mari language"/>
<link wikidata="Q788066" start="6576" end="6617" title="Mari Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Mari Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606744" start="6865" end="6878" title="Sergei Chavain" label="Sergei Čavajn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603840" start="6883" end="6892" title="Olyk Ipai" label="Olyk Ipai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446" start="7081" end="7088" title="Mari El" label="Mari El"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378185" start="7171" end="7186" title="Leonid Markelov" label="Leonid Markelov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139089" start="7190" end="7210" title="Head of Mari El" label="Head of the republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="7278" end="7291" title="Russification" label="Russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q835714" start="7627" end="7633" title="Oblasts of Russia" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="7654" end="7673" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q973685" start="7923" end="7936" title="Mari language" label="Mari language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34113" start="7952" end="7974" title="Uralic language family" label="Uralic language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q250858" start="7982" end="7994" title="Pluricentric language" label="pluricentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759988" start="8004" end="8021" title="literary standard" label="literary standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776032" start="8024" end="8033" title="Hill Mari language" label="Hill Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906614" start="8038" end="8057" title="Meadow Mari language" label="Meadow-Eastern Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="8241" end="8251" title="Endangered language" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q53493410" start="8350" end="8367" title="Northwestern Mari language" label="Northwestern Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="8467" end="8484" title="Iranian languages" label="Iranian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348116" start="8521" end="8532" title="2002 Russian census" label="2002 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="8644" end="8661" title="Shamanism" label="shamanistic faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q786221" start="9234" end="9254" title="Mari native religion" label="Mari native religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4518044" start="9687" end="9696" title="Chumbylat" label="Chumbulat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996" start="9919" end="9926" title="Ivan IV of Russia" label="Ivan IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="10615" end="10624" title="Syncretism" label="syncretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="10669" end="10677" title="neopagan" label="neopagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="10760" end="10783" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q76239" start="11609" end="11615" title="zither" label="zither"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810474" start="11627" end="11632" title="kusle" label="kusle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8347" start="11639" end="11646" title="bagpipe" label="bagpipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506038" start="11658" end="11664" title="shyuvr" label="shyuvr"/>
<link wikidata="Q428875" start="11836" end="11860" title="Human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroup" label="Y-chromosomal haplogroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q49681" start="11882" end="11883" title="Haplogroup N-M231" label="N"/>
<link wikidata="Q34113" start="11918" end="11933" title="Uralic languages" label="Uralic-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12091" end="12097" title="Haplogroup N-M231#N1a1a (M178)" label="N-M178"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12138" end="12143" title="Haplogroup N-M231#N1a2b (P43)" label="N-P43"/>
<link wikidata="Q80658" start="12145" end="12148" title="Haplogroup R1a" label="R1a"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356230" start="12284" end="12289" title="Human mitochondrial DNA haplogroup" label="mtDNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584156" start="12376" end="12388" title="Haplogroup H (mtDNA)" label="haplogroup H"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584199" start="12418" end="12430" title="Haplogroup U (mtDNA)" label="haplogroup U"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12461" end="12463" title="Haplogroup U (mtDNA)#Haplogroup U5" label="U5"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12490" end="12492" title="Haplogroup U (mtDNA)#Haplogroup U4" label="U4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="12586" end="12594" title="Siberia" label="Siberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163044" start="12689" end="12697" title="Nganasan people" label="Nganasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4281421" start="12779" end="12789" title="Mari Ushem" label="Mari Ushem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544008" wikidata="Q224688" url="?curid=544008" title="Houston County">
<text>Houston County is the name of five counties in the United States:

* Houston County, Alabama 
* Houston County, Georgia 
* Houston County, Minnesota 
* Houston County, Tennessee 
* Houston County, Texas

Houston County may also refer to:
*Houston County (band), a country music band</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q496292" start="69" end="92" title="Houston County, Alabama" label="Houston County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q486362" start="96" end="119" title="Houston County, Georgia" label="Houston County, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q486288" start="123" end="148" title="Houston County, Minnesota" label="Houston County, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q502368" start="152" end="177" title="Houston County, Tennessee" label="Houston County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q156496" start="181" end="202" title="Houston County, Texas" label="Houston County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916461" start="239" end="260" title="Houston County (band)" label="Houston County (band)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544009" wikidata="Q1208626" url="?curid=544009" title="E105">
<text>E105 or E-105 may be:
* Fast Yellow AB or E105, a food dye now forbidden in Europe and the United States
* European route E105, a north-south European route connecting Kirkenes in Norway to Yalta in Ukraine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q996659" start="24" end="38" title="Fast Yellow AB" label="Fast Yellow AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321545" start="107" end="126" title="European route E105" label="European route E105"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544013" wikidata="Q996659" url="?curid=544013" title="Fast Yellow AB">
<text>Fast Yellow AB is an azo dye. It used to be used as a food dye, designated in Europe by the E number E105. It is now delisted in both Europe and USA and is forbidden if used in foods and drinks, as toxicological data has shown it is harmful. E105 has been implicated in non-atopic asthma.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q996659" start="0" end="14" title="Fast Yellow AB" label="Fast Yellow AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984395" start="21" end="28" title="azo dye" label="azo dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q753009" start="54" end="62" title="food dye" label="food dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="92" end="100" title="E number" label="E number"/>
<link wikidata="Q996659" start="101" end="105" title="Fast Yellow AB" label="E105"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544023" wikidata="Q233119" url="?curid=544023" title="Hopkins County">
<text>Hopkins County is the name of two counties in the United States:

* Hopkins County, Kentucky 
* Hopkins County, Texas</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q501092" start="68" end="92" title="Hopkins County, Kentucky" label="Hopkins County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q112115" start="96" end="117" title="Hopkins County, Texas" label="Hopkins County, Texas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544025" wikidata="Q424528" url="?curid=544025" title="Yellow 2G">
<text>Yellow 2G is a food coloring denoted by E number E107 with the color index CI18965. It has the appearance of a yellow powder, and it is soluble in water. It is a synthetic yellow azo dye.

It is not listed by the UK&#x27;s Food Standards Agency among EU approved food additives. Its use is also banned in Austria, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and the United States.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q424528" start="0" end="9" title="Yellow 2G" label="Yellow 2G"/>
<link wikidata="Q753009" start="15" end="28" title="food coloring" label="food coloring"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="40" end="48" title="E number" label="E number"/>
<link wikidata="Q424528" start="49" end="53" title="Yellow 2G" label="E107"/>
<link wikidata="Q868387" start="63" end="74" title="Colour_Index_International" label="color index"/>
<link wikidata="Q424528" start="75" end="82" title="Yellow 2G" label="CI18965"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984395" start="179" end="186" title="azo dye" label="azo dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741994" start="223" end="244" title="Food Standards Agency" label="Food Standards Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="305" end="312" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="314" end="319" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="321" end="327" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="329" end="335" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="337" end="348" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="357" end="370" title="United States" label="United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544032" wikidata="Q233083" url="?curid=544032" title="Holt County">
<text>Holt County may refer to:

* Holt County, Missouri 
* Holt County, Nebraska</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q490405" start="29" end="50" title="Holt County, Missouri" label="Holt County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q496139" start="54" end="75" title="Holt County, Nebraska" label="Holt County, Nebraska"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544033" wikidata="Q227139" url="?curid=544033" title="Holmes County">
<text>Holmes County is the name of three counties in the United States:

* Holmes County, Florida 
* Holmes County, Mississippi 
* Holmes County, Ohio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q488879" start="69" end="91" title="Holmes County, Florida" label="Holmes County, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q485426" start="95" end="121" title="Holmes County, Mississippi" label="Holmes County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q485650" start="125" end="144" title="Holmes County, Ohio" label="Holmes County, Ohio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544035" wikidata="Q593075" url="?curid=544035" title="Ocean Terminal, Edinburgh">
<text>Ocean Terminal is the largest shopping centre in the Leith area of Edinburgh, Scotland. It is within the City of Edinburgh.

==History==

It is built on former industrial docklands on the north side of the city, at the edge of the boundary between formerly separate ports of Newhaven and Leith. The land was formerly occupied by the Henry Robb shipyard, which closed in 1983. Since then, the area has undergone urban renewal and regeneration, much led by and on the lands in the ownership of Forth Ports.

These and other developments have played key parts in the regeneration of Leith. The now-decommissioned Royal Yacht &quot;Britannia&quot;, which is accessed via the Britannia Visitor Centre within Ocean Terminal, is permanently berthed next to the building and can be viewed from the centre. Although originally planned to also function as a working passenger terminal, the permanent berthing of the Britannia has meant that the building has never been used for this function, despite its name.

The berth occupied by &quot;Britannia&quot; was originally planned to handle cruise liners. As &quot;Britannia&quot; is now permanently moored alongside the Ocean Terminal, Forth Ports plan to build another terminal for cruise liners.

There is an Antony Gormley sculpture located on an abandoned pier behind the building.

==Current stores==
PureGym, H&amp;M, Boots and HMV are amongst the main shops; in total there are some shops, 6 restaurants, 3 coffee shops, a variety of bars and cafés, as well as a 12-screen Vue cinema, an urban dance studio, children&#x27;s soft-play area and a day spa.

British Home Stores was an anchor tenant until 2016, and Debenhams until 2021.

The mall currently has an NHS vaccination clinic on the second floor.

==Transport==

The centre has multi level car parking facilities at the Southern end of the building.

===Buses===
Lothian Buses services 10, 34, 35, 36 &amp; Skylink 200 run from the stops at the front entrance.

Edinburgh Bus Tours also stop here on their &quot;Majestic&quot; route.

===Tram===
Ocean Terminal has a stop on the Edinburgh Trams light rail route, which opened with the Newhaven line extension in June 2023.

Services run to Newhaven and to the City Centre and Edinburgh Airport.

Ocean Terminal tram stop is an island platform located at the main entrance plaza.


==Redevelopment==

In 2018, the previous owners of the centre announced plans to rebrand the centre as &quot;Porta&quot;, focusing on outlets and factory stores. These plans were dropped in June 2020 by the new owners, ICG Real Estate and Ambassador Group .

City of Edinburgh Council have approved plans for Phase One of a masterplan lodged by the centre’s owners that would see the northern section of the building demolished and a new frontage constructed, with retail units and public realm. The demolition work got underway in Spring 2024.

Plans were submitted in November 2022 for Phase Two, which includes a large scale residential development, and received unanimous council approval in January 2024.

==References==
==External links==
*Ocean Terminal Shopping Centre website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q593075" start="0" end="14" title="Ocean Terminal, Edinburgh" label="Ocean Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11315" start="30" end="45" title="shopping centre" label="shopping centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018540" start="53" end="58" title="Leith" label="Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="67" end="86" title="Edinburgh, Scotland" label="Edinburgh, Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530250" start="105" end="122" title="City of Edinburgh council area" label="City of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262151" start="275" end="283" title="Newhaven, Edinburgh" label="Newhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018540" start="288" end="293" title="Leith" label="Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842471" start="333" end="343" title="Henry Robb" label="Henry Robb"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="411" end="424" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472593" start="492" end="503" title="Forth Ports" label="Forth Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018540" start="580" end="585" title="Leith" label="Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529544" start="610" end="643" title="HMY Britannia" label="Royal Yacht &amp;quot;Britannia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4303352" start="856" end="874" title="Passenger terminal (maritime)" label="passenger terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472593" start="1175" end="1186" title="Forth Ports" label="Forth Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q360371" start="1250" end="1264" title="Antony Gormley" label="Antony Gormley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1275" end="1323" title="List of public art in Edinburgh#Leith" label="located on an abandoned pier behind the building"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345898" start="1345" end="1352" title="PureGym" label="PureGym"/>
<link wikidata="Q188326" start="1354" end="1361" title="H&amp;amp;M" label="H&amp;amp;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q190868" start="1363" end="1368" title="Boots" label="Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854572" start="1373" end="1376" title="HMV" label="HMV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535134" start="1519" end="1522" title="Vue (cinema)" label="Vue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346145" start="1601" end="1620" title="British Home Stores" label="British Home Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181484" start="1658" end="1667" title="Debenhams" label="Debenhams"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="1707" end="1710" title="National Health Service" label="NHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684760" start="1867" end="1880" title="Lothian Buses" label="Lothian Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299624" start="2083" end="2098" title="Edinburgh Trams" label="Edinburgh Trams"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262151" start="2194" end="2202" title="Newhaven, Edinburgh" label="Newhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="2214" end="2225" title="Edinburgh city centre" label="City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8716" start="2230" end="2247" title="Edinburgh Airport" label="Edinburgh Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530250" start="2594" end="2619" title="City of Edinburgh Council" label="City of Edinburgh Council"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544038" wikidata="Q911922" url="?curid=544038" title="Colourant">
<text>A colourant/colour additive (British spelling) or colorant/color additive (American spelling) is a substance that is added or applied in order to change the colour of a material or surface. Colourants can be used for many purposes including printing, painting, and for colouring many types of materials such as foods and plastics. Colourants work by absorbing varying amounts of light at different wavelengths (or frequencies) of its spectrum, transmitting (if translucent) or reflecting the remaining light in straight lines or scattered.

Most colourants can be classified as dyes or pigments, or containing some combination of these. Typical dyes are formulated as solutions, while pigments are made up of solid particles suspended and are generally suspended in a vehicle (e.g., linseed oil). The colour a colourant imparts to a substance is mediated by other ingredients it is mixed with such as binders and fillers are added, for example in paints and inks. In addition, some colourants impart colour through reactions with other substances.

Colourants, or their constituent compounds, may be classified chemically as inorganic (often from a mineral source) and organic (often from a biological source).

== Regulation ==

=== United States ===

In the US, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulates colourants for food safety and accurate labelling.

== See also ==
* Food colouring

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q911922" start="2" end="11" title="Colourant" label="colourant"/>
<link wikidata="Q911922" start="12" end="27" title="Colourant" label="colour additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q911922" start="50" end="58" title="Colourant" label="colorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q911922" start="59" end="73" title="Colourant" label="color additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075" start="157" end="163" title="colour" label="colour"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034" start="241" end="249" title="printing" label="printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="251" end="259" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q753009" start="311" end="316" title="food colouring" label="foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087777" start="321" end="329" title="plastic colorant" label="plastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="379" end="384" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="398" end="408" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="414" end="425" title="frequencies" label="frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="434" end="442" title="visible spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q210028" start="529" end="538" title="Light scattering" label="scattered"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="578" end="581" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="586" end="593" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q863583" start="901" end="908" title="Binder (material)" label="binders"/>
<link wikidata="Q905592" start="913" end="920" title="Filler (materials)" label="fillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q174219" start="947" end="952" title="paint" label="paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q127418" start="958" end="961" title="ink" label="ink"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="1082" end="1091" title="chemical compound" label="compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q190065" start="1125" end="1134" title="inorganic" label="inorganic"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="1169" end="1176" title="organic compound" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q910979" start="1191" end="1201" title="biological pigment" label="biological"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="1268" end="1296" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q753009" start="1382" end="1396" title="Food colouring" label="Food colouring"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544043" wikidata="Q1273648" url="?curid=544043" title="E110">
<text>E110 may refer to:
* Darmstadtium, element 110 in the periodic table
* Sunset yellow FCF, a food colourant with E number E110
* Embraer EMB 110 Bandeirante, a twin-turboprop light aircraft
* A medical form for international road hauliers, replaced by the European Health Insurance Card
* E110 Out-of-town travel, a Uniform Task-Based Management System expense code
* A form of Zircaloy, a corrosion-resistant Russian Zirconium-Niobium alloy used in nuclear reactors
* Toyota Corolla (E110), the eight generation in a line of Japanese compact cars, manufactured from 1995 to 2002
* Acer beTouch E110, a smartphone</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1266" start="21" end="33" title="Darmstadtium" label="Darmstadtium"/>
<link wikidata="Q410095" start="71" end="88" title="Sunset yellow FCF" label="Sunset yellow FCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="112" end="120" title="E number" label="E number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335137" start="128" end="155" title="Embraer EMB 110 Bandeirante" label="Embraer EMB 110 Bandeirante"/>
<link wikidata="Q569412" start="255" end="285" title="European Health Insurance Card" label="European Health Insurance Card"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="315" end="364" title="Uniform Task-Based Management System#Expense Codes" label="Uniform Task-Based Management System expense code"/>
<link wikidata="Q205737" start="377" end="385" title="Zircaloy" label="Zircaloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q921838" start="468" end="489" title="Toyota Corolla (E110)" label="Toyota Corolla (E110)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033251" start="581" end="598" title="Acer beTouch E110" label="Acer beTouch E110"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544050" wikidata="Q410095" url="?curid=544050" title="Sunset yellow FCF">
<text>Sunset yellow FCF (also known as orange yellow S, or C.I. 15985) is a petroleum-derived orange azo dye with a pH-dependent maximum absorption at about 480 nm at pH 1 and 443 nm at pH 13, with a shoulder at 500 nm. When added to foods sold in the United States, it is known as FD&amp;C Yellow 6; when sold in Europe, it is denoted by E Number E110.

==Uses==
Sunset yellow is used in foods, cosmetics, and drugs. Sunset yellow FCF is used as an orange or yellow-orange dye. For example, it is used in candy, desserts, snacks, sauces, and preserved fruits.
Sunset yellow is often used in conjunction with E123, amaranth, to produce a brown colouring in both chocolates and caramel.

==Safety==
The acceptable daily intake (ADI) is 0–4 mg/kg under both EU and WHO/FAO guidelines.
Sunset yellow FCF has no carcinogenicity, genotoxicity, or developmental toxicity in the amounts at which it is used.

It has been claimed since the late 1970s, under the advocacy of Benjamin Feingold, that sunset yellow FCF causes food intolerance and ADHD-like behavior in children, but there is little scientific evidence to support these broad claims. It is possible that certain food colorings may act as a trigger in those who are genetically predisposed, but the evidence is weak.

==Regulation as food additive==

===Europe===
&quot;European Parliament and Council Directive 94/36/EC of 30 June 1994 on colours for use in foodstuffs&quot; harmonized rules and approved Sunset Yellow FCF for use in foodstuffs in the whole of the European Union. Before that time, approved amounts was up to each country, but naming and composition was standardized.

Sunset yellow FCF was not approved in Norway before 2001. That was the time when the 94/36/EC directive of 1994 was included in EFTA (now EEC) rules and came into effect, after years of delaying tactics from the Norwegian side and a heated political debate.

In 2008, the Food Standards Agency of the UK called for food manufacturers to voluntarily stop using six food additive colours, tartrazine, allura red, ponceau 4R, quinoline yellow WS, sunset yellow and carmoisine (dubbed the &quot;Southampton 6&quot;) by 2009, and provided a document to assist in replacing the colors with other colors.

An EU regulation came into effect in 2010 mandating that food manufacturers include a label on foods containing the Southampton 6 stating: &quot;may have an adverse effect on activity and attention in children&quot;.

===United States===
Sunset yellow FCF is known as FD&amp;C yellow No. 6 in the US and is approved for use in coloring food, drugs, and cosmetics with an acceptable daily intake of 3.75 mg/kg.

==Society and culture==

Since the 1970s and the well-publicized advocacy of Benjamin Feingold, there has been public concern that food colorings may cause ADHD-like behavior in children. These concerns have led the FDA and other food safety authorities to regularly review the scientific literature, and led the UK FSA to commission a study by researchers at Southampton University of the effect of a mixture of the &quot;Southampton 6&quot; and sodium benzoate (a preservative) on children in the general population who consumed them in beverages; the study was published in 2007. The study found &quot;a possible link between the consumption of these artificial colours and a sodium benzoate preservative and increased hyperactivity&quot; in the children; the advisory committee to the FSA that evaluated the study also determined that because of study limitations, the results could not be extrapolated to the general population, and further testing was recommended&quot;.

The European regulatory community, with a stronger emphasis on the precautionary principle, required labelling and temporarily reduced the acceptable daily intake (ADI) for the food colorings; the UK FSA called for voluntary withdrawal of the colorings by food manufacturers. However, in 2009 the EFSA re-evaluated the data at hand and determined that &quot;the available scientific evidence does not substantiate a link between the color additives and behavioral effects&quot; and in 2014 after further review of the data, the EFSA restored the prior ADI levels.

The US FDA did not make changes following the publication of the Southampton study, but following a citizen petition filed by the Center for Science in the Public Interest in 2008, requesting the FDA to ban several food additives, the FDA commenced a review of the available evidence, and still made no changes.

==See also==
* Tartrazine, also known as Yellow 5

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q410095" start="0" end="17" title="Sunset yellow FCF" label="Sunset yellow FCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q410095" start="33" end="48" title="Sunset yellow FCF" label="orange yellow S"/>
<link wikidata="Q410095" start="53" end="63" title="Sunset yellow FCF" label="C.I. 15985"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="70" end="79" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q322251" start="95" end="98" title="Azo compound" label="azo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="99" end="102" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="110" end="112" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067874" start="276" end="284" title="FD&amp;amp;C" label="FD&amp;amp;C"/>
<link wikidata="Q410095" start="285" end="293" title="Sunset yellow FCF" label="Yellow 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="333" end="341" title="E Number" label="E Number"/>
<link wikidata="Q410095" start="342" end="346" title="Sunset yellow FCF" label="E110"/>
<link wikidata="Q421074" start="609" end="617" title="Amaranth (dye)" label="amaranth"/>
<link wikidata="Q680142" start="696" end="719" title="acceptable daily intake" label="acceptable daily intake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888576" start="960" end="977" title="Benjamin Feingold" label="Benjamin Feingold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727229" start="1009" end="1025" title="food intolerance" label="food intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="1030" end="1034" title="Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="ADHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="1673" end="1679" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741994" start="1907" end="1928" title="Food Standards Agency" label="Food Standards Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q407158" start="2022" end="2032" title="tartrazine" label="tartrazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q419895" start="2034" end="2044" title="allura red" label="allura red"/>
<link wikidata="Q384709" start="2046" end="2056" title="ponceau 4R" label="ponceau 4R"/>
<link wikidata="Q420123" start="2058" end="2077" title="Quinoline Yellow WS" label="quinoline yellow WS"/>
<link wikidata="Q409676" start="2097" end="2107" title="carmoisine" label="carmoisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888576" start="2722" end="2739" title="Benjamin Feingold" label="Benjamin Feingold"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="2801" end="2805" title="Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="ADHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q423971" start="3092" end="3107" title="sodium benzoate" label="sodium benzoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q515255" start="3690" end="3713" title="precautionary principle" label="precautionary principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q680142" start="3762" end="3785" title="acceptable daily intake" label="acceptable daily intake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053605" start="4318" end="4359" title="Center for Science in the Public Interest" label="Center for Science in the Public Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q407158" start="4516" end="4526" title="Tartrazine" label="Tartrazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544051" wikidata="Q249100" url="?curid=544051" title="Highland County">
<text>Highland County is the name of two counties in the United States:

* Highland County, Ohio 
* Highland County, Virginia

==See also==
* Highlands County, Florida</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q249100" start="0" end="15" title="Highland County" label="Highland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q490144" start="69" end="90" title="Highland County, Ohio" label="Highland County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q505861" start="94" end="119" title="Highland County, Virginia" label="Highland County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q488885" start="136" end="161" title="Highlands County, Florida" label="Highlands County, Florida"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544053" wikidata="Q233023" url="?curid=544053" title="Hidalgo County">
<text>Hidalgo County is the name of two counties in the United States:

* Hidalgo County, New Mexico 
* Hidalgo County, Texas

==See also==
* 
* Lordsburg–Hidalgo County (disambiguation)
* Hidalgo (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233023" start="0" end="14" title="Hidalgo County" label="Hidalgo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q489613" start="68" end="94" title="Hidalgo County, New Mexico" label="Hidalgo County, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q26519" start="98" end="119" title="Hidalgo County, Texas" label="Hidalgo County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q94435293" start="139" end="180" title="Lordsburg–Hidalgo County (disambiguation)" label="Lordsburg–Hidalgo County (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q218762" start="183" end="207" title="Hidalgo (disambiguation)" label="Hidalgo (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544055" wikidata="Q248925" url="?curid=544055" title="Hickman County">
<text>Hickman County is the name of several counties in the United States:

* Hickman County, Kentucky 
* Hickman County, Tennessee</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q500680" start="72" end="96" title="Hickman County, Kentucky" label="Hickman County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q502047" start="100" end="125" title="Hickman County, Tennessee" label="Hickman County, Tennessee"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544060" wikidata="Q5322333" url="?curid=544060" title="E111">
<text>E111 may be:
* A European medical form now replaced by the European Health Insurance Card
* Orange GGN, a food additive, classified under E111 in the European Union
* The DB Class 111 locomotive
* Roentgenium, element 111 in the periodic table</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q569412" start="59" end="89" title="European Health Insurance Card" label="European Health Insurance Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q929052" start="92" end="102" title="Orange GGN" label="Orange GGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q558185" start="171" end="183" title="DB Class 111" label="DB Class 111"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272" start="197" end="208" title="Roentgenium" label="Roentgenium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544063" wikidata="Q929052" url="?curid=544063" title="Orange GGN">
<text>Orange GGN, also known as alpha-naphthol orange, is an azo dye formerly used as a food dye. It is the disodium salt of 1-(&quot;m&quot;-sulfophenylazo)-2-naphthol-6-sulfonic acid. In Europe, it was denoted by the E Number E111, but has been forbidden for use in foods since 1 January 1978. It has never been included in the food additives list of the Codex Alimentarius. As such, it is forbidden for food use in general, because toxicological data has shown it is harmful.

The absorption spectrum of Orange GGN and Sunset Yellow is nearly identical in visible and ultraviolet range, but they can be distinguished by their IR spectra.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q929052" start="0" end="10" title="Orange GGN" label="Orange GGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q929052" start="26" end="47" title="Orange GGN" label="alpha-naphthol orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984395" start="55" end="62" title="azo dye" label="azo dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q753009" start="82" end="90" title="food dye" label="food dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="183" end="189" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="213" end="221" title="E Number" label="E Number"/>
<link wikidata="Q312100" start="351" end="369" title="Codex Alimentarius" label="Codex Alimentarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553575" start="478" end="497" title="absorption spectrum" label="absorption spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q410095" start="516" end="529" title="Sunset Yellow" label="Sunset Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="565" end="576" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="623" end="633" title="infrared spectrum" label="IR spectra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544064" wikidata="Q1516058" url="?curid=544064" title="Indian Act">
<text>The Indian Act () is a Canadian Act of Parliament that concerns registered Indians, their bands, and the system of Indian reserves. First passed in 1876 and still in force with amendments, it is the primary document that defines how the Government of Canada interacts with the 614 First Nation bands in Canada and their members. Throughout its long history, the act has been a subject of controversy and has been interpreted in different ways by both Indigenous Canadians and non-Indigenous Canadians. The legislation has been amended many times, including &quot;over five major changes&quot; made in 2002.

The act is very wide-ranging in scope, covering governance, land use, healthcare, education, and more on Indian reserves. Notably, the original &quot;Indian Act&quot; defines two elements that affect all Indigenous Canadians:

* It says how reserves and bands can operate. The act sets out rules for governing Indian reserves, defines how bands can be created, and defines the powers of &quot;band councils&quot;. Bands do not have to have reserve lands to operate under the act.
* It defines who is, and who is not, recognized as an &quot;Indian&quot;; that is, who has Indian status. The act defines types of Indian persons who are not recognized as &quot;registered&quot; or &quot;status&quot; Indians, who are therefore denied membership in bands. In mixed marriage (between someone with Indian status and someone without it), the status of each partner and their children resolved on patrilineal terms. From a postmodern perspective, the act is now viewed as having historically discriminated against women, their claim to status and being registered under the same terms as men. For example, women marrying a non-Indian lost their Indian status, but men who married non-Indians did not lose Indian status. (This was amended in the late 20th century.)

The act was passed because the Crown relates differently to First Nations (historically called &quot;Indians&quot;) than to other ethnic groups because of their previous history on the land. When Canada confederated in 1867 the new state inherited legal responsibilities from the colonial periods under France and Great Britain, most notably the Royal Proclamation of 1763 which made it illegal for British subjects to buy land directly from Indian nations, because only the Crown could add land to the British Empire from other sovereign nations through treaties. This led to early treaties between Britain and nations the British still recognized as sovereign, like the &quot;Peace and Friendship Treaties&quot; with the Mi&#x27;kmaq and the Upper Canada treaties. During the negotiations around Canadian Confederation, the framers of Canada&#x27;s constitution wanted the new federal government to inherit Britain&#x27;s former role in treaty-making and land acquisition, and specifically assigned responsibility for &quot;Indians and lands reserved for Indians&quot; to the federal government (rather than the provinces), by the terms of Section 91(24) of the &quot;Constitution Act, 1867&quot;. The &quot;Indian Act&quot; replaced any laws on the topic passed by a local legislature before a province joined Canadian Confederation, creating a definitive national policy.

The act is not a treaty; it is Canada&#x27;s legal response to the treaties. The act&#x27;s unilateral nature was imposed on Indigenous peoples after passage by the Canadian government, in contrast to the treaties, which were negotiated. This aspect was resented and resisted by many Indigenous peoples in Canada.

== Original rationale and purpose ==
The act was introduced in 1875 by the Liberal government as a consolidation of various laws concerning Indigenous peoples enacted by the separate colonies of British North America prior to Confederation, most notably the &quot;Gradual Civilization Act&quot; passed by the Parliament of the Province of Canada in 1857 and the &quot;Gradual Enfranchisement Act&quot; of 1869. The act was passed by the Parliament of Canada under the provisions of Section 91(24) of the &quot;Constitution Act, 1867&quot;, which provides Canada&#x27;s federal government exclusive authority to govern in relation to &quot;Indians and Lands Reserved for Indians&quot;. It was an attempt to codify rights promised to Native peoples by King George III in the Royal Proclamation of 1763 while at the same time enforcing Euro-Canadian standards of &quot;civilization&quot;. The purpose of the act, as stated by its drafters, was to administer Indian affairs in such a way that Indian people would feel compelled to renounce their Indian status and join Canadian civilization as full members: a process called enfranchisement.

The idea of enfranchisement predated the 1876 version of the act and survived in some form until 1985. From the introduction in 1857 by the Taché-Macdonald administration of the &quot;Gradual Civilization Act&quot; until 1961, the enfranchisement process was optional for men of age 21 able to read and write English or French.

Reserves, under this legislation, were islands within Canada to which were attached a different set of Indigenous rights. &quot;Enfranchisement&quot; derives from the idea of &quot;franchise&quot;, which has gradually been degraded as &quot;vote&quot;. Indigenous people with the franchise became official citizens of Canada (or British subjects before 1947), were allowed to vote for representatives, were expected to pay taxes, and lived &quot;off-reserve&quot;. By contrast, groups of people who lived on a reserve were subject to a different set of rights and obligations. One needed to descend from an Indian to be allowed to live on a reserve.

The tenure of land in a reserve was limited to the collective, or tribe, by virtue of a Crown protectorate. Interactions between enfranchised citizens and Indians were subject to strict controls; for example, the enfranchised were forbidden by the &quot;Royal Proclamation of 1763&quot; to traffic in alcohol or land with Indians. The Crown (in this case the Indian Department) hoped, by means of fiduciary duty that it voluntarily took on, to preserve Indian identity. But later the government of the Province of Canada conceived of the compulsory enfranchisement scheme of the &quot;Gradual Civilization Act&quot;. The 1985 amendment to the &quot;Indian Act&quot; extinguished the idea of enfranchisement, although by then Status Indians were Canadian citizens by birth.

== Definitions ==

=== &quot;Reserve&quot; ===

Under the section entitled &quot;Reserves&quot; in the &quot;Indian Act&quot;, reserves are said &quot;to be held for use and benefit of Indians.

=== &quot;Band&quot; ===

In the &quot;Indian Act&quot;, updated to April 2013, the term &quot;band&quot;

=== &quot;Indian&quot; ===

Fundamental to Canada&#x27;s ability to interact with First Nations peoples is the question of defining who they are (e.g. who are the &quot;Indians&quot; of the &quot;Indian Act&quot;?), and this aspect of the legislation has been an ongoing source of controversy throughout its history. Not all people who self-identify as &quot;Aboriginal&quot; are considered &quot;Indians&quot; under the terms of the act. Only those on the official Indian Register maintained by the federal government (or a local &quot;band list&quot; in some cases) are Status Indians, subject to the full legal benefits and restrictions of the act. Notably this excludes Métis, Inuit, and so-called Non-Status Indians. Various amendments and court decisions have repeatedly altered the rules regarding who is eligible for Indian Status. Many bands now maintain their own band lists.

==== Loss of status prior to 1985 amendments ====
Prior to 1985, Indigenous persons could lose status under the act in a variety of ways, including the following:

* marrying a man who was not a status Indian
* enfranchisement: until 1947, Indigenous persons could not have both Indian status and Canadian citizenship.
* having a father or husband who becomes enfranchised
* having at the age of 21 a mother and paternal grandmother who did not have status before marriage
* being born out of wedlock to a mother with status and a father without.

These provisions interfered with the matrilineal cultures of many First Nations, whereby children were born to the mother&#x27;s clan and people gained their belonging in the clan from her family. Often property and hereditary leadership passed through the maternal line. In addition, the 1876 &quot;Indian Act&quot; maintained that Indigenous women with status who married status Indigenous men would, in the event of divorce, be unable to regain their status to the band they were originally registered in. This occurred as a result of the act&#x27;s enforcement of the patrilineal descent principle required to determine an individual&#x27;s eligibility for Indian status. As individuals, Indigenous women were not eligible for status or able to transfer status to their children in their own right. Indian status could only be reacquired or transferred legally by proof of an Indigenous father or through marriage to a husband with status.

In &quot;Attorney General of Canada v. Lavell&quot; (1974), these laws were upheld despite arguments made under the &quot;Canadian Bill of Rights.&quot; The act was amended in 1985 (Bill C-31) to restore status to people who had lost it in one of these ways, and to their children. Though people accepted into band membership under band rules may not be status Indians, Bill C-31 clarified that various sections of the &quot;Indian Act&quot; would apply to such members. The sections in question are those relating to community life (e.g., landholdings). Sections relating to Indians (Aboriginal people) as individuals (in this case, wills and taxation of personal property) were not included.

===== Discriminatory definition issues =====

Bonita Lawrence (2003) discusses a feminist position on the relationship between federal definition and Indian identity in Canada. Until 1985, subsection 12(1)(b) of the act &quot;discriminated against Indian women by stripping them and their descendants of their Indian status if they married a man without Indian status.&quot; Under subsection 12(2) of the act, &quot;&#x27;illegitimate&#x27; children of status Indian women could also lose status if the alleged father was known not to be a status Indian and if the child&#x27;s status as an Indian was &quot;protested&quot; by the Indian agent.&quot; Further, subparagraph 12(1)(a)(iv), which Lawrence calls the &quot;double mother&quot; clause, &quot;removed status from children when they reached the age of 21 if their mother and paternal grandmother did not have status before marriage.&quot; Much of the discrimination stems from the &quot;Indian Act&quot; amendments and modifications in 1951.

Lawrence discusses the struggles of Jeannette Corbiere Lavell and Yvonne Bédard in the early 1970s, two Indigenous women who had both lost their Indian status for marrying white men. Lavell, whose activism helped create the Ontario Native Women&#x27;s Association and also held the position of vice president of the Native Women&#x27;s Association of Canada, and other Indigenous women were key actors in generating public awareness of gender discrimination in Canadian law and paving the way for later amendments to the &quot;Indian Act&quot; that allowed some women and their children to regain and/or attain status under Bill-C31. Meanwhile, the Supreme Court of Canada ruled that the &quot;Indian Act&quot; was not discriminatory, as the pair gained the legal rights of white women at the same time they lost the status of Indian women, in a parallel to &quot;R. v. Drybones&quot;. In 1981, Sandra Lovelace, a Maliseet woman from western New Brunswick, forced the issue by taking her case to the United Nations Human Rights Committee, contending that she should not have to lose her own status by her marriage. The Canadian law was amended in 1985.

== Policies enacted via the Indian Act ==

===Gender discrimination===
The Canadian government applied gender bias requirements to the legal status of Aboriginal peoples in Canada. First passed as part of the &quot;Gradual Enfranchisement Act&quot;, a status Indian woman who married a man who was not a status Indian became non-status. Without legal status, Aboriginal women are unable to access treaty benefits, practice inherent rights to live on their reserve, inherit family property or be buried on reserve with ancestors. Restricted from access to their native community, Aboriginal women without legal status were unable to participate in ceremonies and rituals on their traditional land. However, these conditions did not apply to status Indian men who married non-status women; these men were able to keep their status. Section 12, paragraph 1(b) of the act worked to disadvantage the position of Aboriginal women and can be considered an attempt to demolish Aboriginal families and alienate Aboriginal women from their land. Inflicting gender discriminatory laws, the Canadian government marginalized and disadvantaged Aboriginal women. Section 12 gained the attention of female movements contributing to a variety of proposals for reform. Amended in 1985 through the introduction of Bill C-31, section 12 was removed and status was reinstated to those affected. The 1985 amendments led to the repatriation of status for many Indigenous women and their children but did not guarantee acceptance into an Indian band. A decade later, nearly 100,000 people had their status&#x27; reinstated while bands had newly gained control of membership responsibilities which was previously administrated by the Department of Indian Affairs. Consequently, the reality of scarce access to essential services and resources amongst Indigenous communities became a primary factor driving the membership process and its outcomes.

==== Bill C-31 ====
As stated in Bill C-31, women who lost their status as a result of marrying a man who was not a status Indian can apply for reinstatement and regain status under subsection 6(1). However, the children of reinstated women are subject to registration under subsection 6(2). Aboriginal people registered under section 6(2) are unable to transmit status to future generations. Thus, by reinstating women under section 6 of the act, the Canadian government failed to completely remove gender discrimination from its legislation, as the children of reinstated women have restrictions on their status, and status Indian men continue to hold a greater quality of status than women. Under Bill C-31, this system became known as the second generation cut-off. Bill C-31 amendments create a new system for classifying status Indians that maintains gender discrimination. Indigenous women&#x27;s movements expressed that Bill C-31 failed to eliminate all gender discrimination from the &quot;Indian Act&quot;, and in 2010 the Canadian government introduced Bill C-3 (the &quot;Act to Promote Gender Equality in Indian Registration&quot;).

Bill C-31 attempts to recognise the United Nations&#x27; Human Rights Committee decision in the Sandra Lovelace case and Charter compliance issues. However, under Bill C-31, women who regain status fall under 6(1) and her children fall under 6(1) status. However, anybody who loses and regains status that is not from marriage falls under 6(2) and cannot gain status [like 6(1)]. This action has ultimately violated the United Nations&#x27; International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights through the discriminatory practices of the &quot;Indian Act&quot;; that this law discriminates against Indigenous women and her descendants and their right to express their culture. In addition, this decision was also made based on the 2007 Supreme Court of British Columbia case of Sharon McIvor and her son, Jacob Grisner, that have been waiting over a decade of a verdict of their case. The UNHRC&#x27;s decision has determined that Bill C-31 has violated Articles 3 and 26 of the International Covenant, in concurrence of Article 27. As well, In Article 2(3)(a) of the decision, the Government of Canada must provide effective remedy.

Under the United Nations&#x27; International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Government of Canada is required in 180 days to fulfill these requirements: to ensuring that paragraph 6(1)(a) of the &quot;Indian Act&quot; is understood in a way that allows registration of those who were not previously registered under the distinction of paragraph 6(1)(a) on the basis of sex and gender, account for the ongoing discrimination of Indigenous peoples in Canada of gender and sex in the &quot;Indian Act&quot; and to avoid future discrimination similar to this Bill.

==== Bill C-3 ====
Bill C-3 amendments to the act (&quot;Gender Equity in Indian Registration Act&quot;—GEIRA) permitted Aboriginal women reinstated under subsection 6(2) to be eligible for 6(1) status. Creating paragraph 6(1)(c.1) registration, reinstated Aboriginal women could only be eligible for registration under 6(1) if they had non-status children. Since it was the children of Aboriginal women who had been affected by restrictions under subsection 6(2) legal registration, only women who had children were eligible to be registered under subsection 6(1) of the act. Continuing to place restrictions on the status of reinstated women, Bill C-3 does not remove all gender bias provisions from the act.

Bill S-3, &quot;An Act to amend the Indian Act in response to the Superior Court of Quebec decision in Descheneaux c. Canada (Procureur général)&quot; addresses gender-based inequalities in the &quot;Indian Act&quot;. Bill S-3 received royal assent in December 2017 and came in to full effect in August 2019.

=== Residential schools ===

In 1894 amendments to the &quot;Indian Act&quot; made school attendance compulsory for Indigenous children between 7 and 16 years of age. The changes included a series of exemptions regarding school location, the health of the children and their prior completion of school examinations. The Canadian Indian residential school system subjected children to forced conversions, sickness, abuse and what has been described as an attempt at cultural genocide by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. The residential school system severed family ties and diminished the transmission of traditional culture, in an attempt to assimilate Indigenous peoples into broader Canadian society for which on June 11, 2008, the government of Canada apologized.

=== Bans on religious ceremonies (&quot;Potlatch Law&quot;) ===
In 1885, an amendment to the act banned the Potlatch ceremony of the West Coast peoples. The Potlatch ban drove traditional ceremonies underground. A similar amendment in 1895 banned the Sun Dance of the Plains peoples, which was not lifted until 1951. Although lifted in 1951, repression of Indigenous spiritual practices continued in Canadian prisons through to the 1980s, as prison wardens often denied Indigenous peoples access to materials used for prayer.

=== Restriction on access to the courts ===
Starting in the early 1900s, the Nisga&#x27;a First Nation started or attempted to start several legal proceedings to take control of their traditional territory. A series of attempts were denied by the B.C. government or not pursued by the Canadian Government. A 1927 amendment (Section 141) forbade any First Nation or band from retaining a lawyer for the purpose of making a claim against Canada, and further forbade them from raising money to retain a lawyer, on punishment of imprisonment.

=== Tax exemption ===
Section 87 exempts Indians from paying taxes on two types of property: (a) the interest of an Indian or a band in reserve lands or surrendered lands; and (b) the personal property of an Indian or a band situated on a reserve.

== Relation to the Constitution ==
The rights exclusive to Indians in the &quot;Indian Act&quot; are beyond legal challenge under the &quot;Constitution Act, 1982&quot;. Section 25 of the &quot;Constitution Act, 1982&quot; provides that the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms shall not be interpreted as negating Aboriginal, treaty or other rights of Canada&#x27;s Aboriginal peoples.

=== Section 88 ===
Section 88 of the act states that provincial laws may affect Aboriginals if they are of &quot;general application&quot;, meaning that they affect other people as well as Aboriginals. Hence, provincial laws are incorporated into federal law, since otherwise the provincial laws would be unconstitutional. In &quot;Kruger and al. v. The Queen&quot; (1978), the Supreme Court found that provincial laws with a more significant impact on Aboriginals than other people can be upheld, as &quot;There are few laws which have a uniform impact.&quot;

Constitutional scholar Peter Hogg argues that in &quot;Dick v. The Queen&quot; (1985), the Supreme Court &quot;changed its mind about the scope of s. 88.&quot; Section 88 could now protect provincial laws relating to primary Aboriginal issues and even limiting Aboriginal rights.

== History of proposed and actual changes ==

=== List of precursors and amendments ===

==== Pre-Confederation ====
* 1839: &quot;Act for the Protection of the Indians in Upper Canada&quot;
* 1850: &quot;An Act for the Protection of the Indians in Upper Canada from imposition, and the property occupied or enjoyed by them from trespass and injury&quot; (13&amp;14 Vic. c.74)
* 1850: &quot;An Act for the Protection of the Indians in Lower Canada from imposition, and the property occupied or enjoyed by them from trespass and injury&quot;&quot; (13&amp;14 Vic. c.42)
* 1857: &quot;Act to Encourage the Gradual Civilization of Indian Tribes in this Province, and to Amend the Laws Relating to Indians&quot; (20 Vic. c.26) through voluntary enfranchisement
* 1859: &quot;An Act respecting Civilization and Enfranchisement of certain Indians&quot;

==== Post-Confederation ====
* 1868: &quot;An Act providing for the organisation of the Department of the Secretary of State of Canada, and for the management of Indian and Ordnance Lands&quot; was created.
* 1869: &quot;An Act for the gradual enfranchisement of Indians, the better management of Indian affairs, and to extend the provisions of the Act 31st Victoria, Chapter 42&quot; introduced changes to the enfranchisement process.
* 1874: &quot;An Act to amend certain Laws respecting Indians, and to extend certain Laws relating to matters connected with Indians to the Provinces of Manitoba and British Columbia&quot; extended westward the effect of Canadian legislation regarding Indians.
* 1876: An Act to amend and consolidate the laws respecting Indians (the original &quot;Indian Act&quot;) was passed.
* 1879: &quot;An Act to amend The Indian Act, 1876&quot; amended the act to allow &quot;half-breeds&quot; to withdraw from treaty; to allow punishment for trespassing on reserves; to expand the powers of chief and council to include punishment by fine, penalty or imprisonment; and to prohibit houses of prostitution.
* 1880: &quot;An Act to amend and consolidate the laws respecting Indians&quot; passed.
* 1881: Amended to make officers of the Indian Department, including Indian Agents, legal justices of the peace, able to enforce regulations. The following year they were granted the same legal power as magistrates. Further amended to prohibit the sale of agricultural produce by Indians in Prairie Provinces without an appropriate permit from an Indian agent. This prohibition is, , still included in the &quot;Indian Act&quot;, though it is not enforced.
* 1884: Amended to force attendance of Indian youth in school. Amended to prevent elected band leaders who have been deposed from office from being re-elected.
* 1884: Amended to prohibit the potlatch and &quot;Tamanawas&quot; dances.
* 1894: Amended to remove band control of non-natives living on reserve. This power now rested exclusively in the hands of the Superintendent-General of Indian Affairs.
* 1896: Amended to extend the ban on potlatch and &quot;Tamanawas&quot; dances to outlaw all dances, ceremonies and festivals that involved the wounding of animals or humans, or the giving away of money or goods.
* 1905: Amended to allow Aboriginal people to be removed from reserves near towns with more than 8,000 residents.
* 1906: Amended to allow 50% of the sale price of reserve lands to be given to band members, following the surrender of that land.
* 1911: Amended to allow municipalities and companies to expropriate portions of reserves, without surrender, for roads, railways, and other public works. Further amended to allow a judge to move an entire reserve away from a municipality if it was deemed &quot;expedient.&quot; These amendments were also known as the &quot;Oliver Act&quot;.
* 1914: Amended to require western Indians to seek official permission before appearing in &quot;Aboriginal costume&quot; in any &quot;dance, show, exhibition, stampede or pageant.&quot;
* 1918: Amended to allow the Superintendent-General to lease out uncultivated reserve lands to non-Aboriginals if the new lease-holder used it for farming or pasture.
* 1920: Amended to make it mandatory for Aboriginal parents to send their children to Indian residential school (&quot;Indian Act&quot;, 1920 s.10(1)). Also amended to allow the Department of Indian Affairs to ban hereditary rule of bands. Further amended to allow for the involuntary enfranchisement (and loss of treaty rights) of any status Indian considered fit by the Department of Indian Affairs, without the possession of land previously required for those living off reserve. Repealed two years later but reintroduced in a modified form in 1933.
* 1927: Amended to prevent anyone (Aboriginal or otherwise) from soliciting funds for Indian legal claims without a special license from the Superintendent-General. This effectively prevented any First Nation from pursuing Aboriginal land claims.
* 1930: Amended to prevent a pool hall owner from allowing entrance to an Indian who &quot;by inordinate frequenting of a pool room either on or off an Indian reserve misspends or wastes his time or means to the detriment of himself, his family or household&quot;. The owner could face a fine or a one-month jail term.
* 1936: Amended to allow Indian agents to direct band council meetings, and to cast a deciding vote in the event of a tie.
* 1951: Amended to allow the sale and slaughter of livestock without an Indian Agent permit. Status women are allowed to vote in band elections. Attempts to pursue land claims and the use of religious ceremonies (such as potlatches) are no longer prohibited by law. Further amended for the compulsory enfranchisement of First Nations women who married non-status men (including Métis, Inuit and non-status Indian, as well as non-Aboriginal men), thus causing them to lose their status, and denying Indian status to any children from the marriage.
* 1958: Bill C-24 Métis scrip provision. On June 9, 1958, the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration, Ellen Fairclough, introduced legislation that would keep persons and their descendants that had received &quot;half-breed lands and money scrip&quot; (land-entitlements) from being removed from the Indian Register. Under the previous versions of the &quot;Indian Act&quot;, persons who had received these land allocations were not entitled to be registered as status Indians. In the Senate of Canada the bill was debated by the newly appointed Senator James Gladstone in his maiden speech on August 12, 1958. Gladstone&#x27;s speech was the first time the Blackfoot language from the Kainai Nation had been used in parliamentary proceedings. The bill received royal assent on August 13, 1958. 
* 1961: Amended to end the compulsory enfranchisement of men or bands.
* 1970: A judgement in &quot;R. v. Drybones&quot;, [1970] S.C.R. 282, rules section 94(b) inoperable for violating Section 1(b) of the Canadian Bill of Rights.
* 1971: Parliament voted to repeal section 94 in its entirety.
* 1985: &quot;Indian Act&quot; amended to void the enfranchisement process. Amended to allow status Indian women the right to keep or regain their status even after &quot;marrying out&quot; and to grant status to the children (but not grandchildren) of such a marriage. This amendment was debated in Parliament as Bill C-31. Under this amendment, full status Indians are referred to as 6–1. A child of a marriage between a status (6–1) person and a non-status person qualifies for 6–2 (half) status. If that child grows up and in turn married a non-status person, the child of that union would be non-status. If a 6–2 marries a 6–1 or another 6–2, the children revert to 6–1 status. Blood quantum is disregarded, or rather, replaced with a &quot;two-generation cut-off clause&quot;. Under amendments to the &quot;Indian Act&quot; (Bill C-31), Michel Band members have individual Indian status restored. No provision made in Bill C-31 for the restoration of status under the Band enfranchisement provision that was applied to the Michel Band. According to Thomas King, around half of status Indians are currently marrying non-status people, meaning this legislation accomplishes complete legal assimilation in a matter of a few generations.
* 2002: Amended to allow band members living off reserves to vote in band elections and referendums.
* 2011: &quot;Gender Equity in Indian Registration Act&quot; (Bill C-3) amended provisions of the &quot;Indian Act&quot; that the Court of Appeal for British Columbia found to be unconstitutional in the case of &quot;McIvor v. Canada&quot;. The bringing into force of Bill C-3 on January 31, 2011, ensured that eligible grandchildren of women who lost status as a result of marrying non-status men became entitled to registration (Indian status). As a result of this legislation approximately 45,000 persons became newly entitled to registration.
* 2012: &quot;Jobs and Growth Act&quot; (Bill C-45).
* 2013: 200,000 Métis and 400,000 non-status Indians are included in the federal responsibility for Indians after a 13-year legal dispute.
* 2016: Changes to the &quot;Jobs and Growth Act&quot; (Bill C-45).
* 2017: Gender-based inequalities addressed (Bill S-3).

=== Attempts to repeal or replace ===
Numerous failed attempts have been made by Canadian parliamentarians to repeal or replace the &quot;Indian Act&quot; without success. Those changes that have been made have been piecemeal reforms, rather than sweeping revisions.

==== Failed major changes ====
* The Statement of the Government of Canada on Indian policy or &quot;the White Paper&quot; (1969) would have abolished reserves and all other markers of &quot;special status&quot; and assimilated Indians fully into Canada. Failed due to First Nations&#x27; opposition (e.g. &quot;the Red Paper&quot;) and withdrawn in 1971.
* The Manitoba Framework Agreement – a 1994 agreement between the Assembly of Manitoba Chiefs and the Minister of Indian Affairs, it created a regional pilot project to dismantle the Department of Indian Affairs&#x27; regional structure in Manitoba. It was deemed unsuccessful and discontinued in 2004.
* The &quot;Indian Act Optional Modification Act&quot; (Bill C-79) – introduced in 1996, it would have devolved certain powers to bands, but was opposed by most bands as being too limited and not respecting the principle of Aboriginal self-government as endorsed by the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples. It died in parliament at the start of the 1997 election.
* The &quot;First Nations Governance Act&quot; (Bill C-7) – introduced in 2002, it would have allowed bands to amend their own leadership selection processes and devolved some other powers. It was opposed by most bands and died in Parliament in 2003.
* Senate Proposals (several) – the most recent is &quot;An Act for the Recognition of Self-Governing First Nations&quot; (Bill S-216) initiated by Senator Gerry St. Germain in May 2006 which would have allowed bands to write their own constitutions, subject to vetting by the Auditor General. Died in Parliament in September 2007.

==== Opt-outs ====
Since the 1990s, several pieces of legislation have been passed allowing individual bands to opt out of a particular section of the &quot;Indian Act&quot; if an agreement is signed between the band and the government putting alternative measures in place. These are called &quot;Sectoral Legislative Arrangements&quot;. The band remains subject to the act except for the section in question.
* &quot;First Nations Land Management Act&quot; (FNLMA)—enacted in 1999, it allows opt-outs of 34 land-related sections of the &quot;Indian Act&quot; and allows bands to create their own codes on land use and environmental stewardship. Fourteen bands originally signed on, by 2013 there were over 30 bands involved.
* &quot;First Nations Fiscal Management Act&quot; (FNFMA)—enacted in 2005, allows bands to issue their own bonds.
* &quot;First Nations Oil and Gas and Moneys Management Act&quot; (FNOGMMA)—enacted in 2005, allows bands to opt to take over the management of funds held in trust for them by the Crown, or to assume management of oil and gas resources on their reserves.
* &quot;First Nations Commercial and Industrial Development Act&quot; (FNCIDA)—since 2006 has allowed a band to request the federal government to create regulations for a particular industry on reserve that mirror those of the surrounding province. Amended in 2010 by the &quot;First Nations Certainty of Land Title Act&quot; (FNCLTA) which creates a registry similar to a provincial land titles registry for on-reserve real estate.

== Case law ==

The 1895 amendment of the &quot;Indian Act&quot; (Section 114) criminalized many Aboriginal ceremonies, which resulted in the arrest and conviction of numerous Aboriginal people for practising their basic traditions. These arrests were based on Aboriginal participation in festivals, dances and ceremonies that involved the wounding of animals or humans, or the giving away of money or goods. The Dakota people (Sioux) who settled in Oak River, Manitoba, in 1875 were known to conduct &quot;give-away dances&quot;, also known as the &quot;grass dance&quot;. The dance ceremony involved the giving away and exchange of blankets and horses; thus it breached Section 114 of the Indian Act. As a result, Wanduta, an elder of the Dakota community, was sentenced to four months of hard labour and imprisonment on January 26, 1903.

According to Canadian historian Constance Backhouse, the Aboriginal &quot;give-away dances&quot; were ceremonies more commonly known as potlatches that connected entire communities politically, economically and socially. These dances affirmed kinship ties, provided elders with opportunities to pass on insight, legends and history to the next generation, and were a core part of Aboriginal resistance to assimilation. It is estimated that between 1900 and 1904, 50 Aboriginal people were arrested and 20 were convicted for their involvement in such dances. The Indian Act was amended in 1951 to allow religious ceremonies, including the &quot;give-away dance&quot;.

In &quot;R. v. Jim&quot; (1915), the British Columbia Supreme Court found that Aboriginal hunting on Indian reserves should be considered under federal jurisdiction under both the constitution and the &quot;Indian Act&quot;. The case involved whether Aboriginals were subject to provincial game laws when hunting on Indian reserves.

The act was at the centre of the 1969 Supreme Court case &quot;R. v. Drybones&quot;, regarding the conflict of a clause forbidding Indians to be drunk off the reserve with the Bill of Rights. The case is remembered for having been one of the few in which the Bill of Rights prevailed in application to Indian rights.

In &quot;Corbiere v. Canada&quot; (1999), voting rights on reserves were extended under Section Fifteen of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.

In &quot;Canada (Canadian Human Rights Commission) v. Canada (Attorney General)&quot; (2018), the majority found that the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal&#x27;s determination that the &quot;Indian Act&quot; did not violate the Canadian Human Rights Act was reasonable due to judicial deference.

==See also==

* Aboriginal Protection Act 1869 and Half-Caste Act (Australia)
* Canadian Aboriginal law
* Aboriginal land title in Canada
* Indian Health Transfer Policy (Canada)
* Indigenous land claims in Canada
* Indigenous specific land claims in Canada
* Numbered Treaties
* Status of First Nations treaties in British Columbia
* The Canadian Crown and Aboriginal peoples
* The Potlatch Ban
* Treaty of Niagara

==Further reading==
* This article by John F. Leslie, a research consultant with Public History Inc., is an edited version of Leslie&#x27;s testimony to the House of Commons Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs on March 12, 2002. The article provides a detailed step-by-step description of amendments to the &quot;Indian Act&quot;. It also provides detailed information about other laws related to the &quot;Indian Act&quot;. &quot;In 2001 the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs, Robert Nault, announced that the government would be introducing legislation to overhaul the &quot;Indian Act&quot;. In anticipation of this legislation in February 2002, the House of Commons Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs began hearing from various witnesses on issues relating to the &quot;Act&quot;. For the sake of simplicity, this article uses the term &quot;Indian&quot; throughout.
* The Constitution states that Canada&#x27;s Aboriginal Peoples are Indians, Métis and Inuit, but the &quot;Indian Act&quot; does not apply to Métis and the 1951 &quot;Indian Act&quot; specifically excludes Inuit from its operation.&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
*
* Furi, Megan &amp; Wherret, Jill. &quot;Indian Status and Band Membership Issues.&quot; Political and Social Affairs Division. 2003. Parliament of Canada. Web. April 6. 2015. 
* 
* 
===Act===
* 
==External links==
*The Indian Act
* 
** This web page uploaded on 1997 on www.johnco.com has re-published materials from various sources. This page is part of a series of &quot;information sheets produced by the Communications Branch, Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development regarding the Report to Parliament on the Implementation of the 1985 Changes to the Indian Act, The Impacts of the 1985 Amendments to the Indian Act (Bill C-31) produced for the Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development, Ottawa, Ontario.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="32" end="49" title="Act of Parliament" label="Act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095049" start="64" end="81" title="Indian Register" label="registered Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882257" start="90" end="95" title="Band government" label="bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q155239" start="115" end="129" title="Indian reserve" label="Indian reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="237" end="257" title="Government of Canada" label="Government of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="281" end="293" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960143" start="656" end="666" title="Indigenous self-government in Canada" label="governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005571" start="668" end="676" title="Indigenous land rights" label="land use"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535133" start="678" end="688" title="Healthcare in Canada" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q104846812" start="690" end="699" title="Indigenous education in Canada" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="812" end="832" title="Indigenous peoples in Canada" label="Indigenous Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q155239" start="918" end="932" title="Indian reserve" label="Indian reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="1497" end="1508" title="patrilineality" label="patrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="1523" end="1533" title="postmodernism" label="postmodern"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="1893" end="1902" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404301" start="1990" end="2009" title="Ethnic origins of people in Canada" label="other ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233473" start="2057" end="2089" title="Post-Confederation Canada (1867–1914)" label="When Canada confederated in 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="2146" end="2162" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="colonial periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="2169" end="2175" title="New France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029541" start="2180" end="2193" title="History of Canada (1763–1867)" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q209573" start="2212" end="2238" title="Royal Proclamation of 1763" label="Royal Proclamation of 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971466" start="2265" end="2281" title="British subject" label="British subjects"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="2369" end="2383" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="2395" end="2412" title="National Sovereignty" label="sovereign nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q30646273" start="2544" end="2573" title="Peace and Friendship Treaties" label="Peace and Friendship Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q495751" start="2589" end="2601" title="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq" label="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="2610" end="2622" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="2664" end="2686" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Canadian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q899061" start="2692" end="2729" title="Constitution of Canada" label="framers of Canada&amp;#x27;s constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="2980" end="2989" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444656" start="3008" end="3022" title="Section 91 of the Constitution Act, 1867" label="Section 91(24)"/>
<link wikidata="Q868884" start="3036" end="3058" title="Constitution Act, 1867" label="Constitution Act, 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q210187" start="3633" end="3651" title="2nd Canadian Ministry" label="Liberal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="3753" end="3774" title="British North America" label="British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="3784" end="3797" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305352" start="3822" end="3846" title="Gradual Civilization Act" label="Gradual Civilization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365530" start="3867" end="3903" title="Parliament of the Province of Canada" label="Parliament of the Province of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379828" start="3926" end="3953" title="Gradual Enfranchisement Act" label="Gradual Enfranchisement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q475689" start="3995" end="4015" title="Parliament of Canada" label="Parliament of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="4308" end="4323" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q209573" start="4331" end="4357" title="Royal Proclamation of 1763" label="Royal Proclamation of 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="4381" end="4442" title="Cultural assimilation" label="enforcing Euro-Canadian standards of &amp;quot;civilization&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q289263" start="4837" end="4842" title="Étienne-Paschal Taché" label="Taché"/>
<link wikidata="Q128702" start="4843" end="4852" title="John A. Macdonald" label="Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="5771" end="5783" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q717649" start="6036" end="6053" title="British Indian Department" label="Indian Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q537098" start="6074" end="6083" title="fiduciary" label="fiduciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121436" start="6179" end="6197" title="Province of Canada" label="Province of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6431" end="6448" title="citizens by birth" label="citizens by birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="6578" end="6585" title="Indian reservation" label="reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095049" start="7219" end="7234" title="Indian Register" label="Indian Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="7427" end="7432" title="Métis" label="Métis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="7434" end="7439" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049046" start="7455" end="7473" title="Non-Status Indians" label="Non-Status Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305352" start="7851" end="7866" title="Indian enfranchisement in Canada" label="enfranchisement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136773" start="8225" end="8236" title="matrilineal" label="matrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="8317" end="8321" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095049" start="8642" end="8648" title="Indian status" label="status"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818631" start="9142" end="9178" title="Attorney General of Canada v. Lavell" label="Attorney General of Canada v. Lavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408624" start="9255" end="9278" title="Canadian Bill of Rights" label="Canadian Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q47510113" start="9874" end="9889" title="Bonita Lawrence" label="Bonita Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q19659964" start="11012" end="11018" title="Jeannette Corbiere Lavell" label="Lavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969652" start="11145" end="11186" title="Native Women&amp;#x27;s Association of Canada" label="Native Women&amp;#x27;s Association of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="11478" end="11501" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274207" start="11693" end="11707" title="R. v. Drybones" label="R. v. Drybones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471928" start="11724" end="11739" title="Sandra Lovelace Nicholas" label="Sandra Lovelace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563033" start="11743" end="11751" title="Maliseet" label="Maliseet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="11771" end="11784" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q770764" start="11829" end="11866" title="United Nations Human Rights Committee" label="United Nations Human Rights Committee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17711" end="17723" title="Royal assent#Canada" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q945507" start="18105" end="18146" title="Canadian Indian residential school system" label="Canadian Indian residential school system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021399" start="18275" end="18310" title="Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada" label="Truth and Reconciliation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q756880" start="18669" end="18677" title="Potlatch" label="Potlatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234973" start="18718" end="18730" title="Potlatch ban" label="Potlatch ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q263937" start="18812" end="18821" title="Sun Dance" label="Sun Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993509" start="19165" end="19177" title="Nisga&amp;#x27;a" label="Nisga&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q868875" start="20017" end="20039" title="Constitution Act, 1982" label="Constitution Act, 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865533" start="20047" end="20057" title="Section Twenty-five of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Section 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q784786" start="20118" end="20157" title="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6439219" start="20600" end="20627" title="Kruger and al. v. The Queen" label="Kruger and al. v. The Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075771" start="20853" end="20863" title="Peter Hogg" label="Peter Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305352" start="21688" end="21818" title="Gradual Civilization Act" label="&amp;quot;Act to Encourage the Gradual Civilization of Indian Tribes in this Province, and to Amend the Laws Relating to Indians&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379828" start="22174" end="22343" title="Gradual Enfranchisement Act" label="&amp;quot;An Act for the gradual enfranchisement of Indians, the better management of Indian affairs, and to extend the provisions of the Act 31st Victoria, Chapter 42&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661337" start="23249" end="23262" title="Indian Agent (Canada)" label="Indian Agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364746" start="23471" end="23488" title="Prairie Provinces" label="Prairie Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234973" start="23816" end="23870" title="Potlatch ban" label="prohibit the potlatch and &amp;quot;Tamanawas&amp;quot; dances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195049" start="23999" end="24039" title="List of Canadian Superintendents-General of Indian Affairs" label="Superintendent-General of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488798" start="24824" end="24834" title="Oliver Act" label="Oliver Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="25176" end="25183" title="farming" label="farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121" start="25187" end="25194" title="pasture" label="pasture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911824" start="26025" end="26034" title="pool hall" label="pool hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q434334" start="27088" end="27104" title="Ellen Fairclough" label="Ellen Fairclough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095049" start="27286" end="27301" title="Indian Register" label="Indian Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q841180" start="27471" end="27487" title="Senate of Canada" label="Senate of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680460" start="27540" end="27555" title="James Gladstone" label="James Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q33060" start="27644" end="27662" title="Blackfoot language" label="Blackfoot language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520098" start="27672" end="27685" title="Kainai Nation" label="Kainai Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="27748" end="27760" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274207" start="27882" end="27896" title="R. v. Drybones" label="R. v. Drybones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408624" start="27988" end="28011" title="Canadian Bill of Rights" label="Canadian Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927888" start="28759" end="28772" title="Blood quantum" label="Blood quantum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242678" start="28919" end="28930" title="Michel Band" label="Michel Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206848" start="29978" end="29997" title="Jobs and Growth Act" label="Jobs and Growth Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151011" start="30586" end="30640" title="Statement of the Government of Canada on Indian policy" label="Statement of the Government of Canada on Indian policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960143" start="31432" end="31458" title="Aboriginal self-government" label="Aboriginal self-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986734" start="31478" end="31516" title="Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples" label="Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453432" start="31587" end="31615" title="First Nations Governance Act" label="First Nations Governance Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104351" start="31981" end="31998" title="Gerry St. Germain" label="Gerry St. Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148367" start="34101" end="34114" title="Dakota people" label="Dakota people"/>
<link wikidata="Q756880" start="34666" end="34674" title="potlatch" label="potlatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274241" start="35207" end="35216" title="R. v. Jim" label="R. v. Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644885" start="35235" end="35265" title="British Columbia Supreme Court" label="British Columbia Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274207" start="35595" end="35609" title="R. v. Drybones" label="R. v. Drybones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169747" start="35859" end="35877" title="Corbiere v. Canada" label="Corbiere v. Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865493" start="35938" end="36000" title="Section Fifteen of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Section Fifteen of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030145" start="36125" end="36155" title="Canadian Human Rights Tribunal" label="Canadian Human Rights Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030142" start="36229" end="36254" title="Canadian Human Rights Act" label="Canadian Human Rights Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302968" start="36277" end="36295" title="judicial deference" label="judicial deference"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960137" start="36314" end="36344" title="Aboriginal Protection Act 1869" label="Aboriginal Protection Act 1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641561" start="36349" end="36363" title="Half-Caste Act" label="Half-Caste Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="36365" end="36374" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029638" start="36378" end="36401" title="Canadian Aboriginal law" label="Canadian Aboriginal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865243" start="36404" end="36435" title="Aboriginal land title in Canada" label="Aboriginal land title in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020434" start="36438" end="36476" title="Indian Health Transfer Policy (Canada)" label="Indian Health Transfer Policy (Canada)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091535" start="36479" end="36511" title="Indigenous land claims in Canada" label="Indigenous land claims in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q65079919" start="36514" end="36555" title="Indigenous specific land claims in Canada" label="Indigenous specific land claims in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q837144" start="36558" end="36575" title="Numbered Treaties" label="Numbered Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604534" start="36578" end="36630" title="Status of First Nations treaties in British Columbia" label="Status of First Nations treaties in British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721134" start="36633" end="36674" title="The Canadian Crown and Aboriginal peoples" label="The Canadian Crown and Aboriginal peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234973" start="36677" end="36693" title="The Potlatch Ban" label="The Potlatch Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837062" start="36696" end="36713" title="Treaty of Niagara" label="Treaty of Niagara"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544068" wikidata="Q227067" url="?curid=544068" title="Henderson County">
<text>Henderson County is the name of several counties in the United States:

*Henderson County, Illinois 
*Henderson County, Kentucky 
*Henderson County, North Carolina 
*Henderson County, Tennessee 
*Henderson County, Texas</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q486444" start="73" end="99" title="Henderson County, Illinois" label="Henderson County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q491894" start="102" end="128" title="Henderson County, Kentucky" label="Henderson County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q511747" start="131" end="163" title="Henderson County, North Carolina" label="Henderson County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q495031" start="166" end="193" title="Henderson County, Tennessee" label="Henderson County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q112793" start="196" end="219" title="Henderson County, Texas" label="Henderson County, Texas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544072" wikidata="Q13681687" url="?curid=544072" title="A. S. J. Tessimond">
<text>Arthur Seymour John Tessimond (19 July 1902 in Birkenhead – 13 May 1962 in Chelsea, London) was an English poet.

He went to Birkenhead School until the age of 14, before being sent to Charterhouse School, but ran away at age 16. From 1922 to 1926 he attended the University of Liverpool, where he read English literature, French, Philosophy and Greek. He later moved to London where he worked in bookshops, and also as a copywriter.

After avoiding military service in World War II, he later discovered he was unfit for service. He suffered from bipolar disorder, and received electro-convulsive therapy.

He first began to publish in the 1920s in literary magazines. He was to see three volumes of poetry published during his life: &quot;Walls of Glass&quot; in 1934, &quot;Voices in a Giant City&quot; in 1947 and &quot;Selections&quot; in 1958. He contributed several poems to a 1952 edition of &quot;Bewick&#x27;s Birds&quot;.

He died in 1962 from a brain haemorrhage.

In the mid-1970s he was the subject of a radio programme entitled &quot;Portrait of a Romantic&quot;. This, together with the publication of the posthumous selection &quot;Not Love Perhaps&quot; in 1972, increased interest in his work; and his poetry subsequently appeared in school books and anthologies.

A 1985 anthology of his work &quot;The Collected Poems of A. S. J. Tessimond&quot;, edited by Hubert Nicholson, contains previously unpublished works.

In 2010 a new collected poems, based closely on Nicholson&#x27;s edition, was published by Bloodaxe Books.

In April 2010 an edition of Brian Patten&#x27;s series &quot;Lost Voices&quot; on BBC Radio Four was committed solely to Tessimond.

==Notes==
==External links==
*A.S.J. Tessimond Poetry and Translations at the Open Translation Project sponsored by Bryant H. McGill
*A.S.J. Tessimond: 105th Anniversary Celebration at The Filter^
*Review of his collected poems, with biographical information: Mark Ford: The analyst is always right. &quot;London Review of Books&quot; 11 November 2011, p. 23.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13681687" start="0" end="29" title="A. S. J. Tessimond" label="Arthur Seymour John Tessimond"/>
<link wikidata="Q746718" start="47" end="57" title="Birkenhead" label="Birkenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q743535" start="75" end="90" title="Chelsea, London" label="Chelsea, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="107" end="111" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916445" start="125" end="142" title="Birkenhead School" label="Birkenhead School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067870" start="185" end="204" title="Charterhouse School" label="Charterhouse School"/>
<link wikidata="Q499510" start="264" end="287" title="University of Liverpool" label="University of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="303" end="321" title="English literature" label="English literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="331" end="341" title="Philosophy" label="Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="371" end="377" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="470" end="482" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="547" end="563" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131543" start="578" end="604" title="electro-convulsive therapy" label="electro-convulsive therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368943" start="956" end="973" title="brain haemorrhage" label="brain haemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1377" end="1393" title="Hubert Nicholson" label="Hubert Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927908" start="1526" end="1540" title="Bloodaxe Books" label="Bloodaxe Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q912893" start="1571" end="1583" title="Brian Patten" label="Brian Patten"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="1625" end="1639" title="BBC Radio Four" label="BBC Radio Four"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544080" wikidata="Q262533" url="?curid=544080" title="Dithyramb">
<text>The dithyramb (; , &quot;dithyrambos&quot;) was an ancient Greek hymn sung and danced in honor of Dionysus, the god of wine and fertility; the term was also used as an epithet of the god. Plato, in &quot;The Laws&quot;, while discussing various kinds of music mentions &quot;the birth of Dionysos, called, I think, the dithyramb.&quot; Plato also remarks in the &quot;Republic&quot; that dithyrambs are the clearest example of poetry in which the poet is the only speaker.

However, in &quot;The Apology&quot; Socrates went to the dithyrambs with some of their own most elaborate passages, asking their meaning but got a response of, &quot;Will you believe me?&quot; which &quot;showed me in an instant that not by wisdom do poets write poetry, but by a sort of genius and inspiration; they are like diviners or soothsayers who also say many fine things, but do not understand the meaning of them.&quot;

Plutarch contrasted the dithyramb&#x27;s wild and ecstatic character with the paean. According to Aristotle, the dithyramb was the origin of Athenian tragedy. A wildly enthusiastic speech or piece of writing is still occasionally described as &quot;dithyrambic&quot;.

==History==
Dithyrambs were sung by choirs at Delos, but the literary fragments that have survived are largely Athenian. In Athens, dithyrambs were sung by a Greek chorus of up to fifty men or boys dancing in circular formation, who may or may not have been dressed as Satyrs, probably accompanied by the &quot;aulos&quot;. They would normally relate some incident in the life of Dionysus or just celebrate wine and fertility.

The ancient Greeks laid out the criteria of the dithyramb as follows:
* special rhythm
* &quot;aulos&quot; accompaniment in Phrygian mode
* enriching text
* considerable narrative content
* originally antistrophic character

Competitions between groups, singing and dancing dithyrambs were an important part of the festivals of Dionysus, such as the Dionysia and Lenaia. Each tribe would enter two choirs, one of men and one of boys, each under the leadership of a &quot;coryphaeus&quot;. The names of the winning teams of dithyrambic contests in Athens were recorded. The successful &quot;choregos&quot; would receive a statue that would be erected—at his expense—as a public monument to commemorate the victory. However, most of the poets remain unknown.

The earliest mention of dithyramb, found by Sir Arthur Wallace Pickard-Cambridge, is in a fragment of Archilochus, who flourished in the first half of the seventh century BCE: &quot;I know how to lead the fair song of the Lord Dionysus, the dithyramb, when my wits are fused with wine.&quot; As a literary composition for chorus, their inspiration is unknown, although it was likely Greek, as Herodotus explicitly speaks of Arion of Lesbos as &quot;the first of men we know to have composed the dithyramb and named it and produced it in Corinth.&quot;

The word &quot;dithyramb&quot; has no known origin, but is frequently assumed not to be derived from Greek. An old hypothesis is that the word is borrowed from Phrygian or Pelasgian, and literally means &quot;Vierschritt&quot;, i. e., &quot;four-step&quot;, compare &quot;iamb&quot; and &quot;thriambus&quot;, but H. S. Versnel rejects this etymology and suggests instead a derivation from a cultic exclamation. Dithyrambs were composed by the poets Simonides and Bacchylides, as well as Pindar (the only one whose works have survived in anything like their original form).

Later examples were dedicated to other gods, but the dithyramb subsequently was developed (traditionally by Arion) into a literary form. According to Aristotle, Athenian tragedy developed from the dithyramb; the two forms developed alongside one another for some time. The clearest sense of dithyramb as proto-tragedy comes from a surviving dithyramb by Bacchylides, though it was composed after tragedy had already developed fully. Bacchylides&#x27; dithyramb is a dialogue between a solitary singer and a choir. It is suggestive of what tragedy may have resembled before Aeschylus added a second actor instead of the choir.

In the later 5th century BCE, the dithyramb &quot;became a favorite vehicle for the musical experiments of the poets of the &#x27;new music&#x27;.&quot; This movement included the poets Timotheus of Miletus, Cinesias, Melanippides, and Philoxenus of Cythera. By the 4th century BCE the genre was in decline, although the dithyrambic competitions did not come to an end until well after the Roman takeover of Greece.

==Modern dithyrambs==
Dithyrambs are rare in English language literature. In German literature they appear more frequently, and from the 19th century several compositions were inspired by them.

===Literature===
John Dryden&#x27;s &quot;Alexander&#x27;s Feast&quot; (1697) is a notable example of an English language dithyramb.

Friedrich Schiller wrote a &quot;Dithyrambe&quot; in 1796. Friedrich Nietzsche composed a set of &quot;Dionysos-Dithyramben&quot; in 1888/89. The poetry cycle &quot;Dithyrambischer Herbst&quot; by Austrian poet Alfred Grünewald was published in 1920.

===Music and dance===
From the 19th century dithyrambs appear frequently in classical music, as well in vocal as instrumental compositions.

Franz Schubert wrote a song for bass voice based on Schiller&#x27;s &quot;Dithyrambe&quot; ( 801, published as Op. 60 No. 2 in 1826). Schubert&#x27;s earlier attempt at setting the same poem for a more extended vocal ensemble had remained unfinished (, 1813). Schubert&#x27;s Fantasie in C Major, Op. 15 (D.760), often called the &quot;Wanderer Fantasy&quot;, was referred to as &quot;the splendid Wanderer-Dithyramb&quot; by Franz Liszt in his letter to Professor Siegmund Lebert of December 2, 1868. Johann Friedrich Reichardt (in &quot;Schillers lyrische Gedichte&quot; volume 2, published around 1809) and Wilhelm Taubert (Op. 144 No. 2, 1864) were other composers setting Schiller&#x27;s poem. Other composers basing vocal music on dithyrambs include Giuseppe Verdi (&quot;Brindisi&quot;, No. 6 of his 1845 &quot;Album di Sei Romanze&quot;), and Max Bruch (Op. 39, 1871). Othmar Schoeck&#x27;s 1911 &quot;Dithyrambe&quot;, Op. 22 is based on an unnamed verse by Goethe.

Instrumental dithyrambs were composed by Robert Volkmann and Hermann Ritter. Nikolai Medtner composed several dithyrambs, including a set of three for solo piano as his Opus 10. Additionally, the final movement of his first violin sonata carries the title, and the last of his &quot;Vergessene Weisen&quot; Op. 40 is a &quot;Danza ditirambica&quot;.

The last movement of Igor Stravinsky&#x27;s &quot;Duo Concertant&quot; for violin and piano is entitled &quot;Dithyrambe&quot;. Richard Edward Wilson&#x27;s 1983 &quot;Dithyramb&quot; is for oboe and clarinet. Wolfgang Rihm composed a 30-minute work, &quot;Concerto&quot;, in 2000, with the subtitle &quot;Dithyrambe&quot; and a scoring for string quartet and orchestra.

In 1961 the American choreographer James Waring created a dance piece entitled &quot;Dithyramb&quot; with music and objects by the Fluxus artist George Brecht.

The Swedish composer, Ture Rangström, 1884–1947, wrote an early symphonic poem, “Dithyramb” in 1909, revised in 1948 by Kurt Atterberg.

==See also==
* Iambus (genre)
* Thriambus

==Notes==
==Sources==
* Armand D&#x27;Angour: &quot;How the Dithyramb Got Its Shape.&quot; &quot;Classical Quarterly&quot; 47 (1997) 331–351.
* 
* 
* Harvey, A. E. 1955. &quot;The Classification of Greek Lyric Poetry.&quot; &quot;Classical Quarterly&quot; 5.
* Pickard-Cambridge, Sir Arthur Wallace. 1927. &quot;Dithyramb Tragedy and Comedy&quot;. Second edition revised by T.B.L. Webster, 1962. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997. .
* —. 1946. &quot;The Theatre of Dionysus in Athens&quot;.
* —. 1953. &quot;The Dramatic Festivals of Athens&quot;.
* Sourvinou-Inwood, Christiane. 2003. &quot;Tragedy and Athenian Religion&quot;. Oxford: Oxford UP.
* 

==External links==
* Bacchylides, &quot;The Theseus Dithyramb&quot; – composed c. 500 BCE ()
* IMSLP:
** Vocal: 
** Instrumental: 
* Dithyrambs at The LiederNet Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q262533" start="4" end="13" title="Dithyramb" label="dithyramb"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="51" end="64" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q484692" start="65" end="69" title="hymn" label="hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="98" end="106" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="119" end="123" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q964401" start="128" end="137" title="fertility" label="fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="168" end="175" title="epithet" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="188" end="193" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q752285" start="204" end="212" title="Laws (dialogue)" label="The Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="368" end="376" title="Republic (Plato)" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q273668" start="492" end="503" title="Apology (Plato)" label="The Apology"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="905" end="913" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333948" start="955" end="963" title="Ecstasy (philosophy)" label="ecstatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q600094" start="983" end="988" title="paean" label="paean"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="1003" end="1012" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="1046" end="1054" title="Classical Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="1055" end="1062" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="1220" end="1225" title="Delos" label="Delos"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="1285" end="1293" title="Classical Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q770974" start="1332" end="1344" title="Greek chorus" label="Greek chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163709" start="1443" end="1448" title="Satyr" label="Satyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q324299" start="1485" end="1490" title="aulos" label="aulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="1554" end="1562" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q324299" start="1697" end="1702" title="aulos" label="aulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342409" start="1726" end="1739" title="Phrygian mode" label="Phrygian mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879256" start="1803" end="1825" title="Antistrophe" label="antistrophic character"/>
<link wikidata="Q574807" start="1952" end="1960" title="Dionysia" label="Dionysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600879" start="1965" end="1971" title="Lenaia" label="Lenaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585001" start="2073" end="2083" title="coryphaeus" label="coryphaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076418" start="2192" end="2200" title="choregos" label="choregos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800596" start="2404" end="2440" title="Arthur Wallace Pickard-Cambridge" label="Sir Arthur Wallace Pickard-Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q201323" start="2462" end="2473" title="Archilochus" label="Archilochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="2753" end="2762" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312422" start="2784" end="2789" title="Arion" label="Arion"/>
<link wikidata="Q128087" start="2793" end="2799" title="Lesbos" label="Lesbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="2897" end="2904" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q36751" start="3073" end="3081" title="Phrygian language" label="Phrygian"/>
<link wikidata="Q107822" start="3085" end="3094" title="Pelasgian language" label="Pelasgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207686" start="3185" end="3189" title="Iamb (poetry)" label="iamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q97863284" start="3206" end="3215" title="thriambus" label="thriambus"/>
<link wikidata="Q273003" start="3363" end="3372" title="Simonides of Ceos" label="Simonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q310681" start="3377" end="3388" title="Bacchylides" label="Bacchylides"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="3401" end="3407" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q312422" start="3596" end="3601" title="Arion" label="Arion"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="3638" end="3647" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="3649" end="3657" title="Classical Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="3658" end="3665" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="4061" end="4070" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q669691" start="4301" end="4321" title="Timotheus of Miletus" label="Timotheus of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973270" start="4323" end="4331" title="Cinesias (poet)" label="Cinesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q506789" start="4333" end="4345" title="Melanippides" label="Melanippides"/>
<link wikidata="Q138664" start="4351" end="4372" title="Philoxenus of Cythera" label="Philoxenus of Cythera"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="4401" end="4406" title="genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="4505" end="4510" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="4577" end="4593" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q181287" start="4609" end="4626" title="German literature" label="German literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="4744" end="4755" title="John Dryden" label="John Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718106" start="4769" end="4791" title="Alexander&amp;#x27;s Feast (Dryden poem)" label="Alexander&amp;#x27;s Feast"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="4861" end="4879" title="Friedrich Schiller" label="Friedrich Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="4920" end="4939" title="Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711866" start="4964" end="4984" title="Dionysian-Dithyrambs" label="Dionysos-Dithyramben"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5072" end="5088" title="Alfred Grünewald" label="Alfred Grünewald"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="5189" end="5204" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="5254" end="5268" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q732784" start="5530" end="5565" title="Wanderer Fantasy" label="Fantasie in C Major, Op. 15 (D.760)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="5680" end="5691" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q213742" start="5756" end="5782" title="Johann Friedrich Reichardt" label="Johann Friedrich Reichardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q69912" start="5864" end="5879" title="Wilhelm Taubert" label="Wilhelm Taubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317" start="6010" end="6024" title="Giuseppe Verdi" label="Giuseppe Verdi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6032" end="6040" title="Brindisi (Song Verdi)" label="Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6072" end="6092" title="Album di Sei Romanze (Verdi)" label="Album di Sei Romanze"/>
<link wikidata="Q106434" start="6105" end="6114" title="Max Bruch" label="Max Bruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q661927" start="6131" end="6145" title="Othmar Schoeck" label="Othmar Schoeck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6158" end="6188" title="List of compositions by Othmar Schoeck#Lieder" label="&amp;quot;Dithyrambe&amp;quot;, Op. 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="6221" end="6227" title="Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q467848" start="6271" end="6286" title="Robert Volkmann" label="Robert Volkmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612486" start="6291" end="6305" title="Hermann Ritter" label="Hermann Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q365574" start="6307" end="6322" title="Nikolai Medtner" label="Nikolai Medtner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="6602" end="6617" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325456" start="6709" end="6730" title="Richard Edward Wilson" label="Richard Edward Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q77031" start="6791" end="6804" title="Wolfgang Rihm" label="Wolfgang Rihm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145139" start="6988" end="7000" title="James Waring" label="James Waring"/>
<link wikidata="Q686321" start="7098" end="7111" title="George Brecht" label="George Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906966" start="7266" end="7280" title="Iambus (genre)" label="Iambus (genre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q97863284" start="7283" end="7292" title="Thriambus" label="Thriambus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800596" start="7555" end="7592" title="Arthur Wallace Pickard-Cambridge" label="Pickard-Cambridge, Sir Arthur Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="7698" end="7721" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q523660" start="8045" end="8050" title="IMSLP" label="IMSLP"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544083" wikidata="Q255659" url="?curid=544083" title="Haywood County">
<text>Haywood County is the name of two counties in the United States:

* Haywood County, North Carolina 
* Haywood County, Tennessee</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q502496" start="68" end="98" title="Haywood County, North Carolina" label="Haywood County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q502069" start="102" end="127" title="Haywood County, Tennessee" label="Haywood County, Tennessee"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544091" wikidata="Q228612" url="?curid=544091" title="Haskell County">
<text>Haskell County is the name of several counties in the United States:

* Haskell County, Kansas 
* Haskell County, Oklahoma 
* Haskell County, Texas</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q374663" start="72" end="94" title="Haskell County, Kansas" label="Haskell County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q490690" start="98" end="122" title="Haskell County, Oklahoma" label="Haskell County, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q112768" start="126" end="147" title="Haskell County, Texas" label="Haskell County, Texas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544096" wikidata="Q247644" url="?curid=544096" title="Hart County">
<text>Hart County is the name of two counties in the United States:

* Hart County, Georgia 
* Hart County, Kentucky</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q491301" start="65" end="85" title="Hart County, Georgia" label="Hart County, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q491911" start="89" end="110" title="Hart County, Kentucky" label="Hart County, Kentucky"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544098" wikidata="Q225552" url="?curid=544098" title="Harrison County">
<text>Harrison County is the name of eight counties in the United States:

*Harrison County, Indiana 
*Harrison County, Iowa 
*Harrison County, Kentucky 
*Harrison County, Mississippi 
*Harrison County, Missouri 
*Harrison County, Ohio 
*Harrison County, Texas 
*Harrison County, West Virginia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q506498" start="70" end="94" title="Harrison County, Indiana" label="Harrison County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q485729" start="97" end="118" title="Harrison County, Iowa" label="Harrison County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q491970" start="121" end="146" title="Harrison County, Kentucky" label="Harrison County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q485434" start="149" end="177" title="Harrison County, Mississippi" label="Harrison County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q490400" start="180" end="205" title="Harrison County, Missouri" label="Harrison County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q421956" start="208" end="229" title="Harrison County, Ohio" label="Harrison County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q110904" start="232" end="254" title="Harrison County, Texas" label="Harrison County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q504850" start="257" end="287" title="Harrison County, West Virginia" label="Harrison County, West Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544099" wikidata="Q228555" url="?curid=544099" title="Harper County">
<text>Harper County is the name of two counties in the United States:

* Harper County, Kansas
* Harper County, Oklahoma</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q377171" start="67" end="88" title="Harper County, Kansas" label="Harper County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q485001" start="91" end="114" title="Harper County, Oklahoma" label="Harper County, Oklahoma"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544106" wikidata="Q856897" url="?curid=544106" title="Kellogg's">
<text>Kellanova, formerly known as the Kellogg Company and commonly known as Kellogg&#x27;s, is an American multinational food manufacturing company headquartered in Chicago, Illinois, US. Kellanova produces and markets convenience foods and snack foods, including crackers and toaster pastries, cereal, and markets their products by several well-known brands including the Kellogg&#x27;s brand itself, Rice Krispies Treats, Pringles, Eggo, and Cheez-It. Outside North America, Kellanova markets cereals such as Corn Flakes, Rice Krispies, Frosties and Coco Pops.

Kellogg&#x27;s products are manufactured and marketed in over 180 countries. Kellanova&#x27;s largest factory is at Trafford Park in Greater Manchester, United Kingdom, which is also the location of its UK headquarters. Other corporate office locations outside of Chicago include Battle Creek, Dublin (European Headquarters), Shanghai, and Querétaro City, Mexico. Kellogg&#x27;s held a Royal Warrant from Queen Elizabeth II until her death in 2022.

Kellogg&#x27;s was split into two companies on October 2, 2023, with WK Kellogg Co owning the North American cereal division, and the existing company being rebranded to &quot;Kellanova&quot;, owning snack brands such as Pop-Tarts and Pringles alongside the international cereal division. The purpose of the split was to separate the faster-growing convenience food, and international cereal products market, from the slower growth North American cereal market. &quot;Kellogg&#x27;s&quot; itself became a brand name of both companies.

Mars Inc., the owner of M&amp;M&#x27;s and Snickers, agreed to acquire Kellanova for nearly $30 billion in August 2024, with the purchase expected to be completed in early 2025.

== History ==
In 1876, John Harvey Kellogg became the superintendent of the Battle Creek Sanitarium (originally the Western Health Reform Institute founded by Ellen White), and his brother, W. K. Kellogg, worked as the bookkeeper. This is where corn flakes were created and led to the eventual formation of the Kellogg Company.

For years, W. K. Kellogg assisted his brother in research to improve the vegetarian diet of the Battle Creek Sanitarium&#x27;s patients, especially in the search for wheat-based granola. The Kelloggs are best known for the invention of the famous breakfast cereal corn flakes. The development of the flaked cereal in 1894 has been variously described by those involved: Ella Eaton Kellogg, John Harvey Kellogg, his younger brother Will Keith Kellogg, and other family members. There is considerable disagreement over who was involved in the discovery and the roles that they played. It is generally agreed that, upon being called out one night, John Kellogg left a batch of wheat-berry dough behind. Rather than throwing it out the following day, he sent it through the rollers and was surprised to obtain delicate flakes, which could then be baked.

W. K. Kellogg persuaded his brother to serve the food in a flake form. Soon the flaked wheat was being packaged to meet hundreds of guest mail-order requests after they left the Sanitarium. However, John forbade his brother Will to distribute the cereal beyond his own consumers. As a result, the brothers fell out, and W. K. launched the Battle Creek Toasted Corn Flake Company on February 19, 1906. On July 4, 1907, a fire destroyed the main factory building. W. K. Kellogg had the new plant in full operation six months after the fire.

Convincing his brother to relinquish rights to the product, Will&#x27;s company produced and marketed the hugely successful Kellogg&#x27;s Toasted Corn Flakes and was renamed to the Kellogg Toasted Corn Flake Company in 1909 and to the Kellogg Company in 1922. By 1909, Will&#x27;s company produced 120,000 cases of Corn Flakes daily. John, who resented his brother&#x27;s success, filed suit against Will&#x27;s company in 1906 for the right to use the family name. The resulting legal battle, which included a trial that lasted an entire month, ended in December 1920 when the Michigan Supreme Court ruled in Will&#x27;s favor.

In 1931, the Kellogg Company announced that most of its factories would shift towards 30-hour work weeks from the usual 40. W. K. Kellogg stated that he did this so that an additional shift of workers would be employed to support people through the depression era. This practice remained until World War II and continued briefly after the war, although some departments and factories remained locked into 30-hour work weeks until 1980.

The company went public in 1952. In 1964, Kellogg&#x27;s introduced its first non-cereal product: a pastry which can be heated in a toaster, called Pop-Tarts. From 1969 to 1970, the slogan “Kellogg&#x27;s puts more into your day” was used on Sunday morning TV shows. From 1969 to 1977, Kellogg&#x27;s acquired various small businesses, including Salada Tea, Fearn International, Mrs. Smith&#x27;s Pies, Eggo, and Pure Packed Foods; however, it was later criticized for not diversifying further, as General Mills and Quaker Oats had. After underspending its competition in marketing and product development, Kellogg&#x27;s US market share hit a low of 36.7% in 1983. According to Kellogg&#x27;s chairman William E. LaMothe, a prominent Wall Street analyst had described Kellogg&#x27;s &quot;a fine company that&#x27;s past its prime,&quot; and the cereal market was being regarded as &quot;mature&quot;. LaMothe and his team took this critique as a challenge, shifting their focus to approaching the demographic of 80 million baby boomers rather than marketing children-oriented cereals. In emphasizing cereal&#x27;s convenience and nutritional value, Kellogg&#x27;s helped persuade U.S. consumers aged 25 to 49 to eat 26% more cereal than people of that age ate five years prior. The U.S. ready-to-eat cereal market, worth $3.7 billion at retail in 1983, totaled $5.4 billion by 1988 and had expanded three times as fast as the average grocery category. Kellogg&#x27;s also introduced new products, including Crispix, Raisin Squares, and Nutri-Grain Biscuits, and reached out internationally with Just Right aimed at Australians and Genmai Flakes for Japan. During this time, the company maintained success over its top competitors, General Mills, which largely marketed children&#x27;s cereals, and Post, which had difficulty in the adult cereal market.

===21st century===
In 2001, Kellogg&#x27;s acquired the Keebler Company for $3.87 billion. Over the years, it has also gone on to acquire Morningstar Farms and Kashi divisions or subsidiaries. Kellogg&#x27;s also owns the Bear Naked, Natural Touch, Cheez-It, Murray, Austin cookies and crackers, Famous Amos, Gardenburger (acquired 2007), and Plantation brands. Presently, Kellogg&#x27;s is a member of the World Cocoa Foundation.

In 2012, Kellogg&#x27;s became the world&#x27;s second-largest snack food company (after PepsiCo) by acquiring the potato chip brand Pringles from Procter &amp; Gamble for $2.7 billion in a cash deal.

In 2017, Kellogg&#x27;s acquired Chicago-based food company Rxbar for $654 million. Earlier that year, Kellogg&#x27;s also opened new corporate office space in Chicago&#x27;s Merchandise Mart for its global growth and IT departments. In the UK, Kellogg&#x27;s also released the W. K. Kellogg brand of organic, vegan and plant-based cereals (such as granolas, organic wholegrain wheat, and &quot;super grains&quot;) with no added sugars.

In 2018, Kellogg&#x27;s decided to cease their operations in Venezuela due to the economic crisis in the country. Their factories were taken by the Venezuelan state under the Nicolás Maduro administration. In mid-2019, Venezuelan Kellogg&#x27;s cereal boxes began portraying the Venezuelan flag and a motto from Maduro: &quot;Together, everything is possible&quot; () alongside Kellogg&#x27;s logo and mascots were sold all over the country. Kellogg&#x27;s considers it as an illicit use, and the company stated they would take legal action.

On April 1, 2019, it was announced that Kellogg&#x27;s was selling Famous Amos, Murray&#x27;s, Keebler, Mother&#x27;s, and Little Brownie Bakers (one of the producers of the cookies for the Girl Scouts of the USA) to Ferrero SpA for $1.4 billion. On July 29, 2019, that sale was completed. Kellogg&#x27;s kept the Keebler cracker line and replaced the Keebler name on their crackers with the Kellogg&#x27;s name.

In October 2019, Kellogg&#x27;s partnered with GLAAD by &quot;launching a new limited edition &quot;All Together Cereal&quot; and donating $50,000 to support GLAAD&#x27;s anti-bullying and LGBTQ advocacy efforts&quot;. The All Together cereal combined six mini cereal boxes into one package to bring attention to anti-bullying.

In January 2020, Kellogg&#x27;s decided to work with suppliers to phase out the use of glyphosate by 2025, which some farmers have used as a drying agent for wheat and oats supplied to Kellogg&#x27;s.

In October 2021, workers at all of Kellogg&#x27;s cereal-producing plants in the United States went on a strike conducted by the Bakery, Confectionery, Tobacco Workers and Grain Millers&#x27; International Union over disagreements over the terms of a new labor contract. On December 3, 2021, a tentative deal was struck to end the worker strike, but the union members overwhelmingly rejected the tentative agreement and Kellogg&#x27;s management announced they would seek to replace all 1,400 striking workers. On December 21, 2021, about 1,400 Kellogg workers approved a collective bargaining agreement, ending the strike, which had lasted 77 days.

On June 21, 2022, Kellogg&#x27;s announced that the company would spin off its three cereal, snacks, and plant-based food divisions into separate companies. The North American cereal and plant-based food spin-off companies will keep Battle Creek as their headquarters and the new snack and international cereal company will be based in Chicago. The successor company, known as Global Snacking Co. temporarily, represents 80 percent or $11.4 billion of Kellogg&#x27;s sales. 60 percent of Global Snacking&#x27;s business was snacks, and nearly half of the company&#x27;s business was in the United States. The cereal business, temporarily called North America Cereal Co., would be the second-largest American cereal company and the largest in Canada and the Caribbean, with 5 of the top 11 brands and $2.4 billion in annual sales. Plant-based foods, representing $340 million in annual sales, would be called &quot;Plant Co.&quot; and could even be sold.

In January 2023, Kellogg&#x27;s shelved its plans to spin off its plant food business and would retain it as part of Global Snacking Co. On March 15, 2023, Kellogg&#x27;s announced that North America Cereal Co. branch will be named WK Kellogg Co and Global Snacking Co. branch will be called Kellanova. The split was structured with Kellanova as the surviving company, using the ticker symbol &quot;K&quot; on the NYSE. The WK Kellogg Co took the NYSE stock symbol &quot;KLG&quot;. The split was completed on October 2, 2023.

On August 14, 2024, it was announced that Mars Inc., the owner of M&amp;M&#x27;s and Snickers, agreed to purchase Kellanova for nearly $30 billion. The deal is expected to close in the first half of 2025.

== Operations ==
* Australia:
** Pagewood
** Charmhaven (snack and cereal plant closed in 2014.)
* Belgium: Zaventem &amp; Mechelen plant
* Brazil: São Paulo
* Colombia: Bogotá
* Canada:
** Mississauga, Ontario – Canadian head office
** Anjou, Quebec – Eastern Canada sales office
** Calgary, Alberta – Western Canada sales office
** London, Ontario – manufacturers and distributes cereals (including Corn Flakes) in Canada. Closed at end of 2014,
** Belleville, Ontario – cereal production plant opened 2009 and upgraded 2011; took over some operations from London after 2014
* China: Shanghai – Joint venture with agribusiness and food company Yihai Kerry
* Ecuador: Guayaquil
* France: Noisy-le-Grand, Paris
* Germany: Hamburg (sales and marketing for Germany, Austria, Switzerland, and Scandinavia; production in Germany shut down in 2018)
* India: Mumbai
* Republic of Ireland: European Head Office – Kellogg Europe Trading, Swords, Dublin
* Italy: Milan
* Japan: Shinjuku, Tokyo
* Malaysia: Bandar Enstek, Negeri Sembilan
* Mexico: Querétaro
* Middle East
** Bahrain: Manama
** Egypt: Giza
** Iran: Tehran
** Israel: Lod
** Jordan: Amman
** Kuwait: Kuwait City
** Lebanon: Beirut
** Libya: Tripoli
** Oman: Azaiba, Muscat
** Qatar: Doha
** Saudi Arabia: Jeddah
** Syria: Damascus
** UAE: Dubai
* Netherlands: Den Bosch
* Philippines: Bonifacio Global City
* Poland: Kutno
* Portugal: Lisbon
* Russia: Kellogg Rus LLC (Sold to the Russian company Chernogolovka in July 2023)
* South Africa: Springs
* South Korea: Seoul
* Spain: Valls (cereal production plant) and Alcobendas (Spanish head office)
* Sri Lanka: Colombo; Sri Jayawardenapura Kotte
* Thailand: Bangkok, Rayong (snacks and cereals)
* United Kingdom:
** England: Manchester
** Scotland: Portable Foods Manufacturing Livingston
** Wales: Wrexham including Portable Foods Manufacturing
* United States:
** Battle Creek, Michigan
** Cary, North Carolina
** Jackson, Tennessee
** Lancaster, Pennsylvania
** Memphis, Tennessee
** Omaha, Nebraska
** Pikeville, Kentucky
** South Augusta, Georgia
** Virginia Beach, Virginia

* Morocco
== Finances ==
For the fiscal year 2017, Kellogg&#x27;s reported earnings of US$1.269 billion, with an annual revenue of US$12.932 billion, a decline of 0.7% over the previous fiscal cycle. Kellogg&#x27;s market capitalization was valued at over US$22.1 billion in November 2018.
== Brands ==

* Bear Naked, Inc.
* Cheez-It Crackers
* Eggo
* Fruit Winders
* Fruity Snacks
* Morningstar Farms
* Club Crackers
* Nutri-Grain
* Pop-Tarts
* Pringles
* Rxbar
* Sunshine Biscuits
* Town House
* Zesta Crackers
* Carr&#x27;s (US only)
* Rice Krispies Treats
* Incogmeato
* Joybol
* Austin Sandwich Cookies
* Cracklin&#x27; Oat Bran
* Gardenburger
* Frozen Breakfast
* Mueslix Cereal
* Pure Organic Fruit Bars
* Toasteds Crackers
* Special K (snack bars)
=== Cereal ===
Here is a list of Kellanova&#x27;s cereals (international only) with available varieties:

* All-Bran: All-Bran Original, All-Bran Bran Buds, All-Bran Bran Flakes (UK), All-Bran Extra Fiber, All-Bran Guardian (Canada)
* Apple Jacks
* Apple Jacks Apple vs Cinnamon Limited Edition
* Apple Jacks 72 Flavor Blast (Germany)
* Bran Buds (New Zealand)
* Bran Flakes
* Chocos (India, Europe)
* Chocolate Corn Flakes: a chocolate version of Corn Flakes. First sold in the UK in 1998 (as Choco Corn Flakes or Choco Flakes), but discontinued a few years later. Re-released in 2011.
* Cinnabon
* Cinnamon Mini Buns
* Coco Pops Coco Rocks
* Coco Pops Special Edition Challenger Spaceship
* Coco Pops Crunchers
* Coco Pops Mega Munchers
* Coco Pops Moons and Stars
* Cocoa Krispies or Coco Pops (also called Choco Pops in France, Choco Krispies in Portugal, Spain, Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, Choco Krispis in Latin America)
* Cocoa Flakes
* Corn Flakes
* Complete Wheat Bran Flakes/Bran Flakes
* Corn Pops
* Country Store
* Cracklin&#x27; Oat Bran
* Crayola Jazzberry Cereal: In 2021, Kellogg and Crayola teamed up to create a fruit flavored cereal with a coloring book on the box.
* Crispix
* Crunch: Caramel Nut Crunch, Cran-Vanilla Crunch, Toasted Honey Crunch
* Crunchy Nut (formerly Crunchy Nut Cornflakes)
* Crunch Nut Bran
* Cruncheroos
* Disney cereals: Disney Hunny B&#x27;s Honey-Graham, Disney Mickey&#x27;s Magix, Disney Mud &amp; Bugs, Pirates of the Caribbean, Disney Princess
* Donut Shop
* Eggo
* Extra (Muesli): Fruit and Nut, Fruit Magic, Nut Delight
* Froot Loops: Froot Loops, Froot Loops Less Sugar, Marshmallow Froot Loops, Froot Bloopers
* Frosted Flakes (Frosties outside of the US/Canada): Kellogg&#x27;s Frosted Flakes, Kellogg&#x27;s Frosted Flakes Kellogg&#x27;s Banana Frosted Flakes, Kellogg&#x27;s Birthday Confetti Frosted Flakes, Kellogg&#x27;s Cocoa Frosted Flakes, Less Sugar, Tony&#x27;s Cinnamon Krunchers, Honey Nut
* Frosted Mini-Wheats (known in the UK as Toppas until the early 1990s, when the name was changed to Frosted Wheats. The name Toppas is still applied to this product in other parts of Europe, as in Germany and Austria)
* Fruit Harvest: Fruit Harvest Apple Cinnamon, Fruit Harvest Peach Strawberry, Fruit Harvest Strawberry Blueberry
* Fruit &#x27;n Fibre (not related to the Post cereal of the same name sold in the US)
* Fruit Winders (UK)
* Genmai Flakes (Japan)
* Guardian (Australia, NZ, Canada)
* Happy Inside: Bold Blueberry, Simply Strawberry, Coconut Crunch
* Honey Loops (formerly Honey Nut Loops)
* Honey Nut Corn Flakes
* Honey Smacks (US)/Smacks (other markets)
* Jif Peanut Butter Cereal (US only)
* Just Right: Just Right Original, Just Right Fruit &amp; Nut, Just Right Just Grains, Just Right Tropical, Just Right Berry &amp; Apple, Just Right Crunchy Blends – Cranberry, Almond &amp; Sultana (Australia/NZ), Just Right Crunchy Blends – Apple, Date &amp; Sultana (Australia/NZ)
* Khampa Tsampa- Roasted Barley (Tibet)
* Kombos
* Krave – chocolate cereal introduced in the UK in 2010, then rolled out in Europe as &quot;Tresor&quot; or &quot;Trésor&quot; in 2011, and in North America in 2012
* Komplete (Australia)
* Low-Fat Granola: Low-Fat Granola, Low-Fat Granola with Raisins
* Mini Max
* Mini Swirlz
* Mini-Wheats: Mini-Wheats Frosted Original, Mini-Wheats Frosted Bite Size, Mini-Wheats Frosted Maple &amp; Brown Sugar, Mini-Wheats Raisin, Mini-Wheats Strawberry, Mini-Wheats Vanilla Creme, Mini-Wheats Strawberry Delight, Mini-Wheats Blackcurrant
* Mueslix: Mueslix with Raisins, Dates &amp; Almonds
* Nutri-Grain
* Nut Feast
* Oat Bran: Cracklin&#x27; Oat Bran

* Optivita
* Pop-Tarts Bites: Frosted Strawberry, Frosted Brown Sugar Cinnamon
* Raisin Bran/Sultana Bran: Raisin Bran, Raisin Bran Crunch, Sultana Bran (Australia/NZ), Sultana Bran Crunch (Australia/NZ)
* Raisin Wheats
* Rice Krispies/Rice Bubbles: Rice Krispies, Frosted Rice Krispies (Ricicles in the UK), Gluten Free Rice Krispies, Rice Bubbles, LCMs, Rice Krispies Cocoa (Canada only), Rice Crispies Multi-Grain Shapes, Rice Krispies Treats Cereal
* Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory Chocolatey Almond cereal
* Scooby-Doo cereal: Cinnamon Marshmallow Scooby-Doo! Cereal
* Smart Start: Smart Start, Smart Start Soy Protein Cereal
* Smorz
* Special K: Special K, Special K low carb lifestyle, Special K Red Berries, Special K Vanilla Almond, Special K Honey &amp; Almond (Australia), Special K Forest Berries (Australia), Special K Purple Berries (UK), Special K Light Muesli Mixed Berries &amp; Apple (Australia/NZ), Special K Light Muesli Peach &amp; Mango flavour (Australia/NZ), Special K Dark Chocolate (Belgium), Special K Milk Chocolate (Belgium), Special K Sustain (UK)
* Spider-Man cereal: Spider-Man Spidey-Berry
* SpongeBob SquarePants cereal
* Strawberry Pops (South Africa)
* Super Mario Cereal
* Sustain: Sustain, Sustain Selection
* Tresor (Europe)
* Variety
* Vector (Canada only)
* Yeast bites with honey
* Kringelz (formerly known as ZimZ!): mini cinnamon-flavored spirals. Only sold in Germany and Austria
=== Discontinued cereals and foods ===

* Banana Bubbles
: Banana-flavored variation of Rice Krispies. First appeared in the UK in 1995, but discontinued shortly thereafter.
* Banana Frosted Flakes
* Bart Simpson&#x27;s No Problem-O&#x27;s and Bart Simpson&#x27;s Eat My Shorts
: Sold in the UK for a limited period
* Bart Simpson Peanut Butter Chocolate Crunch Cereal
* Bigg Mixx cereal
* Buckwheat &amp; Maple
* Buzz Blasts (based on Buzz Lightyear from the &quot;Toy Story&quot; movies)
* C-3PO&#x27;s cereal: Introduced in 1984 and inspired by the multi-lingual droid from &quot;Star Wars&quot;, the cereal called itself &quot;a New (crunchy) Force at Breakfast&quot; and was composed of &quot;twin rings phased together for two crunches in every double-O&quot;. In other words, they were shaped like the digit 8. After severing the cereal&#x27;s ties to &quot;Star Wars&quot;, the company renamed it Pro-Grain and promoted it with sports-oriented commercials.
* Cinnamon Crunch Crispix
* Cinnamon Mini-Buns
* Cocoa Hoots: Manufactured briefly in the early 1970s, this cereal resembled Cheerios but was chocolate-flavored. The mascot was a cartoon character named Newton the Owl, and one of its commercials featured a young Jodie Foster.
* Coco Pops Strawss
* Complete Oat Bran Flakes
* Concentrate
* Corn Flakes with Instant Bananas
* Corn Soya cereal
* Crunchy Loggs
* Double Dip Crunch
* Eggo Waf-Fulls
* Frosted Krispies
* Frosted Rice: This was a combination of Frosted Flakes and Rice Krispies, using Rice Krispies with frosting on them. Tony Jr. was the brand&#x27;s mascot.
* Fruit Twistables
* Fruity Marshmallow Krispies
* Golden Crackles
* Golden Oatmeal Crunch (later revised to Golden Crunch)
* Gro-Pup Dog Food and Dog Biscuits
* Heartwise (which contained psyllium, an Indian-grown grain used as a laxative and cholesterol-reducer)
* Homer&#x27;s Cinnamon Donut Cereal (based on &quot;The Simpsons&quot; TV cartoon)
* Kenmei Rice Bran cereal
* KOMBOs (orange, strawberry and chocolate flavors)
* Kream Krunch
* Krumbles cereal: Manufactured from approximately the 1920s to the mid-1960s; based on shreds of wheat but different from shredded wheat in texture. Unlike the latter, it tended to remain crisp in milk. In the Chicago area, Krumbles was available into the late 1960s. It was also high in fiber, although that attribute was not in vogue at the time.
* Marshmallow Krispies (later revised to Fruity Marshmallow Krispies)
* Most
* Mr. T&#x27;s Muscle Crunch (1983–1985)
* Nut &amp; Honey Crunch
* OJ&#x27;s (&quot;All the Vitamin C of a 4-oz. Glass of Orange Juice&quot;)
* OKs cereal (early 1960s): Oat-based cereal physically resembling the competing brand Cheerios, with half the OKs shaped like letter O&#x27;s and the other half shaped like K&#x27;s, but did not taste like Cheerios. OKs originally featured Big Otis, a giant, burly Scotsman, on the box; this was replaced by the more familiar Yogi Bear.
* Pep: Best remembered as the sponsor of the Superman radio serial.
* Pokémon Cereal: A limited edition cereal that promoted the Pokémon franchise. It consisted of O-shaped cereal and marshmallows shaped liked Pikachu, Oddish, Poliwhirl and Ditto. They later returned during Gen II with marshmallows formed like Cleffa, Wobbuffet and Pichu for a short time.
* Pop-Tarts Crunch
* Powerpuff Girls Cereal
* Product 19: Discontinued in 2016
* Pro Grain
* Puffa Puffa Rice (late 1960s–early 1970s)
* Raisin Squares
* Raisins Rice and Rye
* Razzle Dazzle Rice Krispies
* Ricicles
* Sugar Stars/Stars/All-Stars cereal
* Strawberry Rice Krispies
* Strawberry Splitz
* 3 Point Pops
* Tony&#x27;s Cinnamon Krunchers
* Tony&#x27;s Turboz
* Triple Snack
* Yogos: Discontinued in 2011
* Yogos (Berry, Mango, Strawberry, 72 Flavor Blast (Germany), Cookies and Cream, Tacos (Mexico))
* Yogos Rollers: Discontinued in 2009
* Zimz: Cinnamon Cereal Discontinued
* Start (UK)
== Marketing ==

Various methods have been used in the company&#x27;s history to promote the company and its brands. Foremost among these is the design of the Kellogg&#x27;s logo by Ferris Crane under the art direction of famed type guru Y. Ames. Another was the well-remembered jingle &quot;K E double-L, O double-good, Kellogg&#x27;s best to you!&quot;.

With the rising popularity of patent medicine in early 20th century advertising, The Kellogg Company of Canada published a book named &quot;A New Way of Living&quot; that showed readers &quot;how to achieve a new way of living; how to preserve vitality; how to maintain enthusiasm and energy; how to get the most out of life because of a physical ability to enjoy it&quot;. It touted the All-Bran cereal as the secret to leading &quot;normal&quot; lives free of constipation.

Kellogg&#x27;s was a major sponsor throughout the run of the hit CBS panel show &quot;What&#x27;s My Line?&quot; It and its associated products Frosted Flakes and Rice Krispies were also major sponsors for the PBS Kids children&#x27;s animated series &quot;Dragon Tales&quot;.

Kellogg&#x27;s is a sponsor of USA Gymnastics and produced the Kellogg&#x27;s Tour of Gymnastics, a 36-city tour held in 2016 after the Olympic games and featured performances by recent medal-winning gymnasts from the United States.

Kellogg&#x27;s is currently the title sponsor of three college football bowl games. In 2019, Kellogg&#x27;s became the new title sponsor of the Sun Bowl game, with the game being branded as the &quot;Tony the Tiger Sun Bowl&quot;. This was followed in 2020 by the company using its Cheez-It brand to sponsor of the game now known as the Pop-Tarts Bowl. In 2022, Kellogg&#x27;s added the Citrus Bowl to its bowl sponsorships, with the game branded as the &quot;Cheez-It Citrus Bowl&quot;.

=== Premiums and prizes ===
W.K. Kellogg was the first to introduce prizes in boxes of cereal. The marketing strategy that he established has produced thousands of different cereal box prizes that have been distributed by the tens of billions.

==== Children&#x27;s premiums ====
Beginning in 1909, Kellogg&#x27;s Corn Flakes had the first cereal premium with &quot;The Funny Jungleland Moving Pictures Book.&quot; The book was originally available as a prize that was given to the customer in the store with the purchase of two packages of the cereal. But in 1909, Kellogg&#x27;s changed the book giveaway to a premium mail-in offer for the cost of a dime. Over 2.5 million copies of the book were distributed in different editions over a period of 23 years.

==== Cereal box prizes ====
In 1945, Kellogg&#x27;s inserted a prize in the form of pin-back buttons into each box of Pep cereal. Pep pins have included U.S. Army squadrons as well as characters from newspaper comics and were available through 1947. There were five series of comic characters and 18 different buttons in each set, with a total of 90 in the collection. Other manufacturers of major brands of cereal, including General Mills, Malt-O-Meal, Nestlé, Post Foods, and Quaker Oats, followed suit and inserted prizes into boxes of cereal to promote sales and brand loyalty.

=== Mascots ===
Licensed brands have been omitted since the corresponding mascots would be obvious (for example, Spider-Man is the mascot for Spider-Man Spidey-Berry).
* Cocoa Hoots cereal: Newton the Owl
* Cocoa Krispies cereal (Known as Choco Krispis in Latin America, Choco Krispies in Germany, Austria, Spain, and Switzerland, Chocos in India, and Coco Pops in Australia, the UK, and Europe): Jose (monkey), Coco (monkey), Melvin (elephant), Snagglepuss (Hanna-Barbera character), Ogg (caveman), Tusk (elephant), and Snap, Crackle and Pop (who were also, and remain as of February 2014, the Rice Krispies mascots; see below)
* Corn Flakes cereal: Cornelius (rooster)
* Frosted Flakes (known as Frosties outside the US/Canada, Zucaritas in Latin America and Sucrilhos in Brazil) cereal: Tony the Tiger
* Froot Loops cereal: Toucan Sam
* Honey Smacks (US)/Smacks (other markets) cereal: Dig &#x27;Em Frog
* Raisin Bran cereal: Sunny the Sun
* Rice Krispies (known as Rice Bubbles in Australia and New Zealand) cereal: Snap, Crackle and Pop
* Ricicles (UK Only) cereal: Captain Rik
* Apple Jacks cereal: CinnaMon and Bad Apple
* Honey Loops cereal: Loopy (bumblebee), Pops (honey bee)
* Keebler cookies and crackers: Ernie and the Elves
=== Motorsports ===
Kellogg&#x27;s made its first foray into auto racing between 1991 and 1992 when the company sponsored the #41 Chevrolets fielded by Larry Hedrick Motorsports in the NASCAR Winston Cup Series and driven by Phil Parsons, Dave Marcis, Greg Sacks, Hut Stricklin, and Richard Petty, but they gained greater prominence for their sponsorship of two-time Winston Cup Champion Terry Labonte from 1993 to 2006, the last 12 years of that as the sponsor for Hendrick Motorsports&#x27; No.5 car. Kellogg&#x27;s sponsored the No.5 car for Labonte, Kyle Busch, Casey Mears, and Mark Martin until 2010, and it then served as an associate sponsor for Carl Edwards&#x27; #99 car for Roush Fenway Racing.

Kellogg&#x27;s placed Dale Earnhardt on Kellogg&#x27;s Corn Flakes boxes for 1993 six-time Winston Cup champion and 1994 seven-time Winston Cup champion, as well as Jeff Gordon on the Mini Wheats box for the 1993 Rookie of the Year, 1995 Brickyard 400 inaugural race, 1997 Champion, and 1998 three-time champion, and a special three-pack racing box set with Dale Earnhardt, Jeff Gordon, Terry Labonte, and Dale Jarrett in 1996.

=== Merchandising ===
Kellogg&#x27;s has used some merchandising for their products. Entertainer Jimmy Durante appeared in some Kellogg&#x27;s commercials in the 1960s. Kellogg&#x27;s once released &quot;Mission Nutrition&quot;, a PC game that came free with special packs of cereal. It played in a similar fashion as &quot;Donkey Kong Country&quot;; users could play as Tony the Tiger, Coco the Monkey, or Snap, Crackle, and Pop.

Kellogg&#x27;s has also released &quot;Talking&quot; games. The two current versions are Talking Tony and Talking Sam. In these games, a microphone is used to play games and create voice commands for their computers. In Talking Tony, Tony the Tiger, a famous Kellogg&#x27;s mascot, would be the main and only character in the game. In Talking Sam, Toucan Sam, would be in the game, instead. Some [toy cars] have the Kellogg&#x27;s logo on them, and occasionally their mascots. There was also a Talking Snap Crackle and Pop software.

=== Olympic Games ===
Kellogg&#x27;s frequently partners with the U.S. Olympic Committee to feature American athletes from the U.S. Olympic and Paralympic Teams on the packages of its cereal brands. In 2011 it became an official sponsor for the 2012, 2014 and 2016 U.S. Olympic and Paralympic Teams. Its sponsorship at the 2018 Winter Olympic Games featured American athletes Nathan Chen, Kelly Clark, Meghan Duggan and Mike Schultz. The sponsorship was renewed for the 2018 and 2020 Olympic and Paralympic Games.

=== Restaurant ===
From 2016 to 2019, Kellogg&#x27;s operated &quot;Kellogg&#x27;s NYC&quot;, a branded café in New York City that sold bowls of cereal with optional toppings.

== Political involvement ==

=== Genetically modified foods labeling ===
Kellogg&#x27;s donated around US$2 million opposing California Proposition 37, a 2012 ballot initiative that, if enacted, would have required compulsory labeling of genetically engineered food products. In March 2016, though, they vowed to label all of their products with genetically modified organisms as such by 2020.

=== Climate change ===
In August 2014, Kellogg&#x27;s called on the President to support the Paris Agreement on climate change. In 2016, Kellogg Company urged President-elect Donald Trump to &quot;continue the Paris Climate Agreement&quot;.

=== Voter ID laws ===
Kellogg&#x27;s has donated to notable groups opposing voter-ID laws, such as the Applied Research Center (now RaceForward). The company also decided to remove their advertisements from the Breitbart News website. Breitbart News in turn called for a boycott of Kellogg&#x27;s products.

=== Education grant ===
In January 2012, Kellogg&#x27;s gave the Calhoun School a $250,000 grant for a &quot;three-part youth-based project on issues of white privilege and institutionalized racism&quot;.

== Controversies ==

=== Misleading claims ===

==== Advertising ====
On June 3, 2010, Kellogg&#x27;s was found to be making unsubstantiated and misleading claims in advertising their cereal products by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). Kellogg&#x27;s responded by stating &quot;We stand behind the validity of our product claims and research, so we agreed to an order that covers those claims. We believe that the revisions to the existing consent agreement satisfied any remaining concerns.&quot;

The FTC had previously found fault with Kellogg&#x27;s claims that Frosted Mini-Wheats cereal improved kids&#x27; attentiveness by nearly 20%. The Children&#x27;s Advertising Review Unit of the Council of Better Business Bureaus has also suggested that the language on Kellogg Pop-Tarts packages saying the pastries are &quot;Made with Real Fruit&quot; should be taken off the products. In July 2012, the UK banned a &quot;Special K&quot; advertisement due to its citing caloric values that did not take into account the caloric value of milk consumed with the cereal. In 2016 an ad telling UK consumers that Special K is “full of goodness” and “nutritious” was banned.

In 2016, it was revealed that members of the Kellogg Breakfast Council, a group of nutrition experts purported to be &quot;independent&quot; on their website, were in fact paid an annual stipend by Kellogg to promote the brand&#x27;s products online, in speeches, and amongst their peers. The company responded by saying that they assumed their sponsorship was implied by putting their name on the group, but agreed to stop describing the council as independent. The council was disbanded in May 2016 following the expiration of its members&#x27; contracts.

==== Questionable nutritional value ====
Some of Kellogg&#x27;s marketing has been questioned in the press, prompted by an increase in consumer awareness of the mismatch between the marketing messages and the products themselves.

Food bloggers are also questioning the marketing methods used by cereal manufacturing companies such as Kellogg&#x27;s, due to their high sugar content and use of ingredients such as high-fructose corn syrup.

==== 2021 Pop-Tarts lawsuit ====
A class-action lawsuit was filed against Kellogg&#x27;s in October 2021 claiming they did not put enough strawberries in their strawberry flavored Pop-Tarts, and seeking $5 million in damages. In April 2022, the lawsuit was dismissed by a federal judge.

Another lawsuit was filed against Kellogg&#x27;s in 2021, with the plaintiff claiming that Kellogg&#x27;s defrauded customers regarding the contents of its Frosted Chocolate Fudge Pop-Tarts. The plaintiff stated she would not have purchased the Pop-Tarts had she known they did not contain milk, milkfat, or butter. In June 2022, a US district judge dismissed the lawsuit, stating that a reasonable consumer would not expect those ingredients.

=== Recalls ===

==== 2010 cereal recall ====
On June 25, the company voluntarily began to recall about 28 million boxes of Apple Jacks, Corn Pops, Froot Loops and Honey Smacks because of an unusual smell and flavor from the packages&#x27; liners that could make people ill. Kellogg&#x27;s said about 20 people complained about the cereals, including five who reported nausea and vomiting. Consumers reported the cereal smelled or tasted waxy or like metal or soap. Company spokeswoman J. Adaire Putnam said some described it as tasting stale. However, no serious health problems had been reported.

The suspected chemical that caused the illnesses was 2-methylnaphthalene, used in the cereal packaging process. Little is known about 2-methylnaphthalene&#x27;s impact on human health as the Food and Drug Administration has no scientific data on its impact on humans, and the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) also does not have health and safety data regarding it. This is despite the EPA having sought information on it from the chemical industry for 16 years. 2-Methylnaphthalene is a component of crude oil and is &quot;structurally related to naphthalene, an ingredient in mothballs and toilet-deodorant blocks&quot; that the EPA considers a possible human carcinogen.

&quot;Kellogg&#x27;s&quot; offered consumers refunds in the meantime. Only products with the letters &quot;KN&quot; following the use-by date were included in the recall. The products were distributed throughout the US and began arriving in stores in late March 2010. Products in Canada were not affected.

==== 2012 cereal recall ====
Kellogg&#x27;s issued a voluntary recall of some of its &quot;Frosted Mini-Wheats Bite Size Original&quot; and &quot;Mini-Wheats Unfrosted Bite Size&quot; products due to the possibility of flexible metal mesh fragments in the food. The affected products varied in size from single-serving bowls to large 70-ounce cartons. Use-by dates printed on the recalled packages ranged from April 1, 2013, to September 21, 2013, and were accompanied by the letters KB, AP or FK.

=== Human rights violations and strikes ===

==== Human right violations of palm oil in 2016 ====
According to Amnesty International in 2016, Kellogg&#x27;s palm oil provider Wilmar International profited from 8 to 14-year-old child labor and forced labor. Some workers were extorted, threatened or not paid for work. Some workers suffered severe injuries from chemicals such as Paraquat. Kellogg&#x27;s alleged not being aware of the child abuses due to traceability; Amnesty&#x27;s human rights director replied that &quot;Using mealy-mouthed excuses about &#x27;traceability&#x27; is a total cop-out.&quot;

==== 2021 strike ====
In October 2021, over a thousand employees at four Kellogg&#x27;s manufacturing plants in the United States went on strike for better working conditions and higher wages. Two months into the strikes, Kellogg&#x27;s fired all the striking workers and posted their jobs in December after negotiations with the BCTGM union failed. During the talks, Kellogg&#x27;s had threatened to move jobs to Mexico if the union did not agree to Kellogg&#x27;s proposal. Kelloggs also filed a lawsuit against the union. As a result, several calls for a boycott went viral on social media.

== See also ==

* W. K. Kellogg Foundation
* Kellogg&#x27;s Cereal City USA – a former tourist attraction in Battle Creek, Michigan focused on the company&#x27;s history
* List of breakfast cereals
* Toucan Sam#Maya Archaeology Initiative for a 2011 trademark dispute over another organization&#x27;s toucan logo
* A. D. David Mackay

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="0" end="9" title="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s" label="Kellanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="33" end="48" title="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s" label="Kellogg Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="71" end="85" title="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s" label="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="102" end="115" title="Multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="160" end="167" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="169" end="177" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q856330" start="259" end="267" title="cracker (food)" label="crackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811427" start="272" end="288" title="toaster pastry" label="toaster pastries"/>
<link wikidata="Q768267" start="290" end="296" title="breakfast cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940375" start="397" end="417" title="Rice Krispies Treats" label="Rice Krispies Treats"/>
<link wikidata="Q528187" start="419" end="427" title="Pringles" label="Pringles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119080" start="429" end="433" title="Eggo" label="Eggo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089476" start="439" end="447" title="Cheez-It" label="Cheez-It"/>
<link wikidata="Q327115" start="506" end="517" title="Corn flakes" label="Corn Flakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763921" start="519" end="532" title="Rice Krispies" label="Rice Krispies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625790" start="534" end="542" title="Frosted Flakes" label="Frosties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981339" start="547" end="556" title="Coco Pops" label="Coco Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q940877" start="675" end="688" title="Trafford Park" label="Trafford Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q23099" start="692" end="710" title="Greater Manchester" label="Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="823" end="830" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="853" end="859" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="885" end="893" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q173121" start="899" end="913" title="Querétaro City" label="Querétaro City"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="915" end="921" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942078" start="945" end="958" title="Royal warrant of appointment (United Kingdom)" label="Royal Warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="964" end="982" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q123112141" start="1078" end="1091" title="WK Kellogg Co" label="WK Kellogg Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585925" start="1230" end="1239" title="Pop-Tarts" label="Pop-Tarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q528187" start="1244" end="1252" title="Pringles" label="Pringles"/>
<link wikidata="Q695087" start="1545" end="1554" title="Mars Inc." label="Mars Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q739550" start="1569" end="1583" title="M&amp;amp;M&amp;#x27;s" label="M&amp;amp;M&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q714179" start="1588" end="1596" title="Snickers" label="Snickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q380036" start="1747" end="1766" title="John Harvey Kellogg" label="John Harvey Kellogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472282" start="1800" end="1823" title="Battle Creek Sanitarium" label="Battle Creek Sanitarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q292290" start="1883" end="1894" title="Ellen G. White" label="Ellen White"/>
<link wikidata="Q578245" start="1914" end="1927" title="W. K. Kellogg" label="W. K. Kellogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q327115" start="2317" end="2328" title="corn flakes" label="corn flakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415342" start="4023" end="4045" title="Michigan Supreme Court" label="Michigan Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4369" end="4381" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403389" start="4858" end="4868" title="Salada tea" label="Salada Tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109512" start="4891" end="4913" title="Mrs. Smith&amp;#x27;s Pies" label="Mrs. Smith&amp;#x27;s Pies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119080" start="4915" end="4919" title="Eggo" label="Eggo"/>
<link wikidata="Q629998" start="5010" end="5023" title="General Mills" label="General Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699694" start="5028" end="5039" title="Quaker Oats" label="Quaker Oats"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="5247" end="5258" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q797819" start="5537" end="5548" title="baby boomer" label="baby boomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186061" start="6021" end="6028" title="Crispix" label="Crispix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070474" start="6050" end="6061" title="Nutri-Grain" label="Nutri-Grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316329" start="6109" end="6119" title="Just Right" label="Just Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318423" start="6129" end="6140" title="Australians" label="Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q629998" start="6245" end="6258" title="General Mills" label="General Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233641" start="6312" end="6316" title="Post Foods" label="Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382670" start="6424" end="6439" title="Keebler Company" label="Keebler Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887365" start="6506" end="6523" title="Morningstar Farms" label="Morningstar Farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374239" start="6528" end="6533" title="Kashi Company" label="Kashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q110281129" start="6590" end="6600" title="Bear Naked" label="Bear Naked"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089476" start="6617" end="6625" title="Cheez-It" label="Cheez-It"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433442" start="6664" end="6675" title="Famous Amos" label="Famous Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522433" start="6677" end="6689" title="Gardenburger" label="Gardenburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239672" start="6775" end="6797" title="World Cocoa Foundation" label="World Cocoa Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q334800" start="6889" end="6896" title="PepsiCo" label="PepsiCo"/>
<link wikidata="Q173265" start="6915" end="6926" title="potato chip" label="potato chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q528187" start="6933" end="6941" title="Pringles" label="Pringles"/>
<link wikidata="Q212405" start="6947" end="6967" title="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble" label="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="7035" end="7042" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q48970184" start="7062" end="7067" title="Rxbar" label="Rxbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921426" start="7177" end="7193" title="Merchandise Mart" label="Merchandise Mart"/>
<link wikidata="Q28485502" start="7522" end="7537" title="Crisis in Venezuela" label="economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q58132" start="7615" end="7629" title="Nicolás Maduro" label="Nicolás Maduro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433442" start="8050" end="8061" title="Famous Amos" label="Famous Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382670" start="8078" end="8085" title="Keebler Company" label="Keebler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917238" start="8087" end="8100" title="Mother&amp;#x27;s Cookies" label="Mother&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308519" start="8157" end="8195" title="Girl Scout Cookies" label="cookies for the Girl Scouts of the USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q269792" start="8200" end="8211" title="Ferrero SpA" label="Ferrero SpA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320972" start="8444" end="8449" title="GLAAD" label="GLAAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q407232" start="8813" end="8823" title="glyphosate" label="glyphosate"/>
<link wikidata="Q109002227" start="9023" end="9039" title="2021 Kellogg&amp;#x27;s strike" label="went on a strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849327" start="9057" end="9139" title="Bakery, Confectionery, Tobacco Workers and Grain Millers&amp;#x27; International Union" label="Bakery, Confectionery, Tobacco Workers and Grain Millers&amp;#x27; International Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q123112141" start="10766" end="10779" title="WK Kellogg Co" label="WK Kellogg Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548784" start="10913" end="10926" title="ticker symbol" label="ticker symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q695087" start="11103" end="11112" title="Mars Inc." label="Mars Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q739550" start="11127" end="11141" title="M&amp;amp;M&amp;#x27;s" label="M&amp;amp;M&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q714179" start="11146" end="11154" title="Snickers" label="Snickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124351" start="11300" end="11308" title="Pagewood, New South Wales" label="Pagewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q21973339" start="11312" end="11322" title="Charmhaven" label="Charmhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q28898" start="11375" end="11383" title="Zaventem" label="Zaventem"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="11390" end="11398" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="11415" end="11424" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="11437" end="11443" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q50816" start="11457" end="11468" title="Mississauga" label="Mississauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q551476" start="11504" end="11517" title="Anjou, Quebec" label="Anjou, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="11551" end="11558" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q92561" start="11601" end="11616" title="London, Ontario" label="London, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q34227" start="11718" end="11737" title="Belleville, Ontario" label="Belleville, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q15914368" start="11913" end="11924" title="Yihai Kerry" label="Yihai Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43509" start="11936" end="11945" title="Guayaquil" label="Guayaquil"/>
<link wikidata="Q207605" start="11956" end="11970" title="Noisy-le-Grand" label="Noisy-le-Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="11989" end="11996" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="12120" end="12126" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q987745" start="12197" end="12211" title="Swords, Dublin" label="Swords, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="12221" end="12226" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179645" start="12236" end="12251" title="Shinjuku, Tokyo" label="Shinjuku, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854397" start="12264" end="12277" title="Bandar Enstek" label="Bandar Enstek"/>
<link wikidata="Q213893" start="12279" end="12294" title="Negeri Sembilan" label="Negeri Sembilan"/>
<link wikidata="Q173121" start="12305" end="12314" title="Querétaro, Querétaro" label="Querétaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882" start="12341" end="12347" title="Manama" label="Manama"/>
<link wikidata="Q81788" start="12358" end="12362" title="Giza" label="Giza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="12372" end="12378" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q207540" start="12390" end="12393" title="Lod" label="Lod"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805" start="12405" end="12410" title="Amman" label="Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q35178" start="12422" end="12433" title="Kuwait City" label="Kuwait City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="12446" end="12452" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="12463" end="12470" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826" start="12480" end="12494" title="Muscat, Oman" label="Azaiba, Muscat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861" start="12505" end="12509" title="Doha" label="Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q374365" start="12527" end="12533" title="Jeddah" label="Jeddah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="12544" end="12552" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="12561" end="12566" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766547" start="12582" end="12591" title="&amp;#x27;s-Hertogenbosch" label="Den Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q23048055" start="12607" end="12628" title="Bonifacio Global City" label="Bonifacio Global City"/>
<link wikidata="Q202160" start="12639" end="12644" title="Kutno" label="Kutno"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="12657" end="12663" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q761408" start="12763" end="12770" title="Springs, Gauteng" label="Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="12786" end="12791" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q825883" start="12801" end="12806" title="Valls" label="Valls"/>
<link wikidata="Q487679" start="12837" end="12847" title="Alcobendas" label="Alcobendas"/>
<link wikidata="Q35381" start="12883" end="12890" title="Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41963" start="12892" end="12917" title="Sri Jayawardenapura Kotte" label="Sri Jayawardenapura Kotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="12930" end="12937" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015123" start="12939" end="12945" title="Rayong" label="Rayong"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="12997" end="13007" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q848287" start="13050" end="13060" title="Livingston, Scotland" label="Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q496368" start="13071" end="13078" title="Wrexham" label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q810998" start="13138" end="13160" title="Battle Creek, Michigan" label="Battle Creek, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q852665" start="13164" end="13184" title="Cary, North Carolina" label="Cary, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q985409" start="13188" end="13206" title="Jackson, Tennessee" label="Jackson, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q320514" start="13210" end="13233" title="Lancaster, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="13237" end="13255" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="13259" end="13274" title="Omaha, Nebraska" label="Omaha, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855088" start="13278" end="13297" title="Pikeville, Kentucky" label="Pikeville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q181962" start="13307" end="13323" title="Augusta, Georgia" label="Augusta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49259" start="13327" end="13351" title="Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="Virginia Beach, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110281129" start="13659" end="13675" title="Bear Naked, Inc." label="Bear Naked, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q5089476" start="13678" end="13686" title="Cheez-It" label="Cheez-It"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119080" start="13698" end="13702" title="Eggo" label="Eggo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506413" start="13705" end="13718" title="Fruit Winders" label="Fruit Winders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887365" start="13737" end="13754" title="Morningstar Farms" label="Morningstar Farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136178" start="13757" end="13770" title="Club Crackers" label="Club Crackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585925" start="13787" end="13796" title="Pop-Tarts" label="Pop-Tarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q528187" start="13799" end="13807" title="Pringles" label="Pringles"/>
<link wikidata="Q48970184" start="13810" end="13815" title="Rxbar" label="Rxbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641439" start="13818" end="13835" title="Sunshine Biscuits" label="Sunshine Biscuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045951" start="13868" end="13879" title="Carr&amp;#x27;s" label="Carr&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940375" start="13892" end="13912" title="Rice Krispies Treats" label="Rice Krispies Treats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183772" start="13963" end="13986" title="Cracklin&amp;#x27; Oat Bran" label="Cracklin&amp;#x27; Oat Bran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522433" start="13989" end="14001" title="Gardenburger" label="Gardenburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492829" start="14086" end="14095" title="Special K" label="Special K"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727808" start="14217" end="14225" title="All-Bran" label="All-Bran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781194" start="14344" end="14355" title="Apple Jacks" label="Apple Jacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845825" start="14446" end="14455" title="Bran Buds" label="Bran Buds"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605867" start="14472" end="14483" title="Bran Flakes" label="Bran Flakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103700" start="14486" end="14492" title="Chocos" label="Chocos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952168" start="14698" end="14706" title="Mini Swirlz" label="Cinnabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952168" start="14709" end="14727" title="Mini Swirlz" label="Cinnamon Mini Buns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981339" start="14878" end="14892" title="Cocoa Krispies" label="Cocoa Krispies"/>
<link wikidata="Q327115" start="15060" end="15071" title="Corn flakes" label="Corn Flakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="15074" end="15100" title="Complete Wheat Bran Flakes" label="Complete Wheat Bran Flakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308127" start="15115" end="15124" title="Corn Pops" label="Corn Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177432" start="15127" end="15140" title="Country Store (cereal)" label="Country Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183772" start="15143" end="15166" title="Cracklin&amp;#x27; Oat Bran" label="Cracklin&amp;#x27; Oat Bran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186061" start="15303" end="15310" title="Crispix" label="Crispix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190104" start="15385" end="15396" title="Crunchy Nut" label="Crunchy Nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190097" start="15451" end="15462" title="Cruncheroos" label="Cruncheroos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="15465" end="15471" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="15481" end="15515" title="Disney Hunny B&amp;#x27;s Honey-Graham" label="Disney Hunny B&amp;#x27;s Honey-Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="15517" end="15543" title="Disney Mickey&amp;#x27;s Magix" label="Disney Mickey&amp;#x27;s Magix"/>
<link wikidata="Q384426" start="15568" end="15592" title="Pirates of the Caribbean" label="Pirates of the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140303" start="15594" end="15609" title="Disney Princess" label="Disney Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347929" start="15625" end="15629" title="Eggo (breakfast cereal)" label="Eggo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310476" start="15690" end="15701" title="Froot Loops" label="Froot Loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625790" start="15782" end="15796" title="Frosted Flakes" label="Frosted Flakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506199" start="16075" end="16094" title="Frosted Mini-Wheats" label="Frosted Mini-Wheats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506355" start="16408" end="16427" title="Fruit &amp;#x27;n Fibre" label="Fruit &amp;#x27;n Fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233641" start="16448" end="16459" title="Post Cereals" label="Post cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506413" start="16495" end="16508" title="Fruit snack" label="Fruit Winders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893572" start="16641" end="16652" title="Honey Loops" label="Honey Loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137793" start="16706" end="16718" title="Honey Smacks" label="Honey Smacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6192239" start="16749" end="16773" title="Jif (peanut butter)" label="Jif Peanut Butter Cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316329" start="16786" end="16796" title="Just Right" label="Just Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444884" start="17100" end="17105" title="Tibet (1912–1951)" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q25488759" start="17118" end="17123" title="Krave (cereal)" label="Krave"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952168" start="17382" end="17393" title="Mini Swirlz" label="Mini Swirlz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070474" start="17698" end="17709" title="Nutri-Grain" label="Nutri-Grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183772" start="17734" end="17757" title="Cracklin&amp;#x27; Oat Bran" label="Cracklin&amp;#x27; Oat Bran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585925" start="17772" end="17781" title="Pop-Tarts" label="Pop-Tarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285132" start="17840" end="17851" title="Raisin Bran" label="Raisin Bran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285134" start="17965" end="17978" title="Raisin Wheats" label="Raisin Wheats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763921" start="17981" end="17994" title="Rice Krispies" label="Rice Krispies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331155" start="18047" end="18055" title="Ricicles" label="Ricicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355878" start="18214" end="18246" title="Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory" label="Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q205683" start="18274" end="18284" title="Scooby-Doo" label="Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546479" start="18394" end="18399" title="Smorz" label="Smorz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492829" start="18402" end="18411" title="Special K" label="Special K"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="18841" end="18851" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q83279" start="18886" end="18907" title="SpongeBob SquarePants" label="SpongeBob SquarePants"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480" start="19386" end="19398" title="Bart Simpson" label="Bart Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480" start="19430" end="19442" title="Bart Simpson" label="Bart Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480" start="19504" end="19516" title="Bart Simpson" label="Bart Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986193" start="19622" end="19636" title="Buzz Lightyear" label="Buzz Lightyear"/>
<link wikidata="Q171048" start="19652" end="19661" title="Toy Story" label="Toy Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q51787" start="19678" end="19683" title="C-3PO" label="C-3PO"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="19769" end="19778" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="20051" end="20060" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186061" start="20153" end="20176" title="Cinnamon Crunch Crispix" label="Cinnamon Crunch Crispix"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952168" start="20179" end="20197" title="Cinnamon Mini-Buns" label="Cinnamon Mini-Buns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425291" start="20276" end="20284" title="Cheerios" label="Cheerios"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="20414" end="20426" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q430675" start="20961" end="20969" title="psyllium" label="psyllium"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="21090" end="21102" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436539" start="21201" end="21213" title="Kream Krunch" label="Kream Krunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166185" start="22124" end="22127" title="Pep Cereal" label="Pep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805503" start="22167" end="22175" title="The Adventures of Superman (radio)" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="22176" end="22188" title="radio serial" label="radio serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q864" start="22192" end="22199" title="Pokémon" label="Pokémon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9351" start="22332" end="22339" title="Pikachu" label="Pikachu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236206" start="22501" end="22516" title="The Powerpuff Girls" label="Powerpuff Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247733" start="22526" end="22536" title="Product 19" label="Product 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258866" start="22573" end="22589" title="Puffa Puffa Rice" label="Puffa Puffa Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331155" start="22687" end="22695" title="Ricicles" label="Ricicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="22830" end="22848" title="Tony&amp;#x27;s Turboz" label="Tony&amp;#x27;s Turboz"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="22993" end="23006" title="Yogos Rollers" label="Yogos Rollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602475" start="23068" end="23073" title="Start (cereal)" label="Start"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="23517" end="23536" title="The Kellogg Company" label="The Kellogg Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="23978" end="23981" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q660263" start="23999" end="24019" title="What&amp;#x27;s My Line?" label="What&amp;#x27;s My Line?"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245159" start="24123" end="24131" title="PBS Kids" label="PBS Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315767" start="24170" end="24182" title="Dragon Tales" label="Dragon Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922711" start="24497" end="24506" title="bowl game" label="bowl game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813537" start="24569" end="24577" title="Sun Bowl" label="Sun Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823740" start="24625" end="24639" title="Tony the Tiger" label="Tony the Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2955927" start="24762" end="24776" title="Pop-Tarts Bowl" label="Pop-Tarts Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937412" start="24812" end="24823" title="Citrus Bowl" label="Citrus Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q15700638" start="24982" end="24988" title="Prize (marketing)" label="prizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064060" start="25088" end="25104" title="cereal box prize" label="cereal box prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q327115" start="25213" end="25239" title="Corn flakes" label="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s Corn Flakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075066" start="25261" end="25268" title="Premium (marketing)" label="premium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15700638" start="25368" end="25373" title="Prize (marketing)" label="prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q756431" start="25566" end="25570" title="Dime (United States coin)" label="dime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064060" start="25738" end="25743" title="Cereal box prize" label="prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132937" start="25759" end="25774" title="pin-back button" label="pin-back button"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="25828" end="25837" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q629998" start="26101" end="26114" title="General Mills" label="General Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717053" start="26116" end="26127" title="Malt-O-Meal Company" label="Malt-O-Meal"/>
<link wikidata="Q160746" start="26129" end="26135" title="Nestlé" label="Nestlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233641" start="26137" end="26147" title="Post Foods" label="Post Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699694" start="26153" end="26164" title="Quaker Oats Company" label="Quaker Oats"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="26371" end="26381" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981339" start="26465" end="26479" title="Cocoa Krispies" label="Cocoa Krispies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722789" start="26704" end="26715" title="Snagglepuss" label="Snagglepuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q736464" start="26717" end="26730" title="Hanna-Barbera" label="Hanna-Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002575" start="26779" end="26800" title="Snap, Crackle and Pop" label="Snap, Crackle and Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q327115" start="26889" end="26900" title="Corn flakes" label="Corn Flakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625790" start="26931" end="26945" title="Frosted Flakes" label="Frosted Flakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823740" start="27048" end="27062" title="Tony the Tiger" label="Tony the Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310476" start="27065" end="27076" title="Froot Loops" label="Froot Loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828544" start="27085" end="27095" title="Toucan Sam" label="Toucan Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137793" start="27098" end="27110" title="Honey Smacks" label="Honey Smacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285132" start="27167" end="27178" title="Raisin Bran" label="Raisin Bran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763921" start="27203" end="27216" title="Rice Krispies" label="Rice Krispies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763921" start="27227" end="27239" title="Rice Bubbles" label="Rice Bubbles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002575" start="27278" end="27299" title="Snap, Crackle and Pop" label="Snap, Crackle and Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331155" start="27302" end="27310" title="Ricicles" label="Ricicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781194" start="27343" end="27354" title="Apple Jacks" label="Apple Jacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893572" start="27388" end="27399" title="Honey Loops" label="Honey Loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490486" start="27648" end="27673" title="Larry Hedrick Motorsports" label="Larry Hedrick Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="27681" end="27687" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="27688" end="27706" title="Sprint Cup Series" label="Winston Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182261" start="27721" end="27733" title="Phil Parsons" label="Phil Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229272" start="27735" end="27746" title="Dave Marcis" label="Dave Marcis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093888" start="27748" end="27758" title="Greg Sacks" label="Greg Sacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950125" start="27760" end="27773" title="Hut Stricklin" label="Hut Stricklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q355130" start="27779" end="27792" title="Richard Petty" label="Richard Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="27863" end="27874" title="Winston Cup" label="Winston Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q204845" start="27884" end="27897" title="Terry Labonte" label="Terry Labonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096654" start="27962" end="27982" title="Hendrick Motorsports" label="Hendrick Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q209479" start="28050" end="28060" title="Kyle Busch" label="Kyle Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047250" start="28062" end="28073" title="Casey Mears" label="Casey Mears"/>
<link wikidata="Q719186" start="28079" end="28090" title="Mark Martin" label="Mark Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q704008" start="28150" end="28162" title="Carl Edwards" label="Carl Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048237" start="28181" end="28200" title="Roush Fenway Racing" label="Roush Fenway Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q355420" start="28225" end="28239" title="Dale Earnhardt" label="Dale Earnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="28294" end="28305" title="Winston Cup" label="Winston Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="28368" end="28379" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q913496" start="28441" end="28454" title="Brickyard 400" label="Brickyard 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q355420" start="28561" end="28575" title="Dale Earnhardt" label="Dale Earnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="28577" end="28588" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q946087" start="28609" end="28621" title="Dale Jarrett" label="Dale Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q471023" start="28729" end="28742" title="Jimmy Durante" label="Jimmy Durante"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="28863" end="28870" title="video game" label="PC game"/>
<link wikidata="Q518987" start="28956" end="28975" title="Donkey Kong Country" label="Donkey Kong Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418438" start="29664" end="29686" title="United States Olympic &amp;amp; Paralympic Committee" label="U.S. Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066131" start="29707" end="29714" title="athlete" label="athlete"/>
<link wikidata="Q9680" start="29921" end="29946" title="2018 Winter Olympics" label="2018 Winter Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968975" start="29974" end="29985" title="Nathan Chen" label="Nathan Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q270331" start="29987" end="29998" title="Kelly Clark" label="Kelly Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809038" start="30000" end="30013" title="Meghan Duggan" label="Meghan Duggan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50414277" start="30018" end="30030" title="Mike Schultz (snowboarder)" label="Mike Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="30225" end="30238" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="30393" end="30395" title="United States dollar" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020812" start="30415" end="30440" title="California Proposition 37 (2012)" label="California Proposition 37"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="30528" end="30550" title="Genetic engineering" label="genetically engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="30778" end="30793" title="Paris Agreement" label="Paris Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467287" start="30844" end="30859" title="President-elect of the United States" label="President-elect"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="30860" end="30872" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="30895" end="30918" title="Paris Climate Agreement" label="Paris Climate Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942150" start="31003" end="31016" title="Voter ID laws in the United States" label="voter-ID laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858230" start="31059" end="31070" title="Race Forward" label="RaceForward"/>
<link wikidata="Q29097043" start="31101" end="31128" title="Sleeping Giants (organization)" label="remove their advertisements"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960434" start="31138" end="31152" title="Breitbart News" label="Breitbart News"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016489" start="31388" end="31403" title="white privilege" label="white privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q848745" start="31408" end="31432" title="institutionalized racism" label="institutionalized racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371586" start="31586" end="31603" title="False advertising" label="misleading claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="31648" end="31672" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506199" start="32010" end="32029" title="Frosted Mini-Wheats" label="Frosted Mini-Wheats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098012" start="32090" end="32129" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Advertising Review Unit" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Advertising Review Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044785" start="32148" end="32170" title="Better Business Bureau" label="Better Business Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585925" start="32220" end="32229" title="Pop-Tarts" label="Pop-Tarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406193" start="32659" end="32684" title="Kellogg Breakfast Council" label="Kellogg Breakfast Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422173" start="33587" end="33611" title="high-fructose corn syrup" label="high-fructose corn syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585925" start="33794" end="33803" title="Pop-Tarts" label="Pop-Tarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781194" start="34471" end="34482" title="Apple Jacks" label="Apple Jacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308127" start="34484" end="34493" title="Corn Pops" label="Corn Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310476" start="34495" end="34506" title="Froot Loops" label="Froot Loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137793" start="34511" end="34523" title="Honey Smacks" label="Honey Smacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813819" start="35000" end="35019" title="2-methylnaphthalene" label="2-methylnaphthalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="35138" end="35166" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="35223" end="35268" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q179724" start="35513" end="35524" title="naphthalene" label="naphthalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="36557" end="36578" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="36603" end="36611" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786712" start="36621" end="36641" title="Wilmar International" label="Wilmar International"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="36673" end="36684" title="child labor" label="child labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="36689" end="36701" title="forced labor" label="forced labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q409669" start="36825" end="36833" title="Paraquat" label="Paraquat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945762" start="37670" end="37694" title="W. K. Kellogg Foundation" label="W. K. Kellogg Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998198" start="37697" end="37727" title="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s Cereal City USA" label="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s Cereal City USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q810998" start="37761" end="37783" title="Battle Creek, Michigan" label="Battle Creek, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608141" start="37824" end="37849" title="List of breakfast cereals" label="List of breakfast cereals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37852" end="37890" title="Toucan Sam#Maya Archaeology Initiative" label="Toucan Sam#Maya Archaeology Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647663" start="37967" end="37985" title="A. D. David Mackay" label="A. D. David Mackay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544112" wikidata="Q7360396" url="?curid=544112" title="Roland Rat">
<text>Roland Rat is a British television puppet character. He was created, operated and voiced by David Claridge, who had previously designed and operated Mooncat, a puppet in the Children&#x27;s ITV television programme &quot;Get Up and Go!&quot;

==Character summary==
Roland lives beneath King&#x27;s Cross railway station in The Ratcave and also in Ratcavetwo under the Hollywood Sign in Los Angeles. He has an infant brother called Little Reggie and had a relationship with a guinea pig called Glenis. His colleagues include dour Welsh technical whizz Errol the Hamster and over-enthusiastic self-appointed &quot;number one ratfan&quot; Kevin the Gerbil, who is from Leeds and loves pink buckets. Roland&#x27;s car &#x27;the Ratmobile&#x27; is a bright pink 1953 Ford Anglia.

Roland had a brash and confident personality, which writer Colin Bostock-Smith states was established by Claridge and writer Richard Curtis.

Claridge provides voices for all the main characters: Roland Rat, Errol the Hamster, Kevin The Gerbil, Little Reggie, Fergie the Ferret, and Roland&#x27;s father Freddy, as they often appear on screen together. 

==TV-am==
Roland Rat was launched at TV-am by children&#x27;s editor Anne Wood to give kids entertainment during the Easter holidays. Roland first appeared on 1 April 1983 (Good Friday) on the ailing breakfast television network TV-am, and is generally regarded as its saviour, being described as &quot;the only rat to join a sinking ship&quot;. After a couple of months on TV-am, Roland took the audience from 100,000 to 1.8 million. 

Initially, Roland was featured as the host of &quot;The Shedvision Show&quot;, ostensibly broadcast from a wooden shack on the roof of TV-am&#x27;s studios. On the strength of this, Roland was soon given a regular slot every morning introducing cartoons for younger viewers.

Roland Rat&#x27;s time at TV-am lasted until summer 1985. During this period, Roland and friends would feature in a half-hour episode transmitted on school holiday weekdays on TV-am from 9:00 am. The school summer holidays of 1983 and 1984 saw &quot;Rat on the Road&quot; in which Roland and Kevin would spend each week in a different town of the United Kingdom. One notable highlight during this period was the visit of Austrian racing driver Roland Ratzenberger who appeared on the show in a motor race against the Ratmobile ending with Ratzenberger&#x27;s car being sabotaged by his near-namesake.

The character of Errol the Hamster was gradually drafted in during the first year as a VT technician responsible for running the cartoons inserted into the show. Errol eventually joined Roland and Kevin on location at Christmas in 1983 for &quot;Roland&#x27;s Winter Wonderland&quot; which saw Roland, Kevin and Errol enjoying a skiing holiday together in Switzerland. The following year at Easter, Roland Rat hosted the show &quot;Roland Goes East&quot; set in Kowloon, Hong Kong, and covering the ill-fated film shoot of Roland&#x27;s attempted movie debut, a martial arts film entitled &quot;Enter the Rodent&quot;.

The half-term week of October 1984 saw &quot;Operation FOGI&quot; (Free Our Glenis Immediately) which revolved around the gang&#x27;s attempts – eventually successful – to liberate Glenis The Guinea Pig from her life in the pets department of Harrods. Following enormous demand, the season was repeated across subsequent Sundays for the benefit of school pupils whose half term had not fallen the week of the series&#x27; transmission.

Christmas 1984 saw &quot;Roland&#x27;s Countdown to Christmas&quot;. TV-am sold Roland Rat advent calendars, with Roland opening each door with the viewers at 7:20 am every day. The final door had Roland and his friends in the snow.

Roland&#x27;s final appearance on TV-am was at the end of August 1985, when the last summer holiday slot was broadcast.

===TV-am serials (selected)===
* The Spectacular Shedvision Show (Easter 1983) Set in a shed on the roof of the TVAM studios.
* Cartoon Time with Roland Rat (May half term 1983)
* Rat on the Road (Summer 1983) introduced Errol the Hamster in the final episode although Roland had ordered him by walkie-talkie to &quot;Run VT&quot; whenever it was time for the cartoon to air previously.
* Roland&#x27;s Winter Wonderland (Christmas holidays 1983) – filmed in Switzerland
* Roland Goes East (Easter 1984) – filmed in Hong Kong. Introduced Little Reggie
* Rat on the Road II (Summer 1984) – featured Kevin&#x27;s cover of Summer Holiday and Roland&#x27;s cover of Love Me Tender.
* Operation FOGI (October half term 1984) – introduced Glenis the Guinea Pig who was rescued from the pet department in Harrods as a result of Operation FOGI (Free Our Glenis Immediately).
* Roland&#x27;s Countdown to Christmas (December 1984) – featured Roland and friends singing a rewritten version of &quot;The Twelve Days of Christmas&quot; featuring such paraphernalia associated with the show as Kevin&#x27;s pink bucket, Errol&#x27;s favourite leek pie and a Roland Rat Superstar cap.
* Roland&#x27;s Rat Race (Easter 1985) – A quiz show, featuring James Saxon as Roland&#x27;s incompetent friend and conman D&#x27;Arcy De Farcey.
* The OWRRAS Summer Spectacular (Summer 1985) – This stood for Official Worldwide Roland Rat Appreciation Society. Broadcast in the summer of 1985, a studio based programme like The Spectacular Shedvision Show and the half-term series Roland Live. The last TV-am Roland Rat series.

==BBC==
On 3 October 1985, he transferred to the BBC, for a three-year contract, which ended up being extended to six years. Roland said, &quot;I saved TV-am and now I&#x27;m here to save the BBC.&quot;

Roland made a number of series during his time at the BBC, most notably &quot;Roland Rat the Series&quot;, a chat show set in Roland&#x27;s sewer home, now converted into a high-tech media centre called the Ratcave. The show would intersperse the chat show segments with a storyline involving some sort of situation &quot;behind the scenes&quot;.

These series also featured Roland&#x27;s parents, Iris and Freddie, his pet flea Colin, Fergie the Ferret, Eric the Eagle, and his agent D&#x27;Arcy De Farcy. His girlfriend Glenis was joined by another female character called Roxanne Rat.

The series purported to be broadcast from Roland&#x27;s personal channel BBC3, complete with &quot;THREE&quot; ident spoofing BBC Two&#x27;s &quot;TWO&quot; ident of the period.

Roland also made two spoof drama series, &quot;Tales of the Rodent Sherlock Holmes&quot;, in which he played Holmes with Kevin as Dr. Watson, and &quot;Ratman&quot;, a &quot;Batman&quot; spoof with Kevin as his sidekick, &quot;Pink Bucket Man&quot;. During Christmas 1985, British Telecom operated a free &quot;ratphone&quot; number on 0800 800 800 where fans could listen to Roland&#x27;s prerecorded Christmas message.

Roland would also host the children&#x27;s game show entitled &quot;Roland&#x27;s Rat Race&quot;, where child contestants answered general knowledge questions in a race car set.

==Channel Five==
In the late 1990s, he made a series for Channel 5, called &quot;L.A. RAT&quot;, which featured Roland and friends living in Los Angeles. In 2003, Roland was a guest presenter for ITV&#x27;s children&#x27;s strand CITV.

==Other appearances==
Roland appeared on &quot;Big Brother&quot; several times, his first being 2004 in a task that involved the housemates playing a version of 20 questions in order to guess the identity of various celebrities.

In December 2007, Roland Rat appeared on a puppet special of &quot;The Weakest Link&quot; hosted by Anne Robinson which was originally broadcast on Friday 28 December 2007 at 18:00 GMT on BBC One. Roland reached the final round with Soo from &quot;The Sooty Show&quot; which went to sudden death after initially drawing with four points each. Roland ultimately lost out to Soo&#x27;s superior wisdom in the tense final standoff.

Roland appeared in the fourth episode of the second series of &quot;Ashes to Ashes&quot;. This appearance was anachronistic, as the show is set in 1982 whereas Roland did not debut until the following year.

In 2008, Roland released a Christmas single, &quot;Ding Dong Ding Dong (Christmas Down The Drain)&quot; featuring Kevin, Errol and Reggie, available for download.

On 11 February 2010, whilst making an appearance on BBC&#x27;s &quot;The One Show&quot; to answer a question about how children&#x27;s programmes have changed over the years, Roland Rat spent so much time joking about the presenters (Adrian Chiles and Christine Bleakley) that Adrian ended the interview before he answered the question.

==Music==
Between 1983 and 1985, Roland had three UK chart singles, two reached the top 40:

* Rat Rapping: 1983 Peak Position 14
* Love Me Tender: 1984 Peak Position 32
* No. 1 Rat Fan: 1985 Peak Position 72
* Roland Rat* – Living Legend was also released as a single but never charted.

Roland Rat also had two albums &quot;The Cassette of the Album&quot;. A cassette version of the recording, entitled &quot;The Album&quot; was released concurrently. The cassette recording claimed to be the LP recording, and vice versa; spoken word sketches at the starts and ends of the sides on both releases revealed this to have been the result of a mix-up which could not be rectified for financial reasons. Each of the main characters contributed a song: Kevin the Gerbil&#x27;s were &quot;My Roland&quot; and &quot;Pink Bucket Reggae&quot;, Reggie&#x27;s song was &quot;It&#x27;s Great&#x27;Ere, Innit&quot;, and Errol the Hamster contributed &quot;Live Dangerously&quot; and &quot;Leeks Are Wonderful, Leeks Are Nice&quot;. Kevin the Gerbil also had a top 50 single with &quot;Summer Holiday&#x27;.

In 1986, Roland’s second album - Living Legend - was released by BBC / Rodent Records. The album incorporated the theme tune and songs used in Roland Rat: The Series. 

Tracks included a song from Colin, Roland’s pet flea, Kevin’s lost love, Linda, and a ditty from D&#x27;Arcey De Farcey about being bald. Roland also did a cover version of David Bowie’s “Fame”.

==Video game==
In 1985, Ocean Software produced a game called &quot;Roland&#x27;s Rat Race&quot; for the ZX Spectrum and Commodore 64. The player had to guide Roland through the sewers of London and collect nine pieces of a door which, when complete, would allow him to rescue his companions in time for an appearance on TV-am. Roland had to avoid enemies in the form of animated wellington boots which could be temporarily incapacitated with a squirt of glue, which could also be used to stop tube trains in order to ride on them.

==Merchandise==
Roland Rat merchandising was extensive and the Hasbro range of soft toys was hugely popular. Roland has appeared on hundreds of items ranging from toothbrushes to wallpaper, bedding, stationery, mugs, canned pasta, and children&#x27;s glasses by Dolland and Aitchison.

A range of new merchandise in 2010 included a talking Roland Rat soft toy, fancy dress outfit, online game and a &quot;team-up&quot; with Asda&#x27;s George Clothing to launch a new range of rat-themed clothing, including socks, T-shirts, underwear, and &quot;superstar lounge pants&quot;.

==UK releases==

* Thorn EMI (1984–1988)
* BBC Video (1988)
* Contender Entertainment Group (2003)
* Digital Classics DVD (2010)

==References==
==External links==
* Fan website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7360396" start="0" end="10" title="Roland Rat" label="Roland Rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546736" start="16" end="34" title="British television" label="British television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913135" start="35" end="41" title="puppet" label="puppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117103" start="149" end="156" title="Mooncat" label="Mooncat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997305" start="174" end="193" title="Children&amp;#x27;s ITV" label="Children&amp;#x27;s ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q219867" start="286" end="319" title="London King&amp;#x27;s Cross railway station" label="King&amp;#x27;s Cross railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q180376" start="368" end="382" title="Hollywood Sign" label="Hollywood Sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="386" end="397" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="666" end="671" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133667" start="762" end="773" title="Ford Anglia" label="Ford Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144900" start="835" end="854" title="Colin Bostock-Smith" label="Colin Bostock-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q355300" start="901" end="915" title="Richard Curtis" label="Richard Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305473" start="1200" end="1209" title="Anne Wood" label="Anne Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472288" start="1331" end="1351" title="breakfast television" label="breakfast television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672074" start="1360" end="1365" title="TV-am" label="TV-am"/>
<link wikidata="Q78495" start="2288" end="2307" title="Roland Ratzenberger" label="Roland Ratzenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="2775" end="2781" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q332474" start="3309" end="3316" title="Harrods" label="Harrods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672074" start="3771" end="3776" title="TV-am" label="TV-am"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364868" start="4478" end="4492" title="Summer Holiday (song)" label="Summer Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426427" start="4520" end="4534" title="Love Me Tender (song)" label="Love Me Tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q112577" start="4847" end="4875" title="The Twelve Days of Christmas (song)" label="The Twelve Days of Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142804" start="5093" end="5104" title="James Saxon (actor)" label="James Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5507" end="5510" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672074" start="5610" end="5615" title="TV-am" label="TV-am"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5716" end="5719" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q622812" start="5771" end="5780" title="chat show" label="chat show"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="6377" end="6384" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834997" start="6398" end="6401" title="BBC Two &amp;quot;Two&amp;quot; ident" label="TWO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="6539" end="6545" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187349" start="6560" end="6570" title="John Watson (Sherlock Holmes)" label="Dr. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="6604" end="6610" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="6703" end="6718" title="BT Group" label="British Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q846662" start="6895" end="6904" title="game show" label="game show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="7088" end="7097" title="Five (channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="7172" end="7183" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997305" start="7261" end="7265" title="CiTV" label="CITV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7315" end="7326" title="Big Brother (British TV series)" label="Big Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956169" start="7565" end="7581" title="The Weakest Link (British game show)" label="The Weakest Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q454347" start="7598" end="7611" title="Anne Robinson" label="Anne Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="7686" end="7693" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562604" start="7731" end="7734" title="Soo (puppet)" label="Soo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562783" start="7746" end="7760" title="Sooty &amp;amp; Co." label="The Sooty Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q725195" start="7996" end="8010" title="Ashes to Ashes (British TV series)" label="Ashes to Ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755050" start="8369" end="8381" title="The One Show" label="The One Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406348" start="8534" end="8547" title="Adrian Chiles" label="Adrian Chiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110936" start="8552" end="8570" title="Christine Bleakley" label="Christine Bleakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364868" start="9711" end="9725" title="Summer Holiday (song)" label="Summer Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408498" start="10123" end="10137" title="Ocean Software" label="Ocean Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="10204" end="10215" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="10220" end="10232" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805497" start="10277" end="10283" title="sanitary sewer" label="sewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q260142" start="10479" end="10494" title="wellington boot" label="wellington boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="10554" end="10558" title="glue" label="glue"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="10593" end="10604" title="London Underground" label="tube trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q297410" start="11056" end="11060" title="Asda" label="Asda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796279" start="11228" end="11237" title="Thorn EMI" label="Thorn EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633317" start="11252" end="11261" title="BBC Video" label="BBC Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275812" start="11310" end="11330" title="Digital Classics DVD" label="Digital Classics DVD"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544118" wikidata="Q1751330" url="?curid=544118" title="Mbone">
<text>Mbone (short for &quot;multicast backbone&quot;) was an experimental backbone and virtual network built on top of the Internet for carrying IP multicast traffic on the Internet. It was developed in the early 1990s and required specialized hardware and software. Since the operators of most Internet routers have disabled IP multicast due to concerns regarding bandwidth tracking and billing, the Mbone was created to connect multicast-capable networks over the existing Internet infrastructure.

==History==
Mbone was created by Van Jacobson, Steve Deering and Stephen Casner in 1992 based on a suggestion by Allison Mankin.

During March 16–20, 1992 the first significant use of the MBONE took place from the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) meeting in San Diego with 20 sites listening.

On May 23, 1993, &quot;Wax or the Discovery of Television Among the Bees&quot; was streamed over the Mbone, becoming &quot;the first movie to be transmitted on the Internet.&quot;

On June 24, 1993, the band Severe Tire Damage was the first to perform live on the Mbone.

On November 11, 1993 Sky Cries Mary performed on the Mbone from Bellevue, WA sponsored by Starwave.

On August 23, 1994, the band Deth Specula broadcast the first live concert over the Mbone.

A November 1994 Rolling Stones concert at the Cotton Bowl in Dallas with 50,000 fans was the &quot;first major cyberspace multicast concert.&quot; Mick Jagger opened the concert by saying, &quot;I wanna say a special welcome to everyone that&#x27;s, uh, climbed into the Internet tonight and, uh, has got into the M-bone. And I hope it doesn&#x27;t all collapse.&quot;

A year later the Mbone was used, this time symmetrically (simultaneous transmission and reception without hierarchy among participants), for a first experience of real-time graphical interaction without the intermediary of any Center (Poietic Generator).

By 1995, there were M-bone links in Russia, as well as at the McMurdo Sound research station in Antarctica. Mbone was predominantly used by research and scientific entities, including NASA. 

Mbone was used for shared communication such as video teleconferences or shared collaborative workspaces. It was not generally connected to commercial Internet service providers, but often to universities and research institutions. Some other projects and network testbeds, such as Internet2&#x27;s Abilene Network, made Mbone obsolete.

A &quot;virtual room video conferencing system&quot; (VRVS) started operation in 1997 using the Mbone, and was in operation through 2008.

A revived &quot;mboned&quot; (mbone deployment) working group was chartered by the Internet Engineering Task Force in 2014, as a forum to coordinate and document multicast deployment challenges and best practices.

==Details==
The purpose of Mbone was to minimize the amount of data required for multipoint audio/video-conferencing.

Mbone was free and it used a network of routers that support IP multicast, and it enables access to real-time interactive multimedia on the Internet. Many older routers do not support IP multicast. To cope with this, tunnels must be set up on both ends: multicast packets are encapsulated in unicast packets and sent through a tunnel. Mbone uses a small subset of the class D IP address space (224.0.0.0–239.255.255.255) assigned for multicast traffic. Mbone uses 224.2.0.0 for multimedia conferencing.

===Characteristics===
* topology: a combination of mesh and star networks
* IP addresses: 224.2.0.0
* routing schemes: DVMRP, MOSPF
* session registration: IGMP
* traffic requirement: audio 32-64 kbit/s, video 120 kbit/s

===Mbone tools===
* Videoconferencing: vic -t ttl destination-host/port (supports: NV, H.261, CellB, MPEG, mJPEG)
* Audioconferencing: vat -t ttl destination-host/port (supports: LPC, PCMU, DVI4, GSM)
* Whiteboard: wb destination-host/port/ttl
* Session Directory: sdr
* Collective art : gp (Poietic Generator)

==See also==
* CastGate—an attempt at providing connectivity to the multicast network for hosts which have none

==References==
==External links==
*&quot;MBONE: Multicasting Tomorrow&#x27;s Internet&quot;: Classic book about MBONE, by Kevin Savetz, Neil Randall, and Yves Lepage, complete on-line
*IETF MBONE Deployment working group
*How to connect to the MBone
*AccessGrid.org
*Making the MBone Real—Ajit S. Thyagarajan, Stephen L. Casner, and Stephen E. Deering, Proc. INET &#x27;95. Internet Society. May 10, 1995

===Historical clients===
*LBNL&#x27;s tools
*MICE&#x27;s tools
*Telecom Paristech (ex-ENST Paris)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1751330" start="0" end="5" title="Mbone" label="Mbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q899288" start="23" end="32" title="multicast" label="multicast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142907" start="69" end="77" title="Backbone network" label="backbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331985" start="82" end="97" title="Overlay network" label="virtual network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711392" start="140" end="152" title="IP multicast" label="IP multicast"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="168" end="176" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="299" end="305" title="Router (computing)" label="router"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539951" start="529" end="541" title="Van Jacobson" label="Van Jacobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498901" start="543" end="556" title="Steve Deering" label="Steve Deering"/>
<link wikidata="Q111649024" start="609" end="623" title="Allison Mankin" label="Allison Mankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975692" start="819" end="868" title="Wax or the Discovery of Television Among the Bees" label="Wax or the Discovery of Television Among the Bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457843" start="1004" end="1022" title="Severe Tire Damage (band)" label="Severe Tire Damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537291" start="1089" end="1103" title="Sky Cries Mary" label="Sky Cries Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265724" start="1198" end="1210" title="Deth Specula" label="Deth Specula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="1277" end="1291" title="Rolling Stones" label="Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136764" start="1307" end="1318" title="Cotton Bowl (stadium)" label="Cotton Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="1322" end="1328" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="1408" end="1419" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123142" start="1866" end="1883" title="Poietic Generator" label="Poietic Generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="1923" end="1929" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056751" start="1949" end="1962" title="McMurdo Sound" label="McMurdo Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="1983" end="1993" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="2127" end="2147" title="video teleconference" label="video teleconference"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="2230" end="2255" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q873660" start="2361" end="2370" title="Internet2" label="Internet2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624522" start="2378" end="2393" title="Abilene Network" label="Abilene Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="2639" end="2670" title="Internet Engineering Task Force" label="Internet Engineering Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711392" start="3074" end="3086" title="IP multicast" label="IP multicast"/>
<link wikidata="Q957589" start="3107" end="3114" title="Tunneling protocol" label="tunnels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3258" end="3282" title="Classful network#Classes" label="class D IP address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156927" start="3324" end="3341" title="Multicast address" label="multicast traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q145490" start="3418" end="3426" title="Network topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q25552104" start="3445" end="3449" title="Mesh network" label="mesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q841749" start="3454" end="3458" title="Star network" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="3470" end="3480" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229379" start="3513" end="3518" title="Distance Vector Multicast Routing Protocol" label="DVMRP"/>
<link wikidata="Q220169" start="3520" end="3525" title="Multicast Open Shortest Path First" label="MOSPF"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3528" end="3548" title="session registration" label="session registration"/>
<link wikidata="Q14149" start="3550" end="3554" title="Internet Group Management Protocol" label="IGMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="3636" end="3653" title="Videoconferencing" label="Videoconferencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148249" start="3703" end="3708" title="H.261" label="H.261"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3710" end="3715" title="CellB" label="CellB"/>
<link wikidata="Q11273" start="3717" end="3721" title="MPEG" label="MPEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q850954" start="3723" end="3728" title="mJPEG" label="mJPEG"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3732" end="3749" title="Audioconferencing" label="Audioconferencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826438" start="3795" end="3798" title="Linear predictive coding" label="LPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q311989" start="3800" end="3804" title="PCMU" label="PCMU"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3806" end="3810" title="DVI4" label="DVI4"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="3812" end="3815" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16354" start="3819" end="3829" title="Whiteboard" label="Whiteboard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3862" end="3879" title="Session Directory" label="Session Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123142" start="3908" end="3925" title="Poietic Generator" label="Poietic Generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711392" start="3943" end="3951" title="CastGate" label="CastGate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544127" wikidata="Q7451790" url="?curid=544127" title="Separate school">
<text>In Canada, a separate school is a type of school that has constitutional status in three provinces (Ontario, Alberta and Saskatchewan) and statutory status in the three territories (Northwest Territories, Yukon and Nunavut). In these Canadian jurisdictions, a separate school is one operated by a civil authority—a separate school board—with a mandate enshrined in the Canadian Constitution (for the three provinces) or in federal statutes (for the three territories). In these six jurisdictions a civil electorate, composed of the members of the minority faith, elects separate school trustees according to the province&#x27;s or territory&#x27;s local authorities election legislation. These trustees are legally accountable to their electorate and to the provincial or territorial government. No church has a constitutional, legal, or proprietary interest in a separate school.

The constitutionally provided mandate of a separate school jurisdiction and of a separate school is to provide education in a school setting that the separate school board considers reflective of Roman Catholic (or, rarely, Protestant) theology, doctrine, and practices. This mandate can manifest itself in the Program of Studies and the curriculum, exercises and practices, and staffing. The limits of this mandate are determined by the application of the &quot;Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms&quot;, and judicial decisions.

The different experience in Ontario as compared to Alberta and Saskatchewan is principally the result of the same constitutional provisions having effect on settlement at different stages in Canadian history.

The Constitution of Canada does not establish separate school education as a natural or unconditional right available to all. Only Protestants or Roman Catholics, whichever is the minority faith population compared to the other in a community, can consider the establishment of separate school education. The separate school establishment right is not available to citizens of any other faith (such as Orthodox Christians, Jews, Mormons, Muslims, Hindus or Sikhs). In addition, the minority faith must establish that they wish to leave the public school system and create a separate school system.

== Historical background ==
When France&#x27;s colonies in North America were conquered by Britain during the 18th century, British authorities were faced with the dilemma of ruling over a large Roman Catholic community. This was significant, as Catholic-Protestant violence in England and Ireland had been nearly constant since the beginning of the English Reformation. Since the Glorious Revolution of 1688, however, Protestantism had been the official religion of the British state as evidenced by the Act of Settlement 1701 which forbade Catholics to become monarch. This was the beginning of a long period of anti-Catholic laws and policies in the British Empire, most famously expressed through the Irish &quot;Penal&quot; Laws. In the case of the New World French there was also the fear that the new population was potentially more loyal to a foreign king, that of France, than to Britain.

The first French colony to fall to the British was Acadia on the Atlantic coast in 1713 (invaded in 1710). Here the problem of dealing with a French Catholic community was solved through the simple but brutal method of expulsion. The Expulsion of the Acadians of 1755 saw some 12,000 Acadians killed and/or forcibly resettled to the Thirteen Colonies, Louisiana, France, England, etc. Some later returned, but their land and villages had been given away to Anglo-Protestant settlers. However, the trigger for expulsion was about the fear that Acadians would side with France during the &quot;French and Indian War&quot; (1754–1760/1763).

When the much larger colony of Canada fell in 1763 (Quebec City invaded in 1759, Montreal in 1760), deportation was seen as less practical. Instead British officials promised to allow French Canadians to keep their religion and customs:

This guarantee was later threatened on several occasions by assimilationist legislation such as the Royal Proclamation of 1763, but this was largely reversed by the Quebec Act 1774.

After the American Revolution, the new colony was flooded with Anglo-Protestant refugees. The colony was then divided by Constitutional Act of 1791, with the Anglican Church becoming the established religion in Upper Canada (now Ontario) while Lower Canada remained legally secular but dominated by the Catholic church. Inevitably, some people ended up on the &quot;wrong&quot; side of this division, with a French Catholic minority in Upper Canada and an Anglo-Protestant minority in Lower Canada. Schools of the era were almost entirely parochial schools controlled by the various churches. Only when government mandated standardization and public funding for education were introduced did this then become a political issue. By the time of Confederation in 1867, the majority of Catholics in Upper Canada were of Irish extraction as well as English speaking.

In the 1840s Methodist minister and Reformist politician Egerton Ryerson championed &quot;common schools&quot; that would educate the children of all faiths under one system. He became Chief Superintendent of Education for Upper Canada in 1844. However, Ryerson was not able to convince the Catholic minority and grudgingly agreed to clauses in his education reforms that allowed for minority-faith schools within the publicly funded system. The Catholic case was strengthened by the fact that the Protestant minority in Lower Canada had already won the right to a separate system.

The institutionalization of separate schools in Canada West (Upper Canada before 1840) was secured by the &quot;Scott Act&quot; of 1863, but with the caveat that rural Catholic schools could only serve an area with a radius of .

In the Maritime provinces, similar issues were at play. 

In New Brunswick under the Parish Schools Act of 1858, there was only loose supervision from the central board of education, and in practice each school was run independently by its board of trustees, and most schools boards were dominated by partisans from one religion or another. Textbooks were not standardized; Protestant-majority regions used the textbooks of the Irish National Schools while the English-speaking Catholic areas used the books of the Irish Christian Brothers. The few Acadian schools used French-language textbooks from Canada East (Lower Canada).

== The 1867 Constitution ==
These pre-existing rights for tax-funded minority faith schools were then part of the constitutional negotiations surrounding Canadian Confederation in the 1860s. At the Confederation conferences, Roman Catholic Archbishop Connolly of Halifax argued for separate Catholic and Protestant school systems across the entire federation, administered by the central government. This was forcefully rejected by French Canadian delegates from Canada East, who demanded provincial control over education. The compromise was section 93 of the &quot;Constitution Act, 1867&quot; which allows the federal government to intervene only to protect minority schools which are established after Confederation. Apart from that caveat, section 93 provides that education is a matter of exclusive provincial jurisdiction.

== Continuing application of Constitutional settlement ==
The relevant provision for Ontario is s. 93(1) of the &quot;Constitution Act, 1867&quot; as originally enacted. For Alberta and Saskatchewan, the relevant provision is s. 93(1), as amended by the &quot;Alberta Act&quot; and the &quot;Saskatchewan Act&quot;, respectively.

As held by the Supreme Court of Canada in &quot;Adler v. Ontario&quot;, the provincial education power under section 93 of the &quot;Constitution Act, 1867&quot; is plenary, and is not subject to &quot;Charter&quot; attack. As Iacobucci J. noted, it is the product of a historical compromise crucial to Confederation and forms a comprehensive code with respect to denominational school rights which cannot be enlarged through the operation of s. 2(a) of the &quot;Charter&quot;. It does not represent a guarantee of fundamental freedoms.

Section 93 of the &quot;Constitution Act, 1867&quot; only applies to provinces, not territories. Instead, the right to separate schools is protected in the three territories by the federal Acts of Parliament which establish those three territories. The &quot;Northwest Territories Act&quot;, the &quot;Yukon Act&quot; and the &quot;Nunavut Act&quot; all provide that the territorial legislatures can legislate with respect to education, provided they respect the right of religious minorities (whether Protestant or Roman Catholic) to establish separate schools.

== Ontario ==
School boards funded by the province consist of 29 English Catholic and 8 French Catholic boards, as well as 35 non-denominational public school boards (31 English public, 4 French public). There is one Protestant separate school jurisdiction in Ontario, the Burkevale Protestant Separate School, operated by the Penetanguishene Protestant Separate School Board. In Ontario, this determination was largely made throughout the province by the time of Confederation.

The public school system in the province was historically Protestant but was gradually transformed into a secular public system. Prayer in public schools was banned in the late 1980s by a decision of the Ontario Court of Appeal.

Since the 19th century, funding for the Roman Catholic separate school system was provided up to Grade 10 under the British North America (BNA) Act. In 1984, the government of Premier William Davis extended full funding to include the last three (Grades 11–13 (OAC)) years of Roman Catholic secondary schools after having rejected that proposal fifteen years earlier. The first funded academic year occurred in 1985–86, as grade 11, and one grade was added in each of the next two years.

The right to have a publicly funded separate denominational school system continues to be guaranteed to Roman Catholics in Ontario by s. 93 of the &quot;Constitution Act, 1867&quot;.

The issue of extending public funding to other religious schools was raised by the Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario in the 2007 Ontario general election; however they lost the election and the issue was not raised again in the subsequent election.

== Alberta and Saskatchewan ==

In Alberta and Saskatchewan, the extent of separate school education is more limited, and Protestant separate schools are slightly more present. For example, in Alberta, about 40% of the land area of the province is included in separate school jurisdictions and there are two Protestant Separate School Districts, in the City of St. Albert (St. Albert Protestant Separate School District) and in the Town of St. Paul (Glen Avon Protestant Separate School District). One anomaly of the system is that the Town of Morinville has only a public Catholic high school (part of the Greater St. Albert Catholic Regional Division), and no secular or Protestant high schools of any kind.

In Alberta and Saskatchewan, there continues to be large areas of the province where separate school education has never been established. In these two provinces, there is a clear and well-known process for determining the wishes of the members of the minority faith.

In Alberta, for example, the geographic basis for separate school establishment is the underlying public school district. At any time, three or more residents, either Protestant or Roman Catholic, who believe that they are members of the minority faith locally, can initiate the process. A census must be conducted to confirm that they are, in fact, the minority faith locally. When the census confirms minority status, a meeting must be widely advertised. The purpose of meeting is to provide a venue at which all of the local members of the minority faith can debate the pros and cons of leaving the public school jurisdiction and creating a separate school district. At the end of the meeting, a vote may be held on the question of establishment.

If the majority of the minority vote in favour of establishment, the establishment becomes a fact. If the majority of the minority vote against establishment, it does not proceed. The process is civil, democratic, and binding on the minority of the minority. A decision at the meeting against establishment precludes a number of the minority faith who may have favoured establishment from continuing for themselves. (At the same time, any decision against establishment has no term: proponents can begin almost immediately to organize a subsequent effort.)

In Alberta, wherever a separate school system exists, individuals who are of the minority faith that established the separate school system must be residents, electors, and ratepayers of the separate school system (the Schmidt decision). There is no way by which they could opt to be supporters of the public school system except by leaving the minority faith. In Saskatchewan and Ontario, members of the minority faith may choose to be supporters of the public school system, notwithstanding their faith.

== Other provinces ==

Retention of separate school boards with public funding was a major issue of contention in the negotiations that led to Canadian confederation, chiefly as a result of ethnic and religious tension between the (largely French-speaking) Roman Catholic population in Canada and the Protestant majority. The issue was a subject of debate at the 1864 Quebec Conference and was finally resolved at the London Conference of 1866 with a proposal to preserve the separate school systems in Quebec and Ontario. The way in which this agreement was written into the British North America Act, 1867 was to the effect that the condition of education in each colony (or territory) at the time it entered Confederation would be continued thereafter.

Consequently, the provinces of British Columbia, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island have never had an education system that included &quot;separate schools&quot;.

Up until 1997 the Quebec education system was also separated, with Protestant and Catholic school boards. The system was replaced by a linguistically based secular school system, after the passage of a constitutional amendment

The province of Newfoundland and Labrador had a separate school system until 1997. At the time that the Dominion of Newfoundland joined Canada on March 31, 1949, the Newfoundland schools were all organized on a confessional basis with separate denominational schools for Roman Catholics, Seventh-day Adventists, Salvationists, Pentecostals, and an integrated stream which oversaw the schooling for children of many members of so-called &quot;mainstream&quot; Protestant denominations. All of these schools received grants from the provincial government for their operation. Ownership of the schools ranged from parochial (owned and operated directly by a church) to ownership and operation by a separate not-for-profit society. The constitutional obligation on the province to maintain this system of confessional schools was eliminated by the &quot;Constitution Amendment, 1998 (Newfoundland Act)&quot;, following a provincial referendum in 1997. The province then established a single non-denominational public school system.

== Controversy ==

The question of separate schools has been most controversial in Ontario and Manitoba. In the former, the issue of separate schools aggravated tensions between anglophones and francophones, both Protestant and Catholic. The ending of public support for separate schools in the latter province in the 1890s prompted a national crisis known as the Manitoba Schools Question, and led to Pope Leo XIII&#x27;s papal encyclical &quot;Affari Vos&quot;.

Separate school rights have often been criticized as contrary to the spirit of official multiculturalism, primarily, but not exclusively, because only adherents of the Protestant or Roman Catholic faith have these constitutional rights and only in some provinces and territories. In addition, where separate school systems exist, employees or prospective employees who are of the minority faith have more employment opportunities. (All other things being equal, a member of the minority faith can be employed by either the public board or by the separate board, while anyone else can be excluded from employment by the separate system.) On November 5, 1999, the United Nations Human Rights Committee condemned Canada and Ontario for having violated the equality provisions (Article 26) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The Committee restated its concerns on November 2, 2005, when it published its Concluding Observations regarding Canada&#x27;s fifth periodic report under the Covenant. The Committee observed that Canada had failed to &quot;adopt steps in order to eliminate discrimination on the basis of religion in the funding of schools in Ontario.&quot;

Opposition to publicly funded separate schools continues in all three provinces where it remains, but most notably in Ontario, where court cases (see Reva Landau) and long-standing, organized opposition groups (OneSchoolSystem.org and Civil Rights in Public Education) continue to actively seek to end or limit public funding for Catholic schools.

==See also==

*Education in Canada
*Education in Quebec
*Education in Ontario

== References ==
==External links==
*International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
*OneSchoolSystem.org
*Significant Events in the History of Catholic Education (in Ontario)
*Canada&#x27;s Human Rights History</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7451790" start="13" end="28" title="Separate school" label="separate school"/>
<link wikidata="Q11206" start="58" end="79" title="constitutional law" label="constitutional status"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="100" end="107" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="109" end="116" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="121" end="133" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="139" end="155" title="statutory law" label="statutory status"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007" start="182" end="203" title="Northwest Territories" label="Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="205" end="210" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023" start="215" end="222" title="Nunavut" label="Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q399541" start="324" end="336" title="school board" label="school board"/>
<link wikidata="Q899061" start="369" end="390" title="Canadian Constitution" label="Canadian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="504" end="514" title="electoral district" label="electorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="547" end="555" title="minority group" label="minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="556" end="561" title="religion" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q399541" start="579" end="593" title="school trustee" label="school trustee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="812" end="826" title="constitutional" label="constitutional"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="838" end="849" title=":wikt:proprietary" label="proprietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="941" end="953" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1078" end="1092" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="1106" end="1116" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q207137" start="1220" end="1230" title="curriculum" label="curriculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q784786" start="1345" end="1384" title="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="1445" end="1452" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="2029" end="2048" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995" start="2050" end="2054" title="Jews in Canada" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722891" start="2056" end="2063" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Canada" label="Mormons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022915" start="2065" end="2072" title="Islam in Canada" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766557" start="2074" end="2080" title="Hinduism in Canada" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483773" start="2084" end="2089" title="Sikhism in Canada" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="2259" end="2298" title="New France" label="France&amp;#x27;s colonies in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645505" start="2576" end="2595" title="English Reformation" label="English Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="2607" end="2626" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q316537" start="2731" end="2753" title="Act of Settlement 1701" label="Act of Settlement 1701"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774132" start="2840" end="2893" title="Anti-Catholicism in the United Kingdom" label="anti-Catholic laws and policies in the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738523" start="2931" end="2959" title="Penal Laws (Ireland)" label="Irish &amp;quot;Penal&amp;quot; Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q207353" start="3176" end="3182" title="Acadia" label="Acadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723587" start="3359" end="3384" title="Expulsion of the Acadians" label="Expulsion of the Acadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="3717" end="3738" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569593" start="3795" end="3801" title="Canada (New France)" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="3816" end="3827" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="3845" end="3853" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q209573" start="4102" end="4128" title="Royal Proclamation of 1763" label="Royal Proclamation of 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q764479" start="4167" end="4182" title="Quebec Act 1774" label="Quebec Act 1774"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="4195" end="4214" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090855" start="4306" end="4332" title="Constitutional Act of 1791" label="Constitutional Act of 1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="4372" end="4392" title="established religion" label="established religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="5061" end="5070" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760029" start="5084" end="5093" title="Reform Party (pre-Confederation)" label="Reformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347788" start="5105" end="5120" title="Egerton Ryerson" label="Egerton Ryerson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5743" end="5752" title="Scott Act (1863)" label="Scott Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258024" start="6289" end="6311" title="Irish National Schools" label="Irish National Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q783988" start="6376" end="6400" title="Irish Christian Brothers" label="Irish Christian Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525368" start="6731" end="6761" title="Archbishop Connolly of Halifax" label="Archbishop Connolly of Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q868884" start="7058" end="7080" title="Constitution Act, 1867" label="Constitution Act, 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711569" start="7582" end="7593" title="Alberta Act" label="Alberta Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425176" start="7614" end="7630" title="Saskatchewan Act" label="Saskatchewan Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="7668" end="7691" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683293" start="7701" end="7717" title="Adler v. Ontario" label="Adler v. Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204535" start="7818" end="7825" title="plenary power" label="plenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="7956" end="7969" title="Confederation" label="Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237872" start="8169" end="8189" title="fundamental freedoms" label="fundamental freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8829" end="8837" title="Roman Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="8901" end="8914" title="Public school (government funded)" label="public school"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="8973" end="8983" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162615" start="9029" end="9065" title="Burkevale Protestant Separate School" label="Burkevale Protestant Separate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162615" start="9083" end="9131" title="Penetanguishene Protestant Separate School Board" label="Penetanguishene Protestant Separate School Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q919906" start="9582" end="9613" title="British North America Act" label="British North America (BNA) Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q862052" start="9650" end="9663" title="Bill Davis" label="William Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094589" start="9727" end="9730" title="Ontario Academic Credit" label="OAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q826977" start="10222" end="10263" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario" label="Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q602020" start="10271" end="10300" title="2007 Ontario general election" label="2007 Ontario general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q939127" start="10750" end="10768" title="St. Albert, Alberta" label="City of St. Albert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10770" end="10816" title="St. Albert Protestant Separate School District" label="St. Albert Protestant Separate School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745995" start="10837" end="10845" title="St. Paul, Alberta" label="St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10847" end="10892" title="Glen Avon Protestant Separate School District" label="Glen Avon Protestant Separate School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746026" start="10941" end="10951" title="Morinville" label="Morinville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600760" start="11004" end="11049" title="Greater St. Albert Catholic Regional Division" label="Greater St. Albert Catholic Regional Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431812" start="12905" end="12921" title="Schmidt decision" label="Schmidt decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="13336" end="13358" title="Canadian confederation" label="Canadian confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="13494" end="13504" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q824689" start="13556" end="13578" title="Quebec Conference, 1864" label="1864 Quebec Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q655418" start="13611" end="13636" title="London Conference of 1866" label="London Conference of 1866"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="13696" end="13702" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="13707" end="13714" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q919906" start="13769" end="13794" title="British North America Act" label="British North America Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="13981" end="13997" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="13999" end="14012" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="14014" end="14025" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="14031" end="14051" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509266" start="14150" end="14173" title="Quebec education system" label="Quebec education system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458253" start="14334" end="14358" title="Amendments to the Constitution of Canada" label="constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="14376" end="14401" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q38610" start="14464" end="14488" title="Dominion of Newfoundland" label="Dominion of Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="14631" end="14646" title="Roman Catholics" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="14648" end="14670" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventists"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="14672" end="14685" title="Salvation Army" label="Salvationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="14687" end="14699" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostals"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="15288" end="15298" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="15472" end="15479" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="15484" end="15492" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="15567" end="15578" title="English-speaking" label="anglophones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030788" start="15583" end="15595" title="francophones" label="francophones"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="15602" end="15612" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="15617" end="15625" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538672" start="15753" end="15778" title="Manitoba Schools Question" label="Manitoba Schools Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="15791" end="15804" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q221409" start="15812" end="15828" title="papal encyclical" label="papal encyclical"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="15942" end="15958" title="multiculturalism" label="multiculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="16516" end="16530" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q770764" start="16531" end="16553" title="Human Rights Committee" label="Human Rights Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q392119" start="16647" end="16699" title="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" label="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251556" start="17408" end="17427" title="Education in Canada" label="Education in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509266" start="17429" end="17448" title="Education in Quebec" label="Education in Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341110" start="17450" end="17470" title="Education in Ontario" label="Education in Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544138" wikidata="Q228506" url="?curid=544138" title="Guadalupe County">
<text>Guadalupe County is the name of several counties in the United States:

* Guadalupe County, New Mexico 
* Guadalupe County, Texas</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q484290" start="74" end="102" title="Guadalupe County, New Mexico" label="Guadalupe County, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q26610" start="106" end="129" title="Guadalupe County, Texas" label="Guadalupe County, Texas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544139" wikidata="Q228784" url="?curid=544139" title="Grundy County">
<text>Grundy County is the name of four counties in the United States, all named in honor of Felix Grundy:

* Grundy County, Illinois 
* Grundy County, Iowa 
* Grundy County, Missouri 
* Grundy County, Tennessee</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="34" end="42" title="County_(United_States)" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375704" start="87" end="99" title="Felix Grundy" label="Felix Grundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q261380" start="104" end="127" title="Grundy County, Illinois" label="Grundy County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q486139" start="131" end="150" title="Grundy County, Iowa" label="Grundy County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q490395" start="154" end="177" title="Grundy County, Missouri" label="Grundy County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q502386" start="181" end="205" title="Grundy County, Tennessee" label="Grundy County, Tennessee"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544143" wikidata="Q5606864" url="?curid=544143" title="Gregory County">
<text>Gregory County may refer to:
* Gregory County, South Dakota, United States
* Gregory County, New South Wales, Australia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q495234" start="31" end="59" title="Gregory County, South Dakota" label="Gregory County, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606863" start="77" end="108" title="Gregory County, New South Wales" label="Gregory County, New South Wales"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544146" wikidata="Q2085751" url="?curid=544146" title="Inglewood, New Zealand">
<text>Inglewood is a town in the Taranaki Region of New Zealand&#x27;s North Island. It is southeast of New Plymouth on State Highway 3, close to Mount Taranaki, and sits above sea level. The town services a mainly dairy farming region.

==History==

The settlement was founded in 1873 and was originally called Moatown. The name was then changed to Milton, before ultimately being renamed to Inglewood in 1875 to avoid confusion with Milton in the South Island.

The railway reached Inglewood in 1877, connecting it with New Plymouth as part of the first extension of what is now the Marton–New Plymouth line.

Until 1991, Inglewood was home to the Moa-Nui Co-operative Dairies factory (which was the fourth largest dairy factory in New Zealand) before it was shut down in favour of centralised processing near Hāwera.

From 1949 until the late 1980s, Inglewood was home to Fun Ho! Toys, a manufacturer of collectible die cast metal toys and one of New Zealand&#x27;s largest toy companies. The factory shut down in 1987 but a museum in the town still exists with over 3000 toys on display.

Despite its small population, the town has gained notoriety from a string of violent crimes which tend toward the gruesome, bizarre and barbaric. A 2015 book by the anthropologist Michael D. Jackson refers to &quot;Inglewood&#x27;s violent past&quot; and &quot;the popular claim that Inglewood is the &#x27;murder capital&#x27; and &#x27;psychopathic centre&#x27; of New Zealand&quot;.

A number of buildings are listed by Heritage New Zealand. The Railway Station and Yard is listed as Category I. The Shoe Store Building on the corner of Rata and Richmond Streets is one of eight listed as Category II.

===Marae===

Te Kōhanga Moa Marae is located in Inglewood. It features the Matamua meeting house, and is affiliated with the Te Āti Awa hapū of Pukerangiora.

In October 2020, the Government committed $817,845 from the Provincial Growth Fund to upgrade it and Muru Raupatu marae, creating 15 jobs.

==Demographics==
Inglewood covers and had an estimated population of as of with a population density of people per km2.
Before the 2023 census, the town had a smaller boundary, covering . Using that boundary, Inglewood had a population of 3,543 at the 2018 New Zealand census, an increase of 300 people (9.3%) since the 2013 census, and an increase of 456 people (14.8%) since the 2006 census. There were 1,404 households, comprising 1,707 males and 1,836 females, giving a sex ratio of 0.93 males per female. The median age was 38.4 years (compared with 37.4 years nationally), with 741 people (20.9%) aged under 15 years, 654 (18.5%) aged 15 to 29, 1,503 (42.4%) aged 30 to 64, and 648 (18.3%) aged 65 or older.

Ethnicities were 91.1% European/Pākehā, 14.4% Māori, 2.3% Pacific peoples, 2.5% Asian, and 1.6% other ethnicities. People may identify with more than one ethnicity.

The percentage of people born overseas was 11.6, compared with 27.1% nationally.

Although some people chose not to answer the census&#x27;s question about religious affiliation, 55.9% had no religion, 33.3% were Christian, 0.3% had Māori religious beliefs, 0.4% were Hindu, 0.1% were Muslim, 0.1% were Buddhist and 1.4% had other religions.

Of those at least 15 years old, 312 (11.1%) people had a bachelor&#x27;s or higher degree, and 738 (26.3%) people had no formal qualifications. The median income was $29,300, compared with $31,800 nationally. 339 people (12.1%) earned over $70,000 compared to 17.2% nationally. The employment status of those at least 15 was that 1,371 (48.9%) people were employed full-time, 414 (14.8%) were part-time, and 96 (3.4%) were unemployed.

==Education==

Inglewood has a number of coeducational schools.

Inglewood High School is a secondary (years 9–13) school with a roll of . The school was established in 1957.

Inglewood Primary School and St Patrick&#x27;s School are full primary (years 1–8) schools with rolls of and , respectively. Inglewood Primary School was founded in 1875. St Patrick&#x27;s is a state integrated Catholic school.

Rolls are as of 

==Notable people==
Inglewood has produced four All Blacks (John Major, Handley Brown, Dave &quot;Trapper&quot; Loveridge, Chris Masoe), and a leading contemporary artist, Michael Stevenson, who represented New Zealand at the 2003 Venice Biennale.

Other notable people include:
* Fleur Beale (; born 1945), fiction writer
* Henry Brown (1842–1921), sawmiller and Member of the House of Representatives (1896–1899)
* Fiona Clark (born 1954), photographer
* Harry Kerr (1879–1951), athlete
* Margaret Sparrow (born 1935), medical doctor and reproductive rights activist
* Ben Hana a.k.a. Blanket Man (1957–2012), Wellington identity, famous for wearing only a blanket
* Bill Sullivan (1891–1967), politician

==References==
==Further reading==

===General historical works===
:*
:*
:*
:*
:*
:*

===Arts and literature===
:*

===Business history===
:*

===Churches===

Anglican
:*

Catholic

Methodist

===Clubs and organisations===
:*
:*

===Environment===

===Maps===

NOTE: Scale = 1: 12 500

NOTE: Scale = 1: 15 000

NOTE: Scale = 1: 15 000

===People===
:*
:*
:*

===Schools===
:*
:*
:*

== External links ==
* Inglewood - Community Website.
* Inglewood High School website
* Fun Ho! Toy Museum and Factory</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2085751" start="0" end="9" title="Inglewood, New Zealand" label="Inglewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q140207" start="27" end="42" title="Taranaki Region" label="Taranaki Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="65" end="77" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q212984" start="98" end="110" title="New Plymouth" label="New Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983365" start="114" end="129" title="New Zealand State Highway 3" label="State Highway 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q850051" start="140" end="154" title="Mount Taranaki" label="Mount Taranaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q203424" start="429" end="435" title="Milton, New Zealand" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="443" end="455" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q212984" start="516" end="528" title="New Plymouth" label="New Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777310" start="579" end="603" title="Marton–New Plymouth line" label="Marton–New Plymouth line"/>
<link wikidata="Q998452" start="806" end="812" title="Hāwera" label="Hāwera"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875651" start="869" end="881" title="Fun Ho! Toys" label="Fun Ho! Toys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831555" start="1267" end="1285" title="Michael Jackson (anthropologist)" label="Michael D. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q277375" start="1510" end="1530" title="Heritage New Zealand" label="Heritage New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691049" start="1818" end="1828" title="Te Āti Awa" label="Te Āti Awa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691049" start="1837" end="1849" title="Pukerangiora" label="Pukerangiora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488117" start="1912" end="1934" title="Provincial Growth Fund" label="Provincial Growth Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883122" start="1953" end="1965" title="Muru Raupatu" label="Muru Raupatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637539" start="2244" end="2267" title="2018 New Zealand census" label="2018 New Zealand census"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189861" start="2312" end="2323" title="2013 New Zealand census" label="2013 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015254" start="2373" end="2384" title="2006 New Zealand census" label="2006 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250849" start="2739" end="2745" title="Pākehā" label="Pākehā"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="2753" end="2758" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951548" start="2765" end="2780" title="Pasifika New Zealanders" label="Pacific peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467330" start="2787" end="2792" title="Asian New Zealanders" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116486" start="3086" end="3095" title="Christianity in New Zealand" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950631" start="3106" end="3129" title="Religion of Māori people" label="Māori religious beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821145" start="3141" end="3146" title="Hinduism in New Zealand" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q152997" start="3158" end="3164" title="Islam in New Zealand" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q28174275" start="3176" end="3184" title="Buddhism in New Zealand" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q25338945" start="3717" end="3738" title="Inglewood High School, New Zealand" label="Inglewood High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q55801" start="4122" end="4132" title="All Blacks" label="All Blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q47546458" start="4134" end="4144" title="John Major (rugby union)" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q21069933" start="4146" end="4159" title="Handley Brown" label="Handley Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017192" start="4161" end="4195" title="Dave Loveridge" label="Dave &amp;quot;Trapper&amp;quot; Loveridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q609538" start="4197" end="4208" title="Chris Masoe" label="Chris Masoe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4246" end="4263" title="Michael Stevenson (artist)" label="Michael Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458863" start="4355" end="4366" title="Fleur Beale" label="Fleur Beale"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053707" start="4399" end="4410" title="Henry Brown (New Zealand politician)" label="Henry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q45763152" start="4491" end="4502" title="Fiona Clark (photographer)" label="Fiona Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q982602" start="4531" end="4541" title="Harry Kerr (racewalker)" label="Harry Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q17180967" start="4565" end="4581" title="Margaret Sparrow" label="Margaret Sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885781" start="4645" end="4653" title="Ben Hana" label="Ben Hana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911057" start="4743" end="4756" title="Bill Sullivan (politician)" label="Bill Sullivan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544147" wikidata="Q228950" url="?curid=544147" title="Greenwood County">
<text>Greenwood County is the name of two counties in the United States:

* Greenwood County, Kansas 
* Greenwood County, South Carolina

==See also==
* Greenwood (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q228950" start="0" end="16" title="Greenwood County" label="Greenwood County"/>
<link wikidata="Q375008" start="70" end="94" title="Greenwood County, Kansas" label="Greenwood County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q502278" start="98" end="130" title="Greenwood County, South Carolina" label="Greenwood County, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q233791" start="147" end="173" title="Greenwood (disambiguation)" label="Greenwood (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544151" wikidata="Q508376" url="?curid=544151" title="Gibraltar Football Association">
<text>The Gibraltar Football Association or also Gibraltar FA (GFA) is the governing body for Gibraltarian football and futsal. It was formed as the &quot;Gibraltar Civilian Football Association&quot; in 1895, changing to its current name in later years. It is one of the oldest football associations in the world. From October 2012, the GFA were provisional members of UEFA and the Gibraltar national futsal team, under-19 and under-17 representative teams participated in the 2013/14 UEFA season competitions. At the XXXVII UEFA Congress held in London on 24 May 2013, Gibraltar was accepted as a full member of UEFA. Gibraltar were admitted to FIFA as a full member on 13 May 2016 at the 66th FIFA Congress in Mexico.

==History==

The GFA was formed as an increasing number of football clubs were coming into existence in Gibraltar, and the association was designed to bring some form of organisation to the game there. Between the association&#x27;s formation and 1907 the only football competition in Gibraltar was the &quot;Merchant&#x27;s Cup&quot;. However, in 1907 the GFA established a league to complement the existing cup competition.

By 1901 the GFA had established a representative national team, competing against British military teams. This representative team continued to play down the years, their highlight probably being a draw against Real Madrid in 1949.

===UEFA/FIFA application===
The GFA affiliated with The Football Association in 1909, and became a full member of FIFA in 2016 allowing its national team to compete in all international competitions. This attempt was met with fierce opposition from the Royal Spanish Football Federation but was ratified on 13 May 2016 at the 66th FIFA Congress in Mexico.

The GFA&#x27;s application to become a member of FIFA was filed in 1997. Two years later, FIFA confirmed the opening of the procedure and forwarded the GFA application to the appropriate continental confederation, UEFA, since according to FIFA statutes it is the responsibility of confederations to grant membership status to applicants. In 2000, a joint delegation of UEFA and FIFA conducted an inspection on the GFA&#x27;s facilities and infrastructure. The Spanish FA strongly opposed the GFA&#x27;s application. In 2001, UEFA changed its statutes so that only associations in a country &quot;recognised by the United Nations as an independent State&quot; could become members. On such grounds, UEFA denied the GFA&#x27;s application.

Current FIFA and UEFA members include several federations which cannot be said to represent fully independent nations, such as the UK Home Nations (England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales), the Faroe Islands, Guam, Hong Kong, Macau, New Caledonia, Puerto Rico and Tahiti (French Polynesia). Additionally, French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique and Saint Martin each have national teams which, despite not being FIFA members, are allowed to compete at the CONCACAF confederation level. FIFA has also accepted members from other British overseas territories who compete in FIFA World Cup qualification tournaments despite not being sovereign states, including Anguilla, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat and Turks and Caicos Islands.

The GFA appealed to the world&#x27;s highest sporting court, the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS), which in 2003 ruled that the GFA application should be handled according to the old statute. However, UEFA continued to refuse accepting the GFA as member. In August 2006, the CAS ruled again that Gibraltar had to be allowed as a full UEFA and FIFA member, and on 8 December 2006, it was announced that Gibraltar had become a provisional member of UEFA.

However, full membership required a vote of the UEFA membership. Leading up to this vote, the Spanish football federation lobbied against Gibraltar&#x27;s membership. The Federation&#x27;s president Ángel María Villar attributed Spain&#x27;s opposition to the Spanish claim over Gibraltar. He also claimed it was a political issue and referred to the Treaty of Utrecht of 1713. On 26 January 2007 at the UEFA Congress held in Düsseldorf (Germany), Gibraltar&#x27;s application to become a full member of UEFA was rejected, with 45 votes against, 3 in favour (namely, England, Scotland and Wales), and 4 undecided.

===UEFA and FIFA membership approved===

On 21 March 2012 the request for full UEFA membership by Gibraltar was discussed again, and a road map which includes financial and educational support from UEFA was agreed. This road map was to run until the Ordinary UEFA Congress in 2013, when member associations would vote on the request for admission. UEFA&#x27;s Executive Committee admitted the GFA as a provisional member as of 1 October 2012, pending a vote at its Congress in May 2013 to make it a full member.

After the vote at the UEFA Congress held in London on 24 May 2013, Gibraltar was accepted as a full UEFA member. A vote was carried out, a clear majority was found to have voted to admit Gibraltar to UEFA. Two national associations; Belarus and Spain voted against the proposal.

Gibraltar became the smallest UEFA member by population, behind San Marino, then Liechtenstein and the Faroe Islands. Following the example of Armenia and Azerbaijan, Russia and Georgia, it was confirmed that Gibraltar and Spain would be kept apart in qualifying groups in all major tournaments such as the FIFA World Cup and the European Championship (the Euros).

As part of the celebrations for the GFA&#x27;s achievement, a 54p stamp was issued by the Gibraltar Philatelic Bureau commemorating the association becoming the 54th member of UEFA.

On 13 May 2016, Gibraltar was accepted as a member of FIFA with a vote of 172 to 12 in favour. Gibraltar became FIFA&#x27;s 211th member immediately after the Football Federation of Kosovo was voted member 210.

==See also==
* Football in Gibraltar
* Gibraltar national football team

==References==
==External links==

*GFA website
*Gibraltar at FIFA site
*Gibraltar at UEFA site
*Gibraltar&#x27;s historic Four Nations Tournament campaign
*Spanish Football Federation interfering at UEFA 
*BBC report on GFA&#x27;s provisional status entry UEFA</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q508376" start="4" end="34" title="Gibraltar Football Association" label="Gibraltar Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q508376" start="43" end="55" title="Gibraltar Football Association" label="Gibraltar FA"/>
<link wikidata="Q508376" start="57" end="60" title="Gibraltar Football Association" label="GFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485448" start="69" end="83" title="sports governing body" label="governing body"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="88" end="97" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="101" end="109" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q171401" start="114" end="120" title="futsal" label="futsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571050" start="255" end="294" title="List of football associations by date of foundation" label="one of the oldest football associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="364" end="368" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q13652590" start="377" end="407" title="Gibraltar national futsal team" label="Gibraltar national futsal team"/>
<link wikidata="Q96411818" start="520" end="533" title="UEFA Congress" label="UEFA Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="775" end="783" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="820" end="829" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522963" start="1091" end="1097" title="Gibraltar Football League" label="league"/>
<link wikidata="Q583626" start="1192" end="1205" title="Gibraltar national football team" label="national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="1354" end="1365" title="Real Madrid C.F." label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="1428" end="1452" title="The Football Association" label="The Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="1490" end="1494" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q207615" start="1629" end="1662" title="Royal Spanish Football Federation" label="Royal Spanish Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040745" start="2606" end="2618" title="Home Nations" label="Home Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="2620" end="2627" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="2629" end="2645" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="2647" end="2655" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="2660" end="2665" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q200688" start="2668" end="2685" title="Faroe Islands national football team" label="the Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q270203" start="2687" end="2691" title="Guam national football team" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q242119" start="2693" end="2702" title="Hong Kong national football team" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q285708" start="2704" end="2709" title="Macau national football team" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q328295" start="2711" end="2724" title="New Caledonia national football team" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q477452" start="2726" end="2737" title="Puerto Rico national football team" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q239405" start="2742" end="2748" title="Tahiti national football team" label="Tahiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q726592" start="2783" end="2796" title="French Guiana national football team" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q497334" start="2798" end="2808" title="Guadeloupe national football team" label="Guadeloupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q739684" start="2810" end="2820" title="Martinique national football team" label="Martinique"/>
<link wikidata="Q284113" start="2825" end="2837" title="Saint Martin national football team" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160549" start="2932" end="2940" title="CONCACAF" label="CONCACAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q497630" start="3135" end="3143" title="Anguilla national football team" label="Anguilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q497653" start="3145" end="3152" title="Bermuda national football team" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q263708" start="3154" end="3176" title="British Virgin Islands national football team" label="British Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q373462" start="3178" end="3192" title="Cayman Islands national football team" label="Cayman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q497989" start="3194" end="3204" title="Montserrat national football team" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q499287" start="3209" end="3233" title="Turks and Caicos Islands national football team" label="Turks and Caicos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q659499" start="3301" end="3331" title="Court of Arbitration for Sport" label="Court of Arbitration for Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q251805" start="3893" end="3911" title="Ángel María Villar" label="Ángel María Villar"/>
<link wikidata="Q169896" start="3950" end="3982" title="Disputed status of Gibraltar" label="the Spanish claim over Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="4045" end="4062" title="Treaty of Utrecht" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q96411818" start="4098" end="4111" title="UEFA Congress" label="UEFA Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="4120" end="4130" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="4132" end="4139" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="4261" end="4268" title="The Football Association" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q478320" start="4270" end="4278" title="Scottish Football Association" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q275173" start="4283" end="4288" title="Football Association of Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q96411818" start="4568" end="4581" title="UEFA Congress" label="UEFA Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q96411818" start="4844" end="4857" title="UEFA Congress" label="UEFA Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="5166" end="5176" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="5183" end="5196" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="5205" end="5218" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="5409" end="5423" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="5432" end="5453" title="UEFA European Football Championship" label="European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5558" end="5585" title="Gibraltar Philatelic Bureau" label="Gibraltar Philatelic Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493596" start="5878" end="5899" title="Football in Gibraltar" label="Football in Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q583626" start="5902" end="5934" title="Gibraltar national football team" label="Gibraltar national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="6143" end="6146" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="6193" end="6197" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544156" wikidata="Q560747" url="?curid=544156" title="Richard A. Clarke">
<text>Richard Alan Clarke (born October 27, 1950) is an American national security expert, novelist, and former government official. He served as the Counterterrorism Czar for the National Coordinator for Security, Infrastructure Protection, and Counter-Terrorism for the United States between 1998 and 2003.

Clarke worked for the State Department during the presidency of Ronald Reagan. In 1992, President George H. W. Bush appointed him to chair the Counter-terrorism Security Group and to a seat on the United States National Security Council. President Bill Clinton retained Clarke and in 1998 promoted him to be the National Coordinator for Security, Infrastructure Protection, and Counter-terrorism, the chief counter-terrorism adviser on the National Security Council. Under President George W. Bush, Clarke initially continued in the same position but no longer had Cabinet-level access. He was later appointed as Special Advisor to the President on cybersecurity. Clarke left the Bush administration in 2003.

Clarke came to widespread public attention for his counter-terrorism role in March 2004: He published a memoir about his service in government, &quot;Against All Enemies,&quot; appeared on the &quot;60 Minutes&quot; television news magazine, and testified before the 9/11 Commission. In all three cases, Clarke sharply criticized the Bush administration&#x27;s attitude toward counter-terrorism before the September 11 attacks, and its decision afterward to wage war and invade Iraq.

After leaving U.S. government, with U.S. government legal approvals, Clarke helped the United Arab Emirates to set up a cyber security unit intended to protect their nation. Years after Clarke left, some components of the program were acquired by a sequence of firms, and it is reported they eventually surveilled women&#x27;s rights activists, UN diplomats, and FIFA officials.

==Background==
Richard Clarke was born to a worker in a chocolate factory and a nurse in Boston, Massachusetts, in 1950. He attended the Boston Latin School, where he graduated in 1968. He attended college at the University of Pennsylvania, where he received a bachelor&#x27;s degree in 1972. He had been selected to serve in the Sphinx Senior Society.

After starting as a management intern at the U.S. Department of Defense and later working as an analyst on European security issues, Clarke went to graduate school. He earned a master&#x27;s degree in management in 1978 from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

==Government career==
In 1973, Clarke began work in the federal government as a management intern in the Department of Defense. He worked in numerous areas of defense while in headquarters.

From 1979 to 1985, he worked at the Department of State as a career analyst in the Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs. Beginning in 1985, Clarke was appointed by the Ronald Reagan administration as Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Intelligence—his first political appointee position as a Republican Party member.

During the administration of George H. W. Bush, he was appointed as the Assistant Secretary of State for Political-Military Affairs. He coordinated diplomatic efforts to support the 1990–1991 Gulf War and subsequent security arrangements.

Democrat Bill Clinton kept Clarke on in his administration, appointing him in 1998 as National Coordinator for Security, Infrastructure Protection, and Counter-terrorism for the National Security Council. In this position, he had cabinet-level access to the president.

Clarke continued as counter-terrorism coordinator at the NSC during the first year of the George W. Bush administration, but no longer had access, as the position&#x27;s scope was reduced. His written recommendations and memos had to go through layers of political appointees above him. In 2001, he was appointed as Special Advisor to the President on cybersecurity and cyberterrorism. He resigned from the Bush administration in early 2003.

Clarke&#x27;s positions inside the government have included:
* United States Department of State 1985–1992
** Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs, 1989–1992
** Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Intelligence, 1985–1988
* United States National Security Council, 1992–2003
** Special Advisor, 2001–2003
** National Coordinator for Security, Infrastructure Protection, and Counter-terrorism, 1998–2001
** Chairman of the Counter-terrorism Security Group, 1992–2003

===Clinton administration===
During the Rwandan genocide of 1994, Clarke advised Madeleine Albright, then–US Ambassador to the United Nations, to request the UN to withdraw all UN troops from the country. She refused, and permitted Lieutenant-General Roméo Dallaire to keep a few hundred UN troops; his forces saved tens of thousands from the genocide.

Later Clarke told Samantha Power, &quot;It wasn&#x27;t in American&#x27;s national interest. If we had to do the same thing today and I was advising the President, I would advise the same thing.&quot; He supervised the writing of PDD-25, a classified Executive Order that established criteria for future U.S. participation in U.N. peacekeeping operations. It also proposed a reduced military and economic role for the United States in Rwanda.

After Islamists took control in Sudan in a 1989 coup d&#x27;état, the United States had adopted a policy of disengagement with the authoritarian regime throughout the 1990s. After the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, however, some critics charged that the U.S. should have moderated its policy toward Sudan earlier. The influence of Islamists there waned in the second half of the 1990s and Sudanese officials began to indicate an interest in accommodating US concerns related to Osama bin Laden, who lived in Sudan until he was expelled in May 1996 (and was later revealed to be the planner of 9/11.)

Timothy M. Carney, U.S. ambassador to Sudan between September 1995 and November 1997, co-authored an op-ed in 2002 claiming that in 1997, Sudan offered to turn over its intelligence on bin Laden to the US, but that Susan Rice, as National Security Council (NSC) Africa specialist, together with NSC terrorism specialist Richard A. Clarke, successfully lobbied for continuing to bar U.S. officials, including the CIA and FBI, from engaging with the Khartoum government. Similar allegations (that Susan Rice joined others in missing an opportunity to cooperate with Sudan on counter-terrorism) were made by David Rose, &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; contributing editor, and Richard Miniter, author of &quot;Losing Bin Laden&quot;.

Clarke was involved in supervising the investigation of Ramzi Yousef, one of the main perpetrators of the 1993 World Trade Center bombing, who had traveled to the United States on an Iraqi passport. Yousef is the nephew of Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, a senior al-Qaeda member. Many in the Clinton administration and the intelligence community believed Yousef&#x27;s ties were evidence linking al-Qaeda&#x27;s activities and the government of Iraq.

In February 1999, Clarke wrote the Deputy National Security Advisor that a reliable source reported Iraqi officials had met with Bin Laden and may have offered him asylum. Clarke advised against surveillance flights to track bin Laden in Afghanistan: he said that anticipating an attack, &quot;old wily Usama will likely boogie to Baghdad,&quot; where he would be impossible to find. That year Clarke told the press in official statements that &quot;Iraqi nerve gas experts&quot; and al-Qaeda were linked to an alleged joint-chemical-weapons-development effort at the Al-Shifa pharmaceutical factory in Sudan.

Michael Scheuer is the former chief of the bin Laden Unit at the Counterterrorist Center at the CIA. Matthew Continetti wrote:

Scheuer believes that Clarke&#x27;s risk aversion and politicking negatively impacted the hunt for bin Laden prior to September 11, 2001. Scheuer stated that his unit, codename &quot;Alec,&quot; had provided information that could have led to the capture and or killing of Osama bin Laden on ten occasions during the Clinton administration, only to have his recommendations for action turned down by senior intelligence officials, including Clarke.

====Operation Orient Express====
In 1996, Clarke entered into a secret pact with Madeleine Albright, then U.S. ambassador to the UN, Michael Sheehan, and James Rubin, to overthrow U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who was running unopposed for a second term in the 1996 selection. They dubbed the pact &quot;Operation Orient Express&quot; to reflect their hope &quot;that many nations would join us in doing in the UN head.&quot; However, every other member of the Security Council voted for Boutros-Ghali. Despite severe criticism, Clarke and Sheehan prevailed upon President Clinton to resist international pressure and continue the US&#x27;s solo veto. After four deadlocked meetings of the Security Council, Boutros-Ghali suspended his candidacy. He is the only U.N. Secretary-General ever to be denied a second term by a Security Council member veto.

The United States fought a four-round veto duel with France, forcing it to back down and accept the selection of US-educated Kofi Annan as the next Secretary-General. In his memoirs, Clarke said that &quot;the entire operation had strengthened Albright&#x27;s hand in the competition to be Secretary of State in the second Clinton administration.&quot;

===Bush administration===
On April 8, 2004, Condoleezza Rice was publicly interviewed by the 9/11 investigatory commission. She discussed Clarke and his communications with the Bush administration regarding bin Laden and associated terrorist plots targeting the United States. Clarke had written a memo dated January 25, 2001, to Rice. He urgently requested a meeting of the NSC&#x27;s Principals Committee to discuss the growing al-Qaeda threat in the greater Middle East, and suggested strategies for combating al-Qaeda that might be adopted by the new Bush administration.

In his memoir, &quot;Against All Enemies&quot;, Clarke wrote that Condoleezza Rice decided that the position of National Coordinator for Counterterrorism should be downgraded. By demoting the office, he believed that the Administration sent a signal to the national security bureaucracy that reduced the salience of terrorism. No longer would Clarke&#x27;s memos go to the President; instead they had to pass through a chain of command of National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice and her deputy Stephen Hadley, who bounced every one of them back.

Within a week of the inauguration, I wrote to Rice and Hadley asking &#x27;urgently&#x27; for a Principals, or Cabinet-level, meeting to review the imminent Al-Qaeda threat. Rice told me that the Principals Committee, which had been the first venue for terrorism policy discussions in the Clinton administration, would not address the issue until it had been &#x27;framed&#x27; by the Deputies.

The 9/11 Commission reported, in its eighth public hearing:
Clarke asked on several occasions for early principals meetings on these issues and was frustrated that no early meeting was scheduled.

No Principals Committee meetings on al-Qaeda were held until September 4th, 2001.

At the first Deputies Committee meeting on terrorism, held in April 2001, Clarke strongly suggested that the U.S. put pressure on both the Taliban and al-Qaeda by arming the Northern Alliance and other groups in Afghanistan. Simultaneously, he said that the US should target bin Laden and his leadership by restoring flights of the MQ-1 Predators. Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz responded, &quot;Well, I just don&#x27;t understand why we are beginning by talking about this one man bin Laden.&quot; Clarke replied that he was talking about bin Laden and his network because it posed &quot;an immediate and serious threat to the United States.&quot; According to Clarke, Wolfowitz turned to him and said, &quot;You give bin Laden too much credit. He could not do all these things like the 1993 attack on New York, not without a state sponsor. Just because the FBI and CIA have failed to find the linkages does not mean they don&#x27;t exist.&quot;

Clarke wrote in &quot;Against All Enemies&quot; that in the summer of 2001, the intelligence community was convinced of an imminent attack by al-Qaeda, but could not get the attention of the highest levels of the Bush administration.
At a July 5, 2001, White House gathering of the FAA, the Coast Guard, the FBI, Secret Service and INS, Clarke said that &quot;something really spectacular is going to happen here, and it&#x27;s going to happen soon.&quot;

===Cyberterrorism and cybersecurity===
Appointed in 2001 as Special Advisor to the President on Cybersecurity, Clarke spent his last year in the Bush administration focusing on cybersecurity and the threat of terrorism against the critical infrastructure of the United States. At a security conference in 2002, after citing statistics that indicated that less than 0.0025 percent of corporate revenue on average is spent on information-technology security, Clarke was heard to say, &quot;If you spend more on coffee than on IT security, then you will be hacked. What&#x27;s more, you deserve to be hacked.&quot;

==9/11 Commission==
On March 24, 2004, Clarke testified at the public 9/11 Commission hearings. He initially offered an apology to the families of 9/11 victims and said: &quot;...your government failed you. Those entrusted with protecting you failed you. And I failed you. We tried hard, but that doesn&#x27;t matter because we failed. And for that failure, I would ask, once all the facts are out, for your understanding and for your forgiveness.&quot;

Clarke&#x27;s testimony during the hearings was consistent with his account in his memoir. Clarke said that before and during the 9/11 crisis, many in the administration were distracted from taking action against Osama bin Laden&#x27;s al-Qaeda organization because of an existing pre-occupation with Iraq and Saddam Hussein. Clarke wrote that, on September 12, 2001, President Bush &quot;testily&quot; asked him and his aides to try to find evidence that Saddam was connected to the September 11 attacks. In response, Clarke wrote a report stating there was no evidence of Iraqi involvement: all relevant agencies, including the FBI and the CIA, signed off on this conclusion. The paper was quickly returned by a deputy with a note saying, &quot;Please update and resubmit.&quot; In April 2004, the White House at first denied Clarke&#x27;s account of meeting with Bush but reversed its denial when others who had been present backed Clarke&#x27;s version of the events.

Supporting Clarke&#x27;s claim that intelligence forewarning of attacks had been delivered to the president prior to 9/11, former Deputy Attorney General Jamie Gorelick, the sole member of the 9/11 Commission permitted (under an agreement with the Bush administration) to read the President&#x27;s Daily Brief, said that these had contained &quot;an extraordinary spike&quot; in intelligence warnings of al-Qaeda attacks that had &quot;plateaued at a spike level for months&quot; before 9/11.

===Criticism===
Before and after Clarke appeared before the 9/11 Commission, some critics tried to attack his credibility. They impugned his motives, claiming he was a disappointed job-hunter, that he sought publicity, and that he was a political partisan. They charged that he exaggerated perceived failures in the Bush administration&#x27;s counterterrorism policies while exculpating the former Clinton administration from its perceived shortcomings.

According to some reports, the White House tried to discredit Clarke in a move described as &quot;shooting the messenger.&quot; &quot;The New York Times&quot; economics columnist Paul Krugman was more blunt, calling the attacks on Clarke &quot;a campaign of character assassination.&quot;

Some Republicans inside and outside the Bush administration questioned both Clarke&#x27;s testimony and his tenure during the hearings. Senate Republican Majority Leader Bill Frist took to the Senate floor to make a speech alleging Clarke told &quot;two entirely different stories under oath&quot;, pointing to congressional hearing testimony Clarke gave in 2002 and his 9/11 Commission testimony. Frist later speculated to reporters Clarke was trading on his former service as a government insider with access to the nation&#x27;s most valuable intelligence to sell a book.

Clarke was criticized for his suggestions in 1999 of intelligence indicating a link between Saddam Hussein and al-Qaeda, despite the fact Clarke and others concluded after investigations by 2001 that no link had been established. In &quot;Against All Enemies&quot; Clarke writes, &quot;It is certainly possible that Iraqi agents dangled the possibility of asylum in Iraq before bin Laden at some point when everyone knew that the U.S. was pressuring the Taliban to arrest him. If that dangle happened, bin Laden&#x27;s accepting asylum clearly did not,&quot; (p. 270). In an interview on March 21, 2004, Clarke claimed that &quot;there&#x27;s absolutely no evidence that Iraq was supporting al-Qaeda, ever.&quot; Clarke claimed in his book that this conclusion was understood by the intelligence community at the time of 9/11 and the ensuing months, but top Bush administration officials were preoccupied with finding a link between Iraq and 9/11 in the months that followed the attack, and thus, Clarke argued, the Iraq war distracted attention and resources from the war in Afghanistan and hunt for Osama bin Laden.

Fox News, allegedly with the Administration&#x27;s consent, identified and released a background briefing that Clarke gave in August 2002, at the Administration&#x27;s request, to minimize the fallout from a &quot;Time&quot; magazine story about the President&#x27;s failure to take certain actions before 9/11. In that briefing on behalf of the White House, Clarke stated &quot;there was no plan on Al-Qaeda that was passed from the Clinton administration to the Bush administration,&quot; and that after taking office President Bush decided to &quot;add to the existing Clinton strategy and to increase CIA resources, for example, for covert action, fivefold, to go after Al-Qaeda.&quot; At the next day&#x27;s hearing, 9/11 Commission member James Thompson challenged Clarke with the 2002 account, and Clarke explained: &quot;I was asked to make that case to the press. I was a special assistant to the President, and I made the case I was asked to make... I was asked to highlight the positive aspects of what the Administration had done and to minimize the negative aspects of what the Administration had done. And as a special assistant to the President, one is frequently asked to do that kind of thing. I&#x27;ve done it for several Presidents.&quot;

Another point of attack was Clarke&#x27;s role in allowing members of the bin Laden family to fly to Saudi Arabia on September 20, 2001. According to Clarke&#x27;s statements to the 9/11 Commission, a request was relayed to Clarke from the Saudi embassy to allow the members of the bin Laden family living in the U.S. to fly home. Clarke testified to the commission that he passed this decision in turn to the FBI via Dale Watson, and that the FBI at length sent its approval of the flight to the Interagency Crisis Management Group. However, FBI spokesman John Iannarelli denied that the FBI had a role in approving the flight: &quot;I can say unequivocally that the FBI had no role in facilitating these flights.&quot;

Clarke has also exchanged criticism with Michael Scheuer, former chief of the Bin Laden Issue Station at the CIA. When asked to respond to Clarke&#x27;s claim that Scheuer was &quot;a hothead, a middle manager who really didn&#x27;t go to any of the cabinet meetings,&quot; Scheuer returned the criticism as follows: &quot;I certainly agree with the fact that I didn&#x27;t go to the cabinet meetings. But I&#x27;m certainly also aware that I&#x27;m much better informed than Mr. Clarke ever was about the nature of the intelligence that was available against Osama bin Laden and which was consistently denigrated by himself and Mr. Tenet.&quot;

On March 28, 2004, at the height of the controversy during the 9/11 Commission Hearings, Clarke went on NBC&#x27;s Sunday morning news show &quot;Meet the Press&quot; and was interviewed by journalist Tim Russert. In responding to and rebutting the criticism, Clarke challenged the Bush administration to declassify the whole record, including closed testimony by Bush administration officials before the commission.

==Post government career==
Clarke is currently Chairman of Good Harbor Consulting and Good Harbour International, two strategic planning and corporate risk management firms; an on-air consultant for ABC News, and a contributor to the Good Harbor Report, an online community discussing homeland security, defense, and politics. He is an adjunct lecturer at the Harvard Kennedy School and a faculty affiliate of its Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. He has also published two novels: &quot;The Scorpion&#x27;s Gate&quot; (2005) and, &quot;Breakpoint&quot; (2007).

Clarke wrote an op-ed for &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, titled &quot;The Trauma of 9/11 Is No Excuse&quot; (May 31, 2009) harshly critical of other Bush administration officials. Clarke wrote that he had little sympathy for his fellow officials who seemed to want to use the excuse of being traumatized and were caught unaware by Al-Qaeda&#x27;s attacks on the USA because their being caught unaware was due to their ignoring clear reports a major attack on U.S. soil was imminent. Clarke particularly singled out former Vice President Dick Cheney and former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice.

In April 2010, Clarke released his book on &quot;Cyber War&quot;. In April 2012, he wrote a &quot;New York Times&quot; op-ed addressing cyber attacks. In stemming cyber attacks carried out by foreign governments and foreign hackers, particularly from China, Clarke opined that the U.S. government should be authorized to &quot;create a major program to grab stolen data leaving the country&quot; in a fashion similar to how the U.S. Department of Homeland Security currently searches for child pornography that crosses America&#x27;s &quot;virtual borders.&quot; Moreover, he suggested that the US president could authorize agencies to scan Internet traffic outside the US and seize sensitive files stolen from within the United States. Clarke then stated that such a policy would not endanger privacy rights through the institution of a privacy advocate, who could stop abuses or any activity that went beyond halting the theft of important files. The op-ed did not offer evidence that finding and blocking files while they are being transmitted is technically feasible.

In September 2012, Clarke stated that Middle Eastern governments were likely behind hacking incidents against several banks. During the same year, he endorsed Barack Obama&#x27;s reelection for President of the United States.

Following the 2013 high-speed fatal car crash of journalist Michael Hastings, a vocal critic of the surveillance state and restrictions on the press freedom under the Obama Administration tenure, Clarke was quoted as saying, &quot;There is reason to believe that intelligence agencies for major powers—including the United States—know how to remotely seize control of a car. So if there were a cyber attack on the car—and I&#x27;m not saying there was, I think whoever did it would probably get away with it.&quot;

In 2013, Clarke served on an advisory group for the Obama administration, as it sought to reform NSA spying programs following the revelations of documents released by Edward Snowden. The report mentioned in &#x27;Recommendation 30&#x27; on page 37, &quot;...that the National Security Council staff should manage an interagency process to review on a regular basis the activities of the US Government regarding attacks, that exploit a &quot;previously unknown vulnerability in a computer application&quot;.&quot; Clarke told Reuters on 11 April 2014 that the NSA had not known of Heartbleed.

In a 2017 interview, Clarke described Russia&#x27;s recent cyberattack against Ukraine that spread worldwide, via the exPetr virus that posed as ransomware. He warned confidently that Russia would be back to interfere with the 2018 and 2020 U.S. elections as the vulnerabilities demonstrated in the 2016 election still exist.

As of August 2017, Clarke had been obtaining large amounts of funds, notably $20 million for the Middle East Institute via the Emirates Center for Strategic Studies and Research (ECSSR), an Abu Dhabi-based think tank. The Middle East Institute had been propagating Emirati agendas in Washington and was mentioned in mail leaks of Yousef Al Otaiba, the Emirati ambassador to the US. &quot;The Intercept&quot; reported that Saif Mohamed Al Hajeri, CEO of Tawazun Holding L.L.C., had been sanctioning the money, larger than the annual budget of the Middle East Institute, on orders of Otaiba.

In August 2021, Clarke was named as a member of American facial recognition company Clearview AI&#x27;s advisory board.

==Written works==
* &quot;Against All Enemies: Inside America&#x27;s War on Terror—What Really Happened&quot; (2004). . Non-fiction book critical of past and present administrations for the way they handled the war on terror both before and after September 11, 2001. The book focuses much of its criticism on Bush for failing to take sufficient action to protect the country in the elevated-threat period before the September 11, 2001 attacks. Clarke also feels that the 2003 invasion of Iraq greatly hampered the war on terror and was a distraction from the real terrorists.
*&quot;Defeating the Jihadists: A Blueprint for Action&quot; (2004). . Non-fiction book in which Clarke outlines his idea of a more effective U.S. counterterrorism policy. 
*&quot;The Scorpion&#x27;s Gate&quot; (2005) . Novel
*&quot;Breakpoint&quot; (2007) . Novel
*&quot;Your Government Failed You: Breaking the Cycle of National Security Disasters&quot; (2008). . Non-fiction book
*&quot;Cyber War: The Next Threat to National Security and What to Do About It&quot; (2010), with Robert K. Knake. . Non-fiction book
*&quot;How China Steals Our Secrets&quot; (2012) &quot;The New York Times&quot;. Op-ed.
*&quot;Sting of the Drone&quot; (2014). Thomas Dunne Books. . Novel
*&quot;Pinnacle Event&quot; (2015). Thomas Dunne Books. . Novel
*&quot;Warnings: Finding Cassandras to Stop Catastrophes&quot; (2017), with R. P. Eddy. HarperCollins. . Non-fiction book
*&quot;The Fifth Domain: Defending Our Country, Our Companies, and Ourselves in the Age of Cyber Threats&quot; (2019), with Robert K. Knake. . Non-fiction book
*&quot;Hostile State Disinformation in the Internet Age&quot; (2024). &quot;Daedalus.&quot; Essay.

==See also==
*Blue sky memo
*Ramzi Yousef

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q560747" start="0" end="19" title="Richard A. Clarke" label="Richard Alan Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="59" end="83" title="National security" label="national security expert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="85" end="93" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q599151" start="106" end="125" title="government official" label="government official"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201516" start="144" end="165" title="Czar (political term)" label="Counterterrorism Czar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355327" start="174" end="257" title="Executive Office of the President of the United States" label="National Coordinator for Security, Infrastructure Protection, and Counter-Terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="326" end="342" title="United States Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="368" end="381" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="402" end="419" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="501" end="540" title="United States National Security Council" label="United States National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="552" end="564" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="744" end="769" title="United States National Security Council" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="787" end="801" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="1065" end="1082" title="counter-terrorism" label="counter-terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691012" start="1164" end="1183" title="Against All Enemies" label="Against All Enemies"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="1213" end="1223" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250400" start="1281" end="1296" title="9/11 Commission" label="9/11 Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="1420" end="1440" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="1492" end="1496" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="1586" end="1606" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1619" end="1638" title="DarkMatter (Emirati company)#Project Raven" label="cyber security unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="1862" end="1866" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1968" end="1974" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="1976" end="1989" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49129" start="2016" end="2035" title="Boston Latin School" label="Boston Latin School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="2092" end="2118" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="2140" end="2162" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576818" start="2209" end="2230" title="Sphinx Senior Society" label="Sphinx Senior Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="2278" end="2304" title="U.S. Department of Defense" label="U.S. Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="2462" end="2499" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="2558" end="2576" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="2607" end="2628" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="2860" end="2873" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="3044" end="3061" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="3207" end="3215" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="3264" end="3276" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="3433" end="3458" title="United States National Security Council" label="National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="3615" end="3629" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="4031" end="4064" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="4217" end="4256" title="United States National Security Council" label="United States National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4415" end="4447" title="Counter-terrorism Security Group" label="Counter-terrorism Security Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q131297" start="4500" end="4516" title="Rwandan genocide" label="Rwandan genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q174438" start="4541" end="4559" title="Madeleine Albright" label="Madeleine Albright"/>
<link wikidata="Q355188" start="4711" end="4725" title="Roméo Dallaire" label="Roméo Dallaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q454970" start="4832" end="4846" title="Samantha Power" label="Samantha Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241426" start="5044" end="5050" title="Presidential Decision Directive 25" label="PDD-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="5290" end="5295" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="5306" end="5322" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="5442" end="5478" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="5743" end="5758" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726136" start="5866" end="5883" title="Timothy M. Carney" label="Timothy M. Carney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602337" start="5967" end="5972" title="op-ed" label="op-ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q50612" start="6081" end="6091" title="Susan Rice" label="Susan Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="6489" end="6500" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327834" start="6532" end="6547" title="Richard Miniter" label="Richard Miniter"/>
<link wikidata="Q369998" start="6646" end="6658" title="Ramzi Yousef" label="Ramzi Yousef"/>
<link wikidata="Q11240" start="6696" end="6727" title="1993 World Trade Center bombing" label="1993 World Trade Center bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q319068" start="6813" end="6835" title="Khalid Sheikh Mohammed" label="Khalid Sheikh Mohammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="6846" end="6854" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="7519" end="7527" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q475353" start="7603" end="7634" title="Al-Shifa pharmaceutical factory" label="Al-Shifa pharmaceutical factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="7638" end="7643" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929200" start="7646" end="7661" title="Michael Scheuer" label="Michael Scheuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640634" start="7689" end="7703" title="Bin Laden Issue Station" label="bin Laden Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177044" start="7711" end="7734" title="Counterterrorist Center" label="Counterterrorist Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="7742" end="7745" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790331" start="7747" end="7765" title="Matthew Continetti" label="Matthew Continetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q174438" start="8305" end="8323" title="Madeleine Albright" label="Madeleine Albright"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485968" start="8357" end="8372" title="Michael A. Sheehan" label="Michael Sheehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895240" start="8378" end="8389" title="James Rubin" label="James Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257" start="8427" end="8448" title="Boutros Boutros-Ghali" label="Boutros Boutros-Ghali"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593756" start="8501" end="8515" title="United Nations Secretary-General selection, 1996" label="1996 selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254" start="9218" end="9228" title="Kofi Annan" label="Kofi Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47216" start="9491" end="9507" title="Condoleezza Rice" label="Condoleezza Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="9877" end="9885" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q698907" start="10521" end="10535" title="Stephen Hadley" label="Stephen Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250400" start="10974" end="10989" title="9/11 Commission" label="9/11 Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="11203" end="11211" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978339" start="11263" end="11281" title="National Security Council Deputies Committee" label="Deputies Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="11389" end="11396" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q309368" start="11424" end="11441" title="Northern Alliance" label="Northern Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="11462" end="11473" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q198024" start="11582" end="11595" title="MQ-1 Predator" label="MQ-1 Predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q219861" start="11626" end="11640" title="Paul Wolfowitz" label="Paul Wolfowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="13176" end="13182" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798820" start="13221" end="13227" title="Hacker (computer security)" label="hacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="14036" end="14040" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="14045" end="14059" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="14219" end="14239" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q376800" start="14862" end="14876" title="Jamie Gorelick" label="Jamie Gorelick"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="15791" end="15809" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q131112" start="15836" end="15848" title="Paul Krugman" label="Paul Krugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q31112" start="16117" end="16127" title="Bill Frist" label="Bill Frist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397667" start="16615" end="16642" title="Saddam Hussein and al-Qaeda" label="Saddam Hussein and al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283415" start="16879" end="16885" title="Right of asylum" label="asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="16977" end="16984" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="17624" end="17639" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="17642" end="17650" title="Fox News" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="17856" end="17860" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824550" start="18076" end="18098" title="Clinton administration" label="Clinton administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="18162" end="18176" title="George W. Bush" label="President Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="18247" end="18250" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q735247" start="18387" end="18401" title="James R. Thompson" label="James Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q863493" start="18976" end="18992" title="bin Laden family" label="bin Laden family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210688" start="19320" end="19331" title="Dale Watson (FBI)" label="Dale Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="19733" end="19736" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201430" start="20253" end="20262" title="George Tenet" label="Mr. Tenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250400" start="20334" end="20349" title="9/11 Commission" label="9/11 Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543066" start="20417" end="20431" title="Meet the Press" label="Meet the Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q370747" start="20472" end="20483" title="Tim Russert" label="Tim Russert"/>
<link wikidata="Q49127" start="21049" end="21071" title="Harvard Kennedy School" label="Harvard Kennedy School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882367" start="21103" end="21154" title="Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs" label="Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435385" start="21196" end="21220" title="Scorpion&amp;#x27;s Gate (novel)" label="The Scorpion&amp;#x27;s Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959656" start="21245" end="21255" title="Breakpoint (novel)" label="Breakpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602337" start="21287" end="21292" title="op-ed" label="op-ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="21303" end="21322" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="21604" end="21612" title="Al-Qaeda" label="Al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q48259" start="21810" end="21821" title="Dick Cheney" label="Dick Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q47216" start="21852" end="21868" title="Condoleezza Rice" label="Condoleezza Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071928" start="22007" end="22019" title="cyber attack" label="cyber attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798820" start="22095" end="22102" title="Hacker (computer security)" label="hackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q660567" start="22359" end="22376" title="child pornography" label="child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354932" start="22665" end="22679" title="privacy rights" label="privacy rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="23103" end="23115" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="23138" end="23168" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q44706" start="23231" end="23247" title="Michael Hastings (journalist)" label="Michael Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425056" start="23271" end="23289" title="surveillance state" label="surveillance state"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="23784" end="23787" title="NSA" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644106" start="23818" end="23869" title="Global surveillance disclosures (2013–present)" label="revelations of documents released by Edward Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244272" start="24268" end="24278" title="Heartbleed" label="Heartbleed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841337" start="24705" end="24726" title="Middle East Institute" label="Middle East Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24735" end="24785" title="Emirates Center for Strategic Studies and Research" label="Emirates Center for Strategic Studies and Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519" start="24798" end="24807" title="Abu Dhabi" label="Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8059030" start="24938" end="24954" title="Yousef Al Otaiba" label="Yousef Al Otaiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q15725297" start="24996" end="25009" title="The Intercept" label="The Intercept"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192553" start="25256" end="25274" title="Facial recognition system" label="facial recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q82969314" start="25283" end="25295" title="Clearview AI" label="Clearview AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686866" start="25303" end="25317" title="advisory board" label="advisory board"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691012" start="25346" end="25423" title="Against All Enemies" label="Against All Enemies: Inside America&amp;#x27;s War on Terror—What Really Happened"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="25531" end="25544" title="war on terror" label="war on terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="25736" end="25762" title="September 11, 2001 attacks" label="September 11, 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="25791" end="25812" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435385" start="26076" end="26100" title="Scorpion&amp;#x27;s Gate (novel)" label="The Scorpion&amp;#x27;s Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959656" start="26129" end="26139" title="Breakpoint (novel)" label="Breakpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="26468" end="26486" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585647" start="26541" end="26559" title="Thomas Dunne Books" label="Thomas Dunne Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q33779336" start="26640" end="26689" title="Warnings (book)" label="Warnings: Finding Cassandras to Stop Catastrophes"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="26721" end="26734" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270415" start="26991" end="26999" title="Daedalus (journal)" label="Daedalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930159" start="27029" end="27042" title="Blue sky memo" label="Blue sky memo"/>
<link wikidata="Q369998" start="27044" end="27056" title="Ramzi Yousef" label="Ramzi Yousef"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544158" wikidata="Q226990" url="?curid=544158" title="Green County">
<text>Green County may refer to:

* Green County, Kentucky 
* Green County, Wisconsin
* Tom Green County, Texas

== See also ==
*Greene County (disambiguation)
*Green Country, a tourism designation for Northeast Oklahoma</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q226990" start="0" end="12" title="Green County" label="Green County"/>
<link wikidata="Q486087" start="30" end="52" title="Green County, Kentucky" label="Green County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q489163" start="56" end="79" title="Green County, Wisconsin" label="Green County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q113396" start="82" end="105" title="Tom Green County, Texas" label="Tom Green County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q231656" start="123" end="153" title="Greene County (disambiguation)" label="Greene County (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602443" start="155" end="168" title="Green Country" label="Green Country"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544163" wikidata="Q85103897" url="?curid=544163" title="Gibraltar Premier Division">
<text>The Gibraltar Premier Division was a football league established by the Gibraltar Football Association (GFA) in 1905, and the top tier of football in Gibraltar. It originally contained eight member clubs, but it has grown over the years. In 1909 the league was split into two divisions between which clubs can be promoted and relegated at the end of each season. In the 2013–14 season, the Premier Division contained eight clubs with the Second Division containing 12 clubs. For sponsorship reasons it is known as the Argus Insurance Premier Division.

From the 2014–15 season, as a result of the territory&#x27;s membership of UEFA, the champions entered the first UEFA Champions League qualifying round. The winners of Gibraltar&#x27;s cup competition, the Rock Cup, meanwhile, gained entry to the following season&#x27;s UEFA Europa League qualifying rounds. From the 2016–17 season, Gibraltar received an additional place in the Europa League qualifying round for the league runner-up. In 2019 the league merged with the Gibraltar Second Division and became the Gibraltar National League.

==History==
Football in Gibraltar dates from 1892, when military personnel in the territory started playing as Prince of Wales. By 1895 the number of clubs had grown to the point that the Gibraltar Football Association was formed and a tournament (the predecessor to the Premier Division), the Merchants Cup, began, with Gibraltar winning the inaugural competition. By 1907 the Premier Division had officially taken shape with Prince of Wales winning the first full season of league football in Gibraltar. The side went on to win 19 league titles before folding some time in the 1950s.

Since the league&#x27;s formation, football has been played almost every season, along with the Gibraltar Second Division (founded 1909) and a national cup competition, the Rock Cup. After the FA&#x27;s admission to UEFA, the Gibraltar Premier Cup was established in 2013 to provide more competitive games for the sides in the top tier.

Due to the restricted and amateur nature of the league in the past, the competition has been prone to spells of dominance at certain times: for example, the early 20th century dominance by Prince of Wales and the 10 league titles in 11 seasons attained by Glacis United in the 1960s and 1970s. At present Lincoln Red Imps are the dominant side in the division, having won every season since 2000–01 with the exception of the 2001–02 season, until 2017. However, the UEFA acceptance and potential for increased professionalism in the league has opened the possibility of other sides closing the gap, with sides such as Manchester 62 and Lynx making inroads in the 2013–14 season. This came to pass in the 2016–17 season, when Europa FC won their first title in over 60 years.

In 2018, the Gibraltar FA announced changes to the league involving an increase in the &quot;Home Grown Player&quot; quota to 3 players on the pitch, per team, at any one time, as well as introducing salary caps (to be introduced in the senior leagues from 2019) and the introduction of the Gibraltar Intermediate League, replacing the Reserves League and Under-18 League, in order to promote local player development.

For the 2019–20 season, the Premier Division and the Second Division were merged to create a single division for Gibraltar, known as the Gibraltar National League.

==Premier Division 2018-19 season==

Source:

==League Champions==





* Glacis United and Lincoln shared the 1985 title

==Performance by club==
Bold indicates club still playing in top division. 
&quot;Italics&quot; indicates club no longer active.

==See also==
* Gibraltar National League 
==References==
==External links==

*Gibraltar FA Website
*Gibraltar - List of Champions, RSSSF.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q85103897" start="4" end="30" title="Gibraltar Premier Division" label="Gibraltar Premier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q508376" start="72" end="102" title="Gibraltar Football Association" label="Gibraltar Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493596" start="138" end="159" title="football in Gibraltar" label="football in Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q778665" start="313" end="335" title="promotion and relegation" label="promoted and relegated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920927" start="438" end="453" title="Gibraltar Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q85103897" start="518" end="550" title="Gibraltar Premier Division" label="Argus Insurance Premier Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="628" end="632" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="666" end="687" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377815" start="759" end="767" title="Rock Cup" label="Rock Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="824" end="842" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920927" start="1025" end="1050" title="Gibraltar Second Division" label="Gibraltar Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522963" start="1066" end="1091" title="Gibraltar National League" label="Gibraltar National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493596" start="1106" end="1127" title="Football in Gibraltar" label="Football in Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15802671" start="1205" end="1220" title="Prince of Wales F.C." label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q508376" start="1282" end="1312" title="Gibraltar Football Association" label="Gibraltar Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559150" start="1415" end="1424" title="Gibraltar F.C." label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920927" start="1777" end="1802" title="Gibraltar Second Division" label="Gibraltar Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377815" start="1854" end="1862" title="Rock Cup" label="Rock Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="1897" end="1901" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839993" start="1907" end="1928" title="Gibraltar Premier Cup" label="Gibraltar Premier Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108385" start="2275" end="2288" title="Glacis United F.C." label="Glacis United"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241301" start="2324" end="2340" title="Lincoln Red Imps F.C." label="Lincoln Red Imps"/>
<link wikidata="Q17317546" start="2637" end="2650" title="Manchester 62 F.C." label="Manchester 62"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423234" start="2655" end="2659" title="Lynx F.C." label="Lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q23821139" start="2723" end="2730" title="2016–17 Gibraltar Premier Division" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q15732501" start="2744" end="2753" title="Europa F.C." label="Europa FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419370" start="3086" end="3115" title="Gibraltar Intermediate League" label="Gibraltar Intermediate League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522963" start="3352" end="3377" title="Gibraltar National League" label="Gibraltar National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522963" start="3648" end="3673" title="Gibraltar National League" label="Gibraltar National League"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544166" wikidata="Q226098" url="?curid=544166" title="Grant County">
<text>Grant County may refer to:

== Places ==
;Australia
* County of Grant, Victoria

;United States
*Grant County, Arkansas 
*Grant County, Indiana 
*Grant County, Kansas 
*Grant County, Kentucky 
*Grant County, Minnesota 
*Grant County, Nebraska 
*Grant County, New Mexico 
*Grant County, North Dakota 
*Grant County, Oklahoma 
*Grant County, Oregon 
*Grant County, South Dakota 
*Grant County, Washington
*Grant County, West Virginia 
*Grant County, Wisconsin

== Other uses ==
* Grant County, Georgia, a fictional place in the works of Karin Slaughter

==See also==
* Grant Parish, Louisiana</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q226098" start="0" end="12" title="Grant County" label="Grant County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177860" start="54" end="79" title="County of Grant, Victoria" label="County of Grant, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q61296" start="97" end="119" title="Grant County, Arkansas" label="Grant County, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q506722" start="122" end="143" title="Grant County, Indiana" label="Grant County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q375803" start="146" end="166" title="Grant County, Kansas" label="Grant County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q491959" start="169" end="191" title="Grant County, Kentucky" label="Grant County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q486270" start="194" end="217" title="Grant County, Minnesota" label="Grant County, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q339175" start="220" end="242" title="Grant County, Nebraska" label="Grant County, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q426262" start="245" end="269" title="Grant County, New Mexico" label="Grant County, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q48834" start="272" end="298" title="Grant County, North Dakota" label="Grant County, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q486621" start="301" end="323" title="Grant County, Oklahoma" label="Grant County, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q484378" start="326" end="346" title="Grant County, Oregon" label="Grant County, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q490498" start="349" end="375" title="Grant County, South Dakota" label="Grant County, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q281681" start="378" end="402" title="Grant County, Washington" label="Grant County, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q494223" start="404" end="431" title="Grant County, West Virginia" label="Grant County, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q500977" start="434" end="457" title="Grant County, Wisconsin" label="Grant County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q448425" start="478" end="499" title="Grant County, Georgia" label="Grant County, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q504450" start="567" end="590" title="Grant Parish, Louisiana" label="Grant Parish, Louisiana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544177" wikidata="Q311383" url="?curid=544177" title="Plasmodium falciparum">
<text>Plasmodium falciparum is a unicellular protozoan parasite of humans, and the deadliest species of &quot;Plasmodium&quot; that causes malaria in humans. The parasite is transmitted through the bite of a female &quot;Anopheles&quot; mosquito and causes the disease&#x27;s most dangerous form, falciparum malaria. &quot;P. falciparum&quot; is therefore regarded as the deadliest parasite in humans. It is also associated with the development of blood cancer (Burkitt&#x27;s lymphoma) and is classified as a Group 2A (probable) carcinogen.

The species originated from the malarial parasite &quot;Laverania&quot; found in gorillas, around 10,000 years ago. Alphonse Laveran was the first to identify the parasite in 1880, and named it &quot;Oscillaria malariae&quot;. Ronald Ross discovered its transmission by mosquito in 1897. Giovanni Battista Grassi elucidated the complete transmission from a female anopheline mosquito to humans in 1898. In 1897, William H. Welch created the name &quot;Plasmodium falciparum&quot;, which ICZN formally adopted in 1954. &quot;P. falciparum&quot; assumes several different forms during its life cycle. The human-infective stage are sporozoites from the salivary gland of a mosquito. The sporozoites grow and multiply in the liver to become merozoites. These merozoites invade the erythrocytes (red blood cells) to form trophozoites, schizonts and gametocytes, during which the symptoms of malaria are produced. In the mosquito, the gametocytes undergo sexual reproduction to a zygote, which turns into ookinete. Ookinete forms oocytes from which sporozoites are formed.

In 2022, some 249 million cases of malaria worldwide resulted in an estimated 608,000 deaths, with 80 percent being 5 years old or less. Nearly all malarial deaths are caused by &quot;P. falciparum&quot;, and 95% of such cases occur in Africa. In Sub-Saharan Africa, almost 100% of cases were due to &quot;P. falciparum&quot;, whereas in most other regions where malaria is endemic, other, less virulent plasmodial species predominate.

== History ==

Falciparum malaria was familiar to the ancient Greeks, who gave the general name (&quot;pyretós&quot;) &quot;fever&quot;. Hippocrates (c. 460–370 BCE) gave several descriptions on tertian fever and quartan fever. It was prevalent throughout the ancient Egyptian and Roman civilizations. It was the Romans who named the disease &quot;malaria&quot;—&quot;mala&quot; for bad, and &quot;aria&quot; for air, as they believed that the disease was spread by contaminated air, or miasma.

===Discovery===
A German physician, Johann Friedrich Meckel, must have been the first to see &quot;P. falciparum&quot; but without knowing what it was. In 1847, he reported the presence of black pigment granules from the blood and spleen of a patient who died of malaria. The French Army physician Charles Louis Alphonse Laveran, while working at Bône Hospital (now Annaba in Algeria), correctly identified the parasite as a causative pathogen of malaria in 1880. He presented his discovery before the French Academy of Medicine in Paris and published it in &quot;The Lancet&quot; in 1881. He gave it the scientific name &quot;Oscillaria malariae&quot;. However, his discovery was received with skepticism, mainly because by that time, leading physicians such as Theodor Albrecht Edwin Klebs and Corrado Tommasi-Crudeli claimed that they had discovered a bacterium (which they called &quot;Bacillus malariae&quot;) as the pathogen of malaria. Laveran&#x27;s discovery was only widely accepted after five years when Camillo Golgi confirmed the parasite using better microscopes and staining techniques. Laveran was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1907 for his work. In 1900, the Italian zoologist Giovanni Battista Grassi categorized &quot;Plasmodium&quot; species based on the timing of fever in the patient; malignant tertian malaria was caused by &quot;Laverania malariae&quot; (now &quot;P. falciparum&quot;), benign tertian malaria by &quot;Haemamoeba vivax&quot; (now &quot;P. vivax&quot;), and quartan malaria by &quot;Haemamoeba malariae&quot; (now &quot;P. malariae&quot;).

The British physician Patrick Manson formulated the mosquito-malaria theory in 1894; until that time, malarial parasites were believed to be spread in air as miasma, a Greek word for pollution. His colleague Ronald Ross of the Indian Medical Service validated the theory while working in India. Ross discovered in 1897 that malarial parasites lived in certain mosquitoes. The next year, he demonstrated that a malarial parasite of birds could be transmitted by mosquitoes from one bird to another. Around the same time, Grassi demonstrated that &quot;P. falciparum&quot; was transmitted in humans only by female anopheline mosquito (in his case &quot;Anopheles claviger&quot;). Ross, Manson and Grassi were nominated for the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1902. Under controversial circumstances, only Ross was selected for the award.

There was a long debate on the taxonomy. It was only in 1954 the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature officially approved the binominal &quot;Plasmodium falciparum&quot;. The valid genus &quot;Plasmodium&quot; was created by two Italian physicians Ettore Marchiafava and Angelo Celli in 1885. The Greek word &quot;plasma&quot; means &quot;mould&quot; or &quot;form&quot;; &quot;oeidēs&quot; means &quot;to see&quot; or &quot;to know.&quot; The species name was introduced by an American physician William Henry Welch in 1897. It is derived from the Latin &quot;falx&quot;, meaning &quot;sickle&quot; and &quot;parum&quot; meaning &quot;like or equal to another&quot;.

=== Origin and evolution ===
&quot;P. falciparum&quot; is now generally accepted to have evolved from &quot;Laverania&quot; (a subgenus of &quot;Plasmodium&quot; found in apes) species present in gorillas in Western Africa. Genetic diversity indicates that the human protozoan emerged around 10,000 years ago. The closest relative of &quot;P. falciparum&quot; is &quot;P. praefalciparum&quot;, a parasite of gorillas, as supported by mitochondrial, apicoplastic and nuclear DNA sequences. These two species are closely related to the chimpanzee parasite &quot;P. reichenowi&quot;, which was previously thought to be the closest relative of &quot;P. falciparum&quot;. &quot;P. falciparum&quot; was also once thought to originate from a parasite of birds.

Levels of genetic polymorphism are extremely low within the &quot;P. falciparum&quot; genome compared to that of closely related, ape infecting species of &quot;Plasmodium&quot; (including &quot;P. praefalciparum&quot;). This suggests that the origin of &quot;P. falciparum&quot; in humans is recent, as a single &quot;P. praefalciparum&quot; strain became capable of infecting humans. The genetic information of &quot;P. falciparum&quot; has signaled a recent expansion that coincides with the agricultural revolution. The development of extensive agriculture likely increased mosquito population densities by giving rise to more breeding sites, which may have triggered the evolution and expansion of &quot;P. falciparum&quot;.

== Structure ==
&quot;P. falciparum&quot; does not have a fixed structure but undergoes continuous change during its life cycle. A sporozoite is spindle-shaped and 10–15 μm long. In the liver, it grows into an ovoid schizont of 30–70 μm in diameter. Each schizont produces merozoites, each of which is roughly 1.5 μm in length and 1 μm in diameter. In the erythrocyte the merozoite forms a ring-like structure, becoming a trophozoite. A trophozoite feeds on the haemoglobin and forms a granular pigment called haemozoin. Unlike those of other &quot;Plasmodium&quot; species, the gametocytes of &quot;P. falciparum&quot; are elongated and crescent-shaped, by which they are sometimes identified. A mature gametocyte is 8–12 μm long and 3–6 μm wide. The ookinete is also elongated measuring about 18–24 μm. An oocyst is rounded and can grow up to 80 μm in diameter. Microscopic examination of a blood film reveals only early (ring-form) trophozoites and gametocytes that are in the peripheral blood. Mature trophozoites or schizonts in peripheral blood smears, as these are usually sequestered in the tissues. On occasion, faint, comma-shaped, red dots are seen on the erythrocyte surface. These dots are Maurer&#x27;s cleft and are secretory organelles that produce proteins and enzymes essential for nutrient uptake and immune evasion processes.

The apical complex, which is a combination of organelles, is an important structure. It contains secretory organelles called rhoptries and micronemes, which are vital for mobility, adhesion, host cell invasion, and parasitophorous vacuole formation. As an apicomplexan, it harbours a plastid, an apicoplast, similar to plant chloroplasts, which they probably acquired by engulfing (or being invaded by) a eukaryotic alga and retaining the algal plastid as a distinctive organelle encased within four membranes. The apicoplast is involved in the synthesis of lipids and several other compounds and provides an attractive drug target. During the asexual blood stage of infection, an essential function of the apicoplast is to produce the isoprenoid precursors isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) and dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (DMAPP) via the MEP (non-mevalonate) pathway.

=== Genome ===

In 1995 the Malaria Genome Project was set up to sequence the genome of &quot;P. falciparum&quot;. The genome of its mitochondrion was reported in 1995, that of the nonphotosynthetic plastid known as the apicoplast in 1996, and the sequence of the first nuclear chromosome (chromosome 2) in 1998. The sequence of chromosome 3 was reported in 1999 and the entire genome was reported on 3 October 2002. The roughly 24-megabase genome is extremely AT-rich (about 80%) and is organised into 14 chromosomes. Just over 5,300 genes were described. Many genes involved in antigenic variation are located in the subtelomeric regions of the chromosomes. These are divided into the &quot;var&quot;, &quot;rif&quot;, and &quot;stevor&quot; families. Within the genome, there exist 59 &quot;var&quot;, 149 &quot;rif&quot;, and 28 &quot;stevor&quot; genes, along with multiple pseudogenes and truncations. It is estimated that 551, or roughly 10%, of the predicted nuclear-encoded proteins are targeted to the apicoplast, while 4.7% of the proteome is targeted to the mitochondria.

== Life cycle ==

Humans are the intermediate hosts in which asexual reproduction occurs, and female anopheline mosquitos are the definitive hosts harbouring the sexual reproduction stage.

===In humans===
Infection in humans begins with the bite of an infected female &quot;Anopheles&quot; mosquito. Out of about 460 species of &quot;Anopheles&quot; mosquito, more than 70 species transmit falciparum malaria. &quot;Anopheles gambiae&quot; is one of the best known and most prevalent vectors, particularly in Africa.

The infective stage called the sporozoite is released from the salivary glands through the proboscis of the mosquito to enter through the skin during feeding. The mosquito saliva contains antihaemostatic and anti-inflammatory enzymes that disrupt blood clotting and inhibit the pain reaction. Typically, each infected bite contains 20–200 sporozoites. A proportion of sporozoites invade liver cells (hepatocytes). The sporozoites move in the bloodstream by gliding, which is driven by a motor made up of the proteins actin and myosin beneath their plasma membrane.

====Liver stage or exo-erythrocytic schizogony====

Entering the hepatocytes, the parasite loses its apical complex and surface coat and transforms into a trophozoite. Within the parasitophorous vacuole of the hepatocyte, it undergoes 13–14 rounds of mitosis which produce a syncytial cell (coenocyte) called a schizont. This process is called schizogony. A schizont contains tens of thousands of nuclei. From the surface of the schizont, tens of thousands of haploid (1n) daughter cells called merozoites emerge. The liver stage can produce up to 90,000 merozoites, which are eventually released into the bloodstream in parasite-filled vesicles called merosomes.

====Blood stage or erythrocytic schizogony====
Merozoites use the apicomplexan invasion organelles (apical complex, pellicle, and surface coat) to recognize and enter the host erythrocyte (red blood cell). The merozoites first bind to the erythrocyte in a random orientation. It then reorients such that the apical complex is in proximity to the erythrocyte membrane. The parasite forms a parasitophorous vacuole, to allow for its development inside the erythrocyte. This infection cycle occurs in a highly synchronous fashion, with roughly all of the parasites throughout the blood in the same stage of development. This precise clocking mechanism is dependent on the human host&#x27;s own circadian rhythm.

Within the erythrocyte, the parasite metabolism depends on the digestion of haemoglobin. The clinical symptoms of malaria such as fever, anemia, and neurological disorder are produced during the blood stage.

The parasite can also alter the morphology of the erythrocyte, causing knobs on the erythrocyte membrane. Infected erythrocytes are often sequestered in various human tissues or organs, such as the heart, liver, and brain. This is caused by parasite-derived cell surface proteins being present on the erythrocyte membrane, and it is these proteins that bind to receptors in human cells. Sequestration in the brain causes cerebral malaria, a very severe form of the disease, which increases the victim&#x27;s likelihood of death.

=====Trophozoite=====
After invading the erythrocyte, the parasite loses its specific invasion organelles (apical complex and surface coat) and de-differentiates into a round trophozoite located within a parasitophorous vacuole. The trophozoite feeds on the haemoglobin of the erythrocyte, digesting its proteins and converting (by biocrystallization) the remaining heme into insoluble and chemically inert β-hematin crystals called haemozoin. The young trophozoite (or &quot;ring&quot; stage, because of its morphology on stained blood films) grows substantially before undergoing multiplication.

=====Schizont=====
At the schizont stage, the parasite replicates its DNA multiple times and multiple mitotic divisions occur asynchronously. Cell division and multiplication in the erythrocyte is called erythrocytic schizogony. Each schizont forms 16-18 merozoites. The red blood cells are ruptured by the merozoites. The liberated merozoites invade fresh erythrocytes. A free merozoite is in the bloodstream for roughly 60 seconds before it enters another erythrocyte.

The duration of one complete erythrocytic schizogony is approximately 48 hours. This gives rise to the characteristic clinical manifestations of falciparum malaria, such as fever and chills, corresponding to the synchronous rupture of the infected erythrocytes.

=====Gametocyte=====
Some merozoites differentiate into sexual forms, male and female gametocytes. These gametocytes take roughly 7–15 days to reach full maturity, through the process called gametocytogenesis. These are then taken up by a female &quot;Anopheles&quot; mosquito during a blood meal.

===Incubation period===
The time of appearance of the symptoms from infection (called incubation period) is shortest for &quot;P. falciparum&quot; among &quot;Plasmodium&quot; species. An average incubation period is 11 days, but may range from 9 to 30 days. In isolated cases, prolonged incubation periods as long as 2, 3 or even 8 years have been recorded. Pregnancy and co-infection with HIV are important conditions for delayed symptoms. Parasites can be detected from blood samples by the 10th day after infection (pre-patent period).

===In mosquitoes===

Within the mosquito midgut, the female gamete maturation process entails slight morphological changes, becoming more enlarged and spherical. The male gametocyte undergoes a rapid nuclear division within 15 minutes, producing eight flagellated microgametes by a process called exflagellation. The flagellated microgamete fertilizes the female macrogamete to produce a diploid cell called a zygote. The zygote then develops into an ookinete. The ookinete is a motile cell, capable of invading other organs of the mosquito. It traverses the peritrophic membrane of the mosquito midgut and crosses the midgut epithelium. Once through the epithelium, the ookinete enters the basal lamina and settles into an immotile oocyst. For several days, the oocyst undergoes 10 to 11 rounds of cell division to create a syncytial cell (sporoblast) containing thousands of nuclei. Meiosis takes place inside the sporoblast to produce over 3,000 haploid daughter cells called sporozoites on the surface of the mother cell. Immature sporozoites break through the oocyst wall into the haemolymph. They migrate to the mosquito salivary glands where they undergo further development and become infective to humans.

Effects of plant secondary metabolites on &quot;P. falciparum&quot;

Mosquitoes are known to forage on plant nectar for sugar meal, the primary source of energy and nutrients for their survival and other biological process such as host seeking for blood or searching for oviposition sites. Researchers have recently discovered that mosquitoes are very selective about their sugar meal sources. For example &quot;Anopheles&quot; mosquitos prefer some plants over others, specifically those containing compounds that hinder the development and survival of malaria parasites inside the mosquito. This discovery offers an opportunity to look into what could be playing a role in these behavior changes in mosquitoes and also find out what they ingest when they foraged on the selected plants. In other studies, it has been shown that sources of sugars and some secondary metabolites e.g. ricinine, have contrasting effects on mosquito capacity to transmit the parasites malaria.

===Meiosis===

&quot;Plasmodium falciparum&quot; is haploid (one set of chromosomes) during its reproductive stages in human blood and liver. When a mosquito takes a blood meal from a plasmodium infected human host, this meal may include haploid microgametes and macrogametes. Such gametes can fuse within the mosquito to form a diploid (2N) plasmodium zygote, the only diploid stage in the life cycle of these parasites. The zygote can undergo another round of chromosome replication to form an ookinete (4N) (see Figure: Life cycle of plasmodium). The ookinete that differentiates from the zygote is a highly mobile stage that invades the mosquito midgut. The ookinetes can undergo meiosis involving two meiotic divisions leading to the release of haploid sporozoites (see Figure). The sporozoite is an elongated crescent-shaped invasive stage. These sporozoites may migrate to the mosquito’s salivary glands and can enter a human host when the mosquito takes a blood meal. The sporozoite then can move to the human host liver and infect hepatocytes. 

The profile of genes encoded by plasmodium that are employed in meiosis has some overlap with the profile of genes employed in meiosis in other more well-studied organisms, but is more divergent and is lacking some components of the meiotic process found in other organisms. During plasmodium meiosis, recombination occurs between homologous chromosomes as in other organisms.

==Interaction with human immune system==
===Immune response===
A single anopheline mosquito can transmit hundreds of &quot;P. falciparum&quot; sporozoites in a single bite under experimental conditions, but, in nature, the number is generally less than 80. The sporozoites do not enter the bloodstream directly, but rather remain in the skin for two to three hours. About 15–20% of the sporozoites enter the lymphatic system, where they activate dendritic cells, which send them for destruction by T lymphocytes (CD8+ T cells). At 48 hours after infection, &quot;Plasmodium&quot;-specific CD8+ T cells can be detected in the lymph nodes connected to the skin cells. Most of the sporozoites remaining in the skin tissue are subsequently killed by the innate immune system. The sporozoite glycoprotein specifically activates mast cells. The mast cells then produce signaling molecules such as TNFα and MIP-2, which activate cell eaters (professional phagocytes) such as neutrophils and macrophages.

Only a small number (0.5-5%) of sporozoites enter the bloodstream into the liver. In the liver, the activated CD8+ T cells from the lymph bind the sporozoites through the circumsporozoite protein (CSP). Antigen presentation by dendritic cells in the skin tissue to T cells is also a crucial process. From this stage onward, the parasites produce different proteins that help suppress communication of the immune cells. Even at the height of the infection, when red blood cells (RBCs) are ruptured, the immune signals are not strong enough to activate macrophages or natural killer cells.

===Immune system evasion===
Although &quot;P. falciparum&quot; is easily recognized by the human immune system while in the bloodstream, it evades immunity by producing over 2,000 cell membrane antigens. The initial infective stage sporozoites produce circumsporozoite protein (CSP), which binds to hepatocytes. Binding to and entering into the hepatocytes is aided by thrombospondin-related anonymous protein (TRAP). TRAP and other secretory proteins (including sporozoite microneme protein essential for cell traversal 1, SPECT1 and SPECT2) from microneme allow the sporozoite to move through the blood, avoiding immune cells and penetrating hepatocytes.

During erythrocyte invasion, merozoites release merozoite cap protein-1 (MCP1), apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1), erythrocyte-binding antigens (EBA), myosin A tail domain interacting protein (MTIP), and merozoite surface proteins (MSPs). Of these MSPs, MSP1 and MSP2 are primarily responsible for avoiding immune cells. The virulence of &quot;P. falciparum&quot; is mediated by erythrocyte membrane proteins, which are produced by the schizonts and trophozoites inside the erythrocytes and are displayed on the erythrocyte membrane. PfEMP1 is the most important, capable of acting as both an antigen and an adhesion molecule.

== Pathogenicity ==

The clinical symptoms of falciparum malaria are produced by the rupture and destruction of erythrocytes by the merozoites. High fever, called paroxysm, is the most basic indication. The fever has a characteristic cycle of hot stage, cold stage, and sweating stages. Since each erythrocytic schizogony takes a cycle of 48 hours, i.e., two days, the febrile symptom appears every third day. This is the reason the infection is classically named tertian malignant fever (tertian, a derivative of a Latin word that means &quot;third&quot;). The most common symptoms are fever (&gt;92% of cases), chills (79%), headaches (70%), and sweating (64%). Dizziness, malaise, muscle pain, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, mild diarrhea, and dry cough are also generally associated. High heartrate, jaundice, pallor, orthostatic hypotension, enlarged liver, and enlarged spleen are also diagnosed.

The insoluble β-hematin crystal, haemozoin, produced from the digestion of haemoglobin of the RBCs is the main agent that affects body organs. Acting as a blood toxin, haemozoin-containing RBCs cannot be attacked by phagocytes during the immune response to malaria. The phagocytes can ingest free haemozoins liberated after the rupture of RBCs by which they are induced to initiate chains of inflammatory reaction that results in increased fever. It is the haemozoin that is deposited in body organs such as the spleen and liver, as well as in kidneys and lungs, to cause their enlargement and discolouration. Because of this, haemozoin is also known as malarial pigment.

Unlike other forms of malaria, which show regular periodicity of fever, falciparum, though exhibiting a 48-hour cycle, usually presents as irregular bouts of fever&quot;.&quot; This difference is due to the ability of &quot;P. falciparum&quot; merozoites to invade a large number of RBCs sequentially without coordinated intervals, which is not seen in other malarial parasites. &quot;P. falciparum&quot; is therefore responsible for almost all severe human illnesses and deaths due to malaria, in a condition called pernicious or complicated or severe malaria. Complicated malaria occurs more commonly in children under age 5, and sometimes in pregnant women (a condition specifically called pregnancy-associated malaria). Women become susceptible to severe malaria during their first pregnancy. Susceptibility to severe malaria is reduced in subsequent pregnancies due to increased antibody levels against variant surface antigens that appear on infected erythrocytes. But increased immunity in the mother increases susceptibility to malaria in newborn babies.

&quot;P. falciparum&quot; works via sequestration, a process by which group of infected RBCs are clustered, which is not exhibited by any other species of malarial parasites. The mature schizonts change the surface properties of infected erythrocytes, causing them to stick to blood vessel walls (cytoadherence). This leads to obstruction of the microcirculation and results in dysfunction of multiple organs, such as the brain in cerebral malaria.

Cerebral malaria is the most dangerous condition of any malarial infection and the most severe form of neurological disorders. According to the WHO definition, the clinical symptom is indicated by coma and diagnosis by a high level of merozoites in the peripheral blood samples. It is the deadliest form of malaria, and to it are attributed to 0.2 million to over a million annual deaths throughout the ages. Most deaths are of children of below 5 years of age. It occurs when the merozoites invade the brain and cause brain damage of varying degrees. Death is caused by oxygen deprivation (hypoxia) due to inflammatory cytokine production and vascular leakage induced by the merozoites. Among the surviving individuals, persistent medical conditions such as neurological impairment, intellectual disability, and behavioural problems exist. Among them, epilepsy is the most common condition, and cerebral malaria is the leading cause of acquired epilepsy among African children.

The reappearance of falciparum symptom, a phenomenon called recrudescence, is often seen in survivors. Recrudescence can occur even after successful antimalarial medication. It may take a few months or even several years. In some individuals, it takes as long as three years. In isolated cases, the duration can reach or exceed 10 years. It is also a common incident among pregnant women.

==Distribution and epidemiology==
&quot;P. falciparum&quot; is endemic in 84 countries, and is found in all continents except Europe. Historically, it was present in most European countries, but improved health conditions led to the disappearance in the early 20th century. The only European country where it used to be historically prevalent, and from where we got the name malaria, Italy had been declared malaria-eradicated country. In 1947, the Italian government launched the National Malaria Eradication Program, and following, an anti-mosquito campaign was implemented using DDT. The WHO declared Italy free of malaria in 1970.

There were 247 million cases of malaria worldwide in 2021, resulting in an estimated 619,000 deaths. The infection is most prevalent in Africa, where 94% of malaria deaths occur. Children under five years of age are most affected, and 67% of malaria deaths occurred in this age group. 80% of the infection is found in Sub-Saharan Africa, 7% in South-East Asia, and 2% in the Eastern Mediterranean. Nigeria has the highest incidence, with 27% of the total global cases. Outside Africa, India has the highest incidence, with 4.5% of the global burden. Europe is regarded as a malaria-free region. Historically, the parasite and its disease had been most well-known in Europe. But medical programmes since the early 20th century, such as insecticide spraying, drug therapy, and environmental engineering, resulted in complete eradication in the 1970s. It is estimated that approximately 2.4 billion people are at constant risk of infection.

== Treatment ==
===History===

In 1640, Huan del Vego first employed the tincture of the cinchona bark for treating malaria; the native Indians of Peru and Ecuador had been using it even earlier for treating fevers. Thompson (1650) introduced this &quot;Jesuits&#x27; bark&quot; to England. Its first recorded use there was by John Metford of Northampton in 1656. Morton (1696) presented the first detailed description of the clinical picture of malaria and of its treatment with cinchona. Gize (1816) studied the extraction of crystalline quinine from the cinchona bark and Pelletier and Caventou (1820) in France extracted pure quinine alkaloids, which they named quinine and cinchonine. The total synthesis of quinine was achieved by American chemists R.B. Woodward and W.E. Doering in 1944. Woodward received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1965.

Attempts to make synthetic antimalarials began in 1891. Atabrine, developed in 1933, was used widely throughout the Pacific in World War II, but was unpopular because of its adverse effects. In the late 1930s, the Germans developed chloroquine, which went into use in the North African campaigns. Creating a secret military project called Project 523, Mao Zedong encouraged Chinese scientists to find new antimalarials after seeing the casualties in the Vietnam War. Tu Youyou discovered artemisinin in the 1970s from sweet wormwood (&quot;Artemisia annua&quot;). This drug became known to Western scientists in the late 1980s and early 1990s and is now a standard treatment. Tu won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2015.

=== Uncomplicated malaria ===
According to WHO guidelines 2010, artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs) are the recommended first-line antimalarial treatments for uncomplicated malaria caused by &quot;P. falciparum&quot;. WHO recommends combinations such as artemether/lumefantrine, artesunate/amodiaquine, artesunate/mefloquine, artesunate/sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine, and dihydroartemisinin/piperaquine.

The choice of ACT is based on the level of resistance to the constituents in the combination. Artemisinin and its derivatives are not appropriate for monotherapy. As a second-line antimalarial treatment, when initial treatment does not work, an alternative ACT known to be effective in the region is recommended, such as artesunate plus tetracycline or doxycycline or clindamycin, and quinine plus tetracycline or doxycycline or clindamycin. Any of these combinations is to be given for 7 days. For pregnant women, the recommended first-line treatment during the first trimester is quinine plus clindamycin for 7 days. Artesunate plus clindamycin for 7 days is indicated if this treatment fails. For travellers returning to nonendemic countries, atovaquone/proguanil, artemether/lumefantrineany and quinine plus doxycycline or clindamycin are recommended.

=== Severe malaria ===
For adults, intravenous (IV) or intramuscular (IM) artesunate is recommended. Quinine is an acceptable alternative if parenteral artesunate is not available.

For children, especially in the malaria-endemic areas of Africa, artesunate IV or IM, quinine (IV infusion or divided IM injection), and artemether IM are recommended.

Parenteral antimalarials should be administered for a minimum of 24 hours, irrespective of the patient&#x27;s ability to tolerate oral medication earlier. Thereafter, complete treatment is recommended including a complete course of ACT or quinine plus clindamycin or doxycycline.

=== Vaccination ===
RTS,S is the only candidate for the malaria vaccine to have gone through clinical trials. Analysis of the results of the phase III trial (conducted between 2011 and 2016) revealed a rather low efficacy (20-39% depending on age, with up to 50% in 5–17-month aged babies), indicating that the vaccine will not lead to full protection and eradication.

On October 6, 2021, the World Health Organization recommended malaria vaccination for children at risk.

==Cancer==

The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has classified malaria due to &quot;P. falciparum&quot; as a Group 2A carcinogen, meaning that the parasite is probably a cancer-causing agent in humans. Its association with a blood cell (lymphocyte) cancer called Burkitt&#x27;s lymphoma is established. Burkitt&#x27;s lymphoma was discovered by Denis Burkitt in 1958 by African children, and he later speculated that the cancer was likely due to certain infectious diseases. In 1964, a virus, later called Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) after the discoverers, was identified from the cancer cells. The virus was subsequently proved to be the direct cancer agent and is now classified as Group 1 carcinogen.

In 1989, it was realised that EBV requires other infections such as malaria to cause lymphocyte transformation. It was reported that the incidence of Burkitt&#x27;s lymphoma decreased with effective treatment of malaria over several years. The actual role played by &quot;P. falciparum&quot; remained unclear for the next two-and-half decades. EBV had been known to induce lymphocytes to become cancerous using its viral proteins (antigens such as EBNA-1, EBNA-2, LMP1, and LMP2A). From 2014, it became clear that &quot;P. falciparum&quot; contributes to the development of the lymphoma. &quot;P. falciparum&quot;-infected erythrocytes directly bind to B lymphocytes through the CIDR1α domain of PfEMP1. This binding activates toll-like receptors (TLR7 and TLR10) causing continuous activation of lymphocytes to undergo proliferation and differentiation into plasma cells, thereby increasing the secretion of IgM and cytokines. This, in turn, activates an enzyme called activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), which tends to cause mutation in the DNA (by double-strand break) of EBV-infected lymphocytes. The damaged DNA undergoes uncontrolled replication, thus making the cell cancerous.

== Influence on the human genome ==

The high mortality and morbidity caused by &quot;P. falciparum&quot; has placed great selective pressure on the human genome. Several genetic factors provide some resistance to &quot;Plasmodium&quot; infection, including sickle cell trait, thalassaemia traits, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, and the absence of Duffy antigens on red blood cells. E. A. Beet, a doctor working in Southern Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe) had observed in 1948 that sickle-cell disease was related to a lower rate of malaria infections. This suggestion was reiterated by J. B. S. Haldane in 1948, who suggested that thalassaemia might provide similar protection. This hypothesis has since been confirmed and extended to hemoglobin E and hemoglobin C.

== See also ==
* Malaria Atlas Project
* List of parasites (human)
* UCSC Malaria Genome Browser

== References ==
==Further reading==
* Colombian scientists develop computational tool to detect &quot;Plasmodium falciparum&quot; (in Spanish)
* 
* 

==External links==

* Malaria species info at CDC
* Web Atlas of Medical Parasitology
* Species profile at Encyclopedia of Life
* Taxonomy at UniProt
* Profile at Scientists Against Malaria
* Genome info at Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
* PlasmoDB: The Plasmodium Genome Resource
* UCSC Plasmodium Falciparum Browser
* Gene info at Kyoto University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36468" start="27" end="38" title="Unicellular organism" label="unicellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="39" end="47" title="protozoa" label="protozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="49" end="57" title="parasite" label="parasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="61" end="66" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q130948" start="104" end="114" title="Plasmodium" label="Plasmodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="133" end="140" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q158597" start="215" end="224" title="Anopheles" label="Anopheles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367" start="231" end="239" title="mosquito" label="mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016605" start="456" end="479" title="Burkitt&amp;#x27;s lymphoma" label="Burkitt&amp;#x27;s lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155579" start="504" end="534" title="List of IARC Group 2A carcinogens" label="Group 2A (probable) carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502575" start="593" end="602" title="Laverania" label="Laverania"/>
<link wikidata="Q36611" start="618" end="625" title="gorilla" label="gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q189006" start="653" end="669" title="Alphonse Laveran" label="Alphonse Laveran"/>
<link wikidata="Q102034" start="764" end="775" title="Ronald Ross" label="Ronald Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q706466" start="825" end="849" title="Giovanni Battista Grassi" label="Giovanni Battista Grassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q158597" start="901" end="920" title="Anopheles" label="anopheline mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q174743" start="949" end="965" title="William H. Welch" label="William H. Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071346" start="1024" end="1028" title="International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature" label="ICZN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820194" start="1166" end="1177" title="sporozoites" label="sporozoites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1187" end="1215" title="Salivary gland#Other animals" label="salivary gland of a mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="1258" end="1263" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820194" start="1274" end="1284" title="merozoites" label="merozoites"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="1314" end="1326" title="Red blood cell" label="erythrocytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455499" start="1353" end="1365" title="trophozoites" label="trophozoites"/>
<link wikidata="Q929080" start="1367" end="1376" title="schizogony" label="schizonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319949" start="1381" end="1392" title="gametocytes" label="gametocytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170145" start="1511" end="1517" title="zygote" label="zygote"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1536" end="1544" title="Apicomplexan life cycle#ookinete" label="ookinete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246226" start="1561" end="1567" title="oocyte" label="oocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1841" end="1847" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="2096" end="2110" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="2179" end="2190" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2237" end="2268" title="Fever#Types" label="tertian fever and quartan fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q607329" start="2529" end="2535" title="miasma theory" label="miasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q61712" start="2574" end="2597" title="Johann Friedrich Meckel" label="Johann Friedrich Meckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189006" start="2836" end="2866" title="Charles Louis Alphonse Laveran" label="Charles Louis Alphonse Laveran"/>
<link wikidata="Q45942" start="2904" end="2910" title="Annaba" label="Annaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q337555" start="3040" end="3066" title="French Academy of Medicine" label="French Academy of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q939416" start="3102" end="3112" title="The Lancet" label="The Lancet"/>
<link wikidata="Q61203" start="3301" end="3329" title="Edwin Klebs" label="Theodor Albrecht Edwin Klebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694331" start="3334" end="3357" title="Corrado Tommasi-Crudeli" label="Corrado Tommasi-Crudeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q150630" start="3553" end="3566" title="Camillo Golgi" label="Camillo Golgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="3664" end="3701" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q706466" start="3755" end="3779" title="Giovanni Battista Grassi" label="Giovanni Battista Grassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q130948" start="3798" end="3808" title="Plasmodium" label="Plasmodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q311376" start="4038" end="4046" title="Plasmodium vivax" label="P. vivax"/>
<link wikidata="Q133969" start="4121" end="4132" title="Plasmodium malariae" label="P. malariae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057791" start="4164" end="4178" title="Patrick Manson" label="Patrick Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104200" start="4194" end="4217" title="mosquito-malaria theory" label="mosquito-malaria theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q102034" start="4350" end="4361" title="Ronald Ross" label="Ronald Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q158597" start="4754" end="4773" title="Anopheles" label="anopheline mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q240820" start="4793" end="4811" title="Anopheles claviger" label="Anopheles claviger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071346" start="5053" end="5104" title="International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature" label="International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371887" start="5251" end="5269" title="Ettore Marchiafava" label="Ettore Marchiafava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057343" start="5274" end="5286" title="Angelo Celli" label="Angelo Celli"/>
<link wikidata="Q174743" start="5500" end="5519" title="William Henry Welch" label="William Henry Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502575" start="5780" end="5789" title="Laverania" label="Laverania"/>
<link wikidata="Q36611" start="6080" end="6087" title="gorilla" label="gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="6106" end="6119" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825478" start="6121" end="6131" title="apicoplast" label="apicoplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q769863" start="6138" end="6149" title="nuclear DNA" label="nuclear DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="6206" end="6216" title="Common chimpanzee" label="chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="6445" end="6457" title="Polymorphism (biology)" label="polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144960" start="7668" end="7677" title="haemozoin" label="haemozoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22329279" start="8361" end="8380" title="Maurer&amp;#x27;s cleft" label="Maurer&amp;#x27;s cleft"/>
<link wikidata="Q193030" start="8761" end="8773" title="apicomplexan" label="apicomplexan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825478" start="8801" end="8811" title="apicoplast" label="apicoplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q47263" start="8830" end="8841" title="chloroplast" label="chloroplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="8910" end="8920" title="eukaryotic" label="eukaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="8921" end="8925" title="Algae" label="alga"/>
<link wikidata="Q45948" start="8975" end="8984" title="organelle" label="organelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030494" start="8985" end="9014" title="Symbiogenesis" label="encased within four membranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11367" start="9063" end="9068" title="lipid" label="lipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q417403" start="9263" end="9288" title="isopentenyl pyrophosphate" label="isopentenyl pyrophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q417398" start="9299" end="9326" title="dimethylallyl pyrophosphate" label="dimethylallyl pyrophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198649" start="9343" end="9371" title="MEP pathway" label="MEP (non-mevalonate) pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="9507" end="9520" title="mitochondrion" label="mitochondrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q165963" start="9573" end="9580" title="plastid" label="plastid"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="9652" end="9662" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774739" start="9954" end="9973" title="antigenic variation" label="antigenic variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632192" start="9993" end="10005" title="subtelomeric" label="subtelomeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q277338" start="10253" end="10264" title="pseudogenes" label="pseudogenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="10357" end="10365" title="proteins" label="proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825478" start="10386" end="10396" title="apicoplast" label="apicoplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q860947" start="10416" end="10424" title="proteome" label="proteome"/>
<link wikidata="Q158597" start="10794" end="10803" title="Anopheles" label="Anopheles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367" start="10810" end="10818" title="mosquito" label="mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q135237" start="10876" end="10893" title="Anopheles gambiae" label="Anopheles gambiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820194" start="11009" end="11019" title="Apicomplexan life cycle" label="sporozoite"/>
<link wikidata="Q179217" start="11225" end="11239" title="blood clotting" label="blood clotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q827450" start="11378" end="11388" title="hepatocyte" label="hepatocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q618561" start="11435" end="11442" title="gliding motility" label="gliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q185269" start="11495" end="11500" title="actin" label="actin"/>
<link wikidata="Q271727" start="11505" end="11511" title="myosin" label="myosin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="11526" end="11541" title="plasma membrane" label="plasma membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q193030" start="11645" end="11659" title="apical complex" label="apical complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455499" start="11699" end="11710" title="trophozoite" label="trophozoite"/>
<link wikidata="Q25099373" start="11723" end="11746" title="parasitophorous vacuole" label="parasitophorous vacuole"/>
<link wikidata="Q844460" start="11819" end="11828" title="Syncytium" label="syncytial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275223" start="11835" end="11844" title="coenocyte" label="coenocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820194" start="12256" end="12266" title="Merozoites" label="Merozoites"/>
<link wikidata="Q193030" start="12275" end="12287" title="apicomplexan" label="apicomplexan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193030" start="12309" end="12323" title="apical complex" label="apical complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="12398" end="12412" title="red blood cell" label="red blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="12663" end="12674" title="erythrocyte" label="erythrocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="12900" end="12916" title="circadian rhythm" label="circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="12995" end="13006" title="haemoglobin" label="haemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003203" start="13990" end="14008" title="biocrystallization" label="biocrystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="14075" end="14083" title="crystals" label="crystals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319949" start="15078" end="15088" title="gametocyte" label="gametocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q193566" start="15377" end="15394" title="incubation period" label="incubation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="15682" end="15685" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="16084" end="16095" title="flagellum" label="flagellated"/>
<link wikidata="Q770370" start="16096" end="16107" title="microgamete" label="microgamete"/>
<link wikidata="Q770370" start="16195" end="16206" title="macrogamete" label="macrogamete"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="16220" end="16227" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q170145" start="16242" end="16248" title="zygote" label="zygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820194" start="16283" end="16291" title="ookinete" label="ookinete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071196" start="16391" end="16411" title="peritrophic membrane" label="peritrophic membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q809756" start="16523" end="16535" title="basal lamina" label="basal lamina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820194" start="16565" end="16571" title="oocyst" label="oocyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q844460" start="16657" end="16666" title="syncytium" label="syncytial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16673" end="16683" title="sporoblast" label="sporoblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q485675" start="16918" end="16928" title="haemolymph" label="haemolymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="18075" end="18082" title="ploidy" label="haploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q130948" start="18207" end="18217" title="plasmodium" label="plasmodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="18274" end="18280" title="gamete" label="gamete"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="18291" end="18297" title="gamete" label="gamete"/>
<link wikidata="Q170145" start="18376" end="18382" title="zygote" label="zygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="18485" end="18495" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="18707" end="18714" title="meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q827450" start="19063" end="19073" title="hepatocyte" label="hepatocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280388" start="19380" end="19393" title="homologous recombination" label="recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q506253" start="19902" end="19917" title="dendritic cells" label="dendritic cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q376266" start="19969" end="19981" title="Cytotoxic T cell" label="CD8+ T cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q170758" start="20081" end="20092" title="lymph nodes" label="lymph nodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q428253" start="20206" end="20226" title="innate immune system" label="innate immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q191989" start="20279" end="20289" title="mast cells" label="mast cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q212354" start="20319" end="20338" title="Cytokine" label="signaling molecules"/>
<link wikidata="Q21173843" start="20347" end="20351" title="TNFα" label="TNFα"/>
<link wikidata="Q188417" start="20424" end="20435" title="neutrophils" label="neutrophils"/>
<link wikidata="Q184204" start="20440" end="20451" title="macrophages" label="macrophages"/>
<link wikidata="Q24778282" start="20625" end="20649" title="circumsporozoite protein" label="circumsporozoite protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q575296" start="20657" end="20677" title="Antigen presentation" label="Antigen presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q332181" start="21020" end="21040" title="natural killer cells" label="natural killer cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q83138168" start="21904" end="21929" title="merozoite surface protein" label="merozoite surface protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314335" start="22234" end="22240" title="PfEMP1" label="PfEMP1"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="22915" end="22920" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260058" start="22941" end="22947" title="chills" label="chills"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="22955" end="22964" title="headaches" label="headaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503092" start="22976" end="22984" title="sweating" label="sweating"/>
<link wikidata="Q10916362" start="22992" end="23001" title="Dizziness" label="Dizziness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673323" start="23003" end="23010" title="malaise" label="malaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q474959" start="23012" end="23023" title="myalgia" label="muscle pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="23025" end="23039" title="abdominal pain" label="abdominal pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="23041" end="23047" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="23049" end="23057" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="23064" end="23072" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35805" start="23078" end="23087" title="dry cough" label="dry cough"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="23119" end="23133" title="Tachycardia" label="High heartrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="23135" end="23143" title="jaundice" label="jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336398" start="23145" end="23151" title="pallor" label="pallor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104966" start="23153" end="23176" title="orthostatic hypotension" label="orthostatic hypotension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362864" start="23178" end="23192" title="hepatomegaly" label="enlarged liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129121" start="23198" end="23213" title="splenomegaly" label="enlarged spleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="23627" end="23648" title="inflammatory reaction" label="inflammatory reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239883" start="24601" end="24629" title="pregnancy-associated malaria" label="pregnancy-associated malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="24832" end="24840" title="antigens" label="antigens"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="25403" end="25419" title="cerebral malaria" label="cerebral malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339235" start="25525" end="25547" title="neurological disorders" label="neurological disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="26206" end="26229" title="intellectual disability" label="intellectual disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063847" start="26235" end="26255" title="Emotional and behavioral disorders" label="behavioural problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="26275" end="26283" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q969804" start="28440" end="28448" title="tincture" label="tincture"/>
<link wikidata="Q160090" start="28456" end="28464" title="cinchona" label="cinchona"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="28514" end="28518" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="28621" end="28628" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="28649" end="28656" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q192240" start="28710" end="28721" title="Northampton" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q578648" start="28731" end="28737" title="Richard Morton (physician)" label="Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565960" start="28857" end="28861" title="Gize" label="Gize"/>
<link wikidata="Q189522" start="28907" end="28914" title="quinine" label="quinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q715164" start="28942" end="28951" title="Pierre Joseph Pelletier" label="Pelletier"/>
<link wikidata="Q901897" start="28956" end="28964" title="Joseph Bienaimé Caventou" label="Caventou"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="28975" end="28981" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="29005" end="29013" title="alkaloid" label="alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972710" start="29045" end="29055" title="cinchonine" label="cinchonine"/>
<link wikidata="Q417208" start="29275" end="29283" title="Quinacrine" label="Atabrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422438" start="29451" end="29462" title="chloroquine" label="chloroquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840600" start="29558" end="29569" title="Project 523" label="Project 523"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="29571" end="29581" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q462843" start="29686" end="29695" title="Tu Youyou" label="Tu Youyou"/>
<link wikidata="Q426921" start="29707" end="29718" title="artemisinin" label="artemisinin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308044" start="29759" end="29774" title="Artemisia annua" label="Artemisia annua"/>
<link wikidata="Q521616" start="30018" end="30057" title="artemisinin-based combination therapies" label="artemisinin-based combination therapies"/>
<link wikidata="Q179661" start="30085" end="30095" title="first-line therapy" label="first-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q521616" start="30096" end="30108" title="antimalarial" label="antimalarial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981100" start="30219" end="30242" title="artemether/lumefantrine" label="artemether/lumefantrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797577" start="30244" end="30266" title="artesunate/amodiaquine" label="artesunate/amodiaquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163619" start="30268" end="30289" title="artesunate/mefloquine" label="artesunate/mefloquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834000" start="30291" end="30327" title="artesunate/sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine" label="artesunate/sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048104" start="30333" end="30363" title="dihydroartemisinin/piperaquine" label="dihydroartemisinin/piperaquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422442" start="30719" end="30730" title="doxycycline" label="doxycycline"/>
<link wikidata="Q422273" start="30734" end="30745" title="clindamycin" label="clindamycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189522" start="30751" end="30758" title="quinine" label="quinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="30929" end="30944" title="first trimester" label="first trimester"/>
<link wikidata="Q418179" start="31112" end="31122" title="atovaquone" label="atovaquone"/>
<link wikidata="Q420607" start="31123" end="31132" title="proguanil" label="proguanil"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="31258" end="31269" title="intravenous" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q432083" start="31278" end="31291" title="intramuscular" label="intramuscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277881" start="31875" end="31880" title="RTS,S" label="RTS,S"/>
<link wikidata="Q552168" start="32346" end="32389" title="International Agency for Research on Cancer" label="International Agency for Research on Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q715347" start="32586" end="32596" title="lymphocyte" label="lymphocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016605" start="32612" end="32635" title="Burkitt&amp;#x27;s lymphoma" label="Burkitt&amp;#x27;s lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q713342" start="32694" end="32707" title="Denis Parsons Burkitt" label="Denis Burkitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900" start="32855" end="32873" title="Epstein–Barr virus" label="Epstein–Barr virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983535" start="33030" end="33048" title="List of IARC Group 1 carcinogens" label="Group 1 carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83136430" start="33499" end="33505" title="EBNA-1" label="EBNA-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322596" start="33507" end="33513" title="EBNA-2" label="EBNA-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322594" start="33515" end="33519" title="Epstein–Barr virus latent membrane protein 1" label="LMP1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322595" start="33525" end="33530" title="Epstein–Barr virus latent membrane protein 2" label="LMP2A"/>
<link wikidata="Q188930" start="33704" end="33717" title="B lymphocytes" label="B lymphocytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q408004" start="33778" end="33797" title="toll-like receptors" label="toll-like receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914081" start="33799" end="33803" title="TLR7" label="TLR7"/>
<link wikidata="Q15332739" start="33808" end="33813" title="TLR10" label="TLR10"/>
<link wikidata="Q250694" start="33910" end="33922" title="plasma cells" label="plasma cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q79451" start="33960" end="33963" title="IgM" label="IgM"/>
<link wikidata="Q212354" start="33968" end="33977" title="cytokines" label="cytokines"/>
<link wikidata="Q21108149" start="34021" end="34058" title="activation-induced cytidine deaminase" label="activation-induced cytidine deaminase"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="34111" end="34130" title="double-strand break" label="double-strand break"/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="34200" end="34211" title="DNA replication" label="replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="34292" end="34301" title="death" label="mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="34306" end="34315" title="morbidity" label="morbidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="34369" end="34387" title="Selection (biology)" label="selective pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q720988" start="34395" end="34407" title="human genome" label="human genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532924" start="34441" end="34492" title="genetic resistance to malaria" label="some resistance to &amp;quot;Plasmodium&amp;quot; infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536635" start="34504" end="34521" title="sickle cell trait" label="sickle cell trait"/>
<link wikidata="Q185137" start="34523" end="34535" title="thalassaemia" label="thalassaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q848343" start="34544" end="34588" title="glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency" label="glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q205042" start="34609" end="34622" title="Duffy antigen" label="Duffy antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q750583" start="34676" end="34693" title="Southern Rhodesia" label="Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="34699" end="34707" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="34735" end="34754" title="sickle-cell disease" label="sickle-cell disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q156333" start="34840" end="34856" title="J. B. S. Haldane" label="J. B. S. Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q185137" start="34885" end="34897" title="thalassaemia" label="thalassaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022356" start="34989" end="35001" title="hemoglobin E" label="hemoglobin E"/>
<link wikidata="Q409030" start="35006" end="35018" title="hemoglobin C" label="hemoglobin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738422" start="35038" end="35059" title="Malaria Atlas Project" label="Malaria Atlas Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635818" start="35062" end="35087" title="List of parasites (human)" label="List of parasites (human)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864115" start="35090" end="35117" title="UCSC Malaria Genome Browser" label="UCSC Malaria Genome Browser"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544182" wikidata="Q676417" url="?curid=544182" title="Gloucester County">
<text>Gloucester County may refer to:

== Australia ==
* Gloucester County, New South Wales

== Canada ==
* Gloucester County, New Brunswick

== United Kingdom ==
* Gloucestershire, the English county after which the others are named

== United States ==
* Gloucester County, New Jersey
* Gloucester County, Virginia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q676417" start="0" end="17" title="Gloucester County" label="Gloucester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572035" start="51" end="85" title="Gloucester County, New South Wales" label="Gloucester County, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q963112" start="102" end="134" title="Gloucester County, New Brunswick" label="Gloucester County, New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="159" end="174" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q502463" start="251" end="280" title="Gloucester County, New Jersey" label="Gloucester County, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q335121" start="283" end="310" title="Gloucester County, Virginia" label="Gloucester County, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544189" wikidata="Q18641774" url="?curid=544189" title="Rion">
<text>Rion may refer to:

==Surname==
* Chanel Rion (born 1990), American broadcaster
* Francis Rion (born 1933), Belgian international football referee
* José Luis Rion (born 1952), Mexican rower
* Raicu Ionescu-Rion (1872–1895), Romanian literarist

==Given name==
* Rion Amilcar Scott, American short story writer
* Rion Azuma (born 1996), Japanese singer
* Rion Brown (born 1991), American basketball player 
* Rion Taki (born 1992), Japanese football player 
* Rion Sumiyoshi (born 2003), Japanese figure skater 

==Other==
* &quot;&quot;, 2002 animated film
* Rion Hall, historic building
* Rion, South Carolina
* Rion-des-Landes
* Tone Rion, vocaloid

==See also==
* Rio, Greece, also known as Rion
* Rioni River, also known as the Rion River
* Rions, commune in the Gironde department in Nouvelle-Aquitaine in southwestern France
* The Rions, an Australian indie rock band</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18641774" start="0" end="4" title="Rion" label="Rion"/>
<link wikidata="Q89068215" start="34" end="45" title="Chanel Rion" label="Chanel Rion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003426" start="82" end="94" title="Francis Rion" label="Francis Rion"/>
<link wikidata="Q56193330" start="149" end="163" title="José Luis Rion" label="José Luis Rion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202754" start="193" end="211" title="Raicu Ionescu-Rion" label="Raicu Ionescu-Rion"/>
<link wikidata="Q50825635" start="263" end="281" title="Rion Amilcar Scott" label="Rion Amilcar Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q18817333" start="313" end="323" title="Rion Azuma" label="Rion Azuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q30076236" start="355" end="365" title="Rion Brown" label="Rion Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q43426472" start="409" end="418" title="Rion Taki" label="Rion Taki"/>
<link wikidata="Q56599465" start="460" end="474" title="Rion Sumiyoshi" label="Rion Sumiyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335409" start="560" end="569" title="Rion Hall" label="Rion Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q27988784" start="591" end="611" title="Rion, South Carolina" label="Rion, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q30065913" start="614" end="629" title="Rion-des-Landes" label="Rion-des-Landes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24914602" start="632" end="641" title="Tone Rion" label="Tone Rion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852722" start="668" end="679" title="Rio, Greece" label="Rio, Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q203409" start="702" end="713" title="Rioni River" label="Rioni River"/>
<link wikidata="Q578525" start="746" end="751" title="Rions" label="Rions"/>
<link wikidata="Q110654682" start="834" end="843" title="The Rions" label="The Rions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544196" wikidata="Q1050918" url="?curid=544196" title="Evian">
<text>Evian ( , ; , stylized as evian) is a French brand that bottles mineral water from several sources near Évian-les-Bains, on the south shore of Lake Geneva.

Today, Evian is owned by Danone, a French multinational corporation. In addition to the mineral water, Danone Group uses the Evian name for a line of organic skin care products and a luxury resort in Évian-les-Bains.

== History ==
Evian first became a public company in 1859 as the &quot;Société anonyme des eaux minérales de Cachat&quot; and a year later it became French when Savoy was incorporated into France under the Treaty of Turin. The French Ministry of Health reauthorized the bottling of Cachat water on the recommendation of the Medicine Academy in 1878. In 1908, Evian water began to be sold in glass bottles manufactured by the glass factory Souchon-Neuvesel, which today is a part of Owens-Illinois. The first PVC bottle was launched in 1969.

During the following year, the BSN Group, which eventually became the Danone Group, took 100% control of the Évian brand. Evian entered the U.S. market in 1978. In 1995, Evian switched to collapsible PET bottles.

== Production==

Evian&#x27;s site in the French Alps was, during 2015, the largest carbon-neutral food and beverage production site in France.

== Public perception, marketing and advertising ==

In popular culture, Evian is portrayed as a luxury and expensive bottled water. It was named in Agatha Christie&#x27;s &quot;Murder on the Orient Express&quot;. It is popular among Hollywood celebrities. David LaChapelle photographed an Evian campaign juxtaposing a supermodel next to an Evian fountain formed from a Greek statue, which was painted to look like stone by Joanne Gair. The brand frequently collaborates with high-fashion designers for a series of limited edition bottles. Diane von Fürstenberg designed the limited edition bottle for 2013, Elie Saab for 2014, Kenzo for 2015, Alexander Wang for 2016, Christian Lacroix for 2017, Chiara Ferragni for 2018, Virgil Abloh for 2019 and 2020, Moncler for 2021, and Balmain for 2022.

Evian worked with Virgin Records and EMI in 1998 for the mix album &quot;Club Nation&quot;. The album featured many advertisements for Évian, including a logo on the cover, six full pages in the booklet, the image of a bottle of Évian on CD1 and a crushed bottle of Évian on CD2.

In 2009, Evian launched the advertisement campaign, &quot;Evian Roller Babies&quot;. The campaign won a Gold Award at the London International Awards 2009 for Best Visual Effects.

Evian brand ambassadors include singer Dua Lipa and tennis player Emma Raducanu.

In 2014, Evian collaborated with The Amazing Spider-Man 2 to create an advertisement, gaining 150+ million views on YouTube.

In 2023, Evian collaborated with Balmain for a high fashion collection. The collection is titled, “Balmain X Evian”.

==Environmentalism==

In April 2008, Evian created the &quot;Evian Water Protection Institute&quot; to work on three water and wetlands management projects with the Ramsar Convention. The three areas where the projects will take place are Thailand&#x27;s Bung Khong, the La Plata Basin in Argentina and the Jagdishpur Reservoir in Nepal. Evian has also cut energy and water use by incorporating post-consumer recycled PET plastic into the bottle sizes that receive the most sales. The company has joined with Recyclebank in an effort to get consumers to recycle. Recyclebank is an award-based company that gives participating households redeemable points according to the amount of materials they recycle.

During 2018, Evian announced that it will make all of its plastic bottles from 100% recycled plastic by 2025, a move that will see the natural spring water brand adopt a ‘circular approach’ to its plastic usage, where plastic is kept within the economy and out of nature. In order to achieve its 2025 ambition, Evian is partnering with technology companies, one of which is Loop Industries. Loop Industries has developed a technology that enables a continuous loop for recycling at large scale, transforming all types of PET plastic waste into the high-quality plastic required by Evian.

During April 2020, Evian became the first Danone brand to achieve carbon neutrality. In October 2022, a class action lawsuit was filed by plaintiff Stephanie Dorris on behalf of consumers of Evian water, alleging that the Danone&#x27;s claim on Evian packaging that the product is &quot;carbon neutral&quot; is false and misleading and that if consumers had known this they would not have purchased it. In January 2024, US District Judge Nelson Roman ruled that the class action lawsuit challenging Danone&#x27;s &quot;carbon neutral&quot; claim on bottles of Evian water could proceed, calling &#x27;carbon neutral&#x27; an ambiguous term that may reasonably confuse consumers and saying that Danone &quot;expects too much&quot; for consumers to learn what the term means from Evian labels. In response, lawyers for Danone have argued that it is unreasonable for consumers to assume that the product &quot;magically arrived from the French Alps to their homes without the emission of even a molecule of carbon dioxide.&quot;

==See also==
* Évian-les-Bains, France the namesake town
* Badoit and Perrier, other world-renowned brands of French mineral water

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1050918" start="0" end="5" title="Evian" label="Evian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050918" start="26" end="31" title="Evian" label="evian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178921" start="64" end="77" title="mineral water" label="mineral water"/>
<link wikidata="Q273017" start="104" end="119" title="Évian-les-Bains" label="Évian-les-Bains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403" start="143" end="154" title="Lake Geneva" label="Lake Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q329426" start="182" end="188" title="Danone" label="Danone"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="199" end="224" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10480676" start="307" end="314" title="organic product" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294114" start="315" end="324" title="skin care" label="skin care"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880255" start="340" end="346" title="luxury resort" label="luxury"/>
<link wikidata="Q875157" start="347" end="353" title="resort" label="resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q14118" start="536" end="541" title="Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q383866" start="581" end="596" title="Treaty of Turin (1860)" label="Treaty of Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180106" start="857" end="871" title="Owens-Illinois" label="Owens-Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q146368" start="883" end="886" title="Polyvinyl Chloride" label="PVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q145863" start="1117" end="1120" title="Polyethylene terephthalate" label="PET"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1173" end="1184" title="Geography of the Alps#Main chain" label="French Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q845889" start="1453" end="1481" title="Murder on the Orient Express" label="Murder on the Orient Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q366172" start="1532" end="1548" title="David LaChapelle" label="David LaChapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206123" start="1699" end="1710" title="Joanne Gair" label="Joanne Gair"/>
<link wikidata="Q272438" start="1815" end="1836" title="Diane von Fürstenberg" label="Diane von Fürstenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q456638" start="1883" end="1892" title="Elie Saab" label="Elie Saab"/>
<link wikidata="Q895795" start="1903" end="1908" title="Kenzo (brand)" label="Kenzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q705844" start="1919" end="1933" title="Alexander Wang (designer)" label="Alexander Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q350844" start="1944" end="1961" title="Christian Lacroix" label="Christian Lacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q8933801" start="1972" end="1987" title="Chiara Ferragni" label="Chiara Ferragni"/>
<link wikidata="Q26703582" start="1998" end="2010" title="Virgil Abloh" label="Virgil Abloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548951" start="2030" end="2037" title="Moncler" label="Moncler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385309" start="2052" end="2059" title="Balmain (fashion house)" label="Balmain"/>
<link wikidata="Q203059" start="2089" end="2103" title="Virgin Records" label="Virgin Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="2108" end="2111" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136325" start="2144" end="2155" title="Club Nation (album)" label="Club Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956562" start="2539" end="2556" title="brand ambassadors" label="brand ambassadors"/>
<link wikidata="Q21914464" start="2572" end="2580" title="Dua Lipa" label="Dua Lipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q64849968" start="2599" end="2612" title="Emma Raducanu" label="Emma Raducanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4254026" start="2648" end="2672" title="The Amazing Spider-Man 2" label="The Amazing Spider-Man 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="2731" end="2738" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385309" start="2774" end="2781" title="Balmain (fashion house)" label="Balmain"/>
<link wikidata="Q216053" start="2788" end="2800" title="high fashion" label="high fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q170170" start="3024" end="3041" title="Ramsar Convention" label="Ramsar Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362283" start="3130" end="3144" title="La Plata Basin" label="La Plata Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122354" start="3166" end="3186" title="Jagdishpur Reservoir" label="Jagdishpur Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="3190" end="3195" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q145863" start="3277" end="3280" title="Polyethylene terephthalate" label="PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086798" start="3368" end="3379" title="Recyclebank" label="Recyclebank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202090" start="4091" end="4104" title="plastic waste" label="plastic waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="4221" end="4238" title="carbon neutrality" label="carbon neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783852" start="4259" end="4271" title="class action" label="class action"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990721" start="4593" end="4605" title="Nelson S. Román" label="Nelson Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q273017" start="5197" end="5212" title="Évian-les-Bains" label="Évian-les-Bains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878765" start="5241" end="5247" title="Badoit" label="Badoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471021" start="5252" end="5259" title="Perrier" label="Perrier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544199" wikidata="Q228764" url="?curid=544199" title="Gilmer County">
<text>Gilmer County is the name of two counties in the United States:

* Gilmer County, Georgia 
* Gilmer County, West Virginia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q493054" start="67" end="89" title="Gilmer County, Georgia" label="Gilmer County, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q504842" start="93" end="121" title="Gilmer County, West Virginia" label="Gilmer County, West Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544204" wikidata="Q1045310" url="?curid=544204" title="North Point">
<text>North Point is a mixed-use urban area in the Eastern District of Hong Kong. Located in the northeastern part of Hong Kong Island, the area is named after a cape between Causeway Bay and Tsat Tsz Mui that projects towards Kowloon Bay.

==Location==
North Point is bounded by Oil Street () to the west and by Tin Chiu Street () to the east, by Victoria Harbour to the north and Braemar Hill to the southeast. Causeway Bay neighbourhood lies west of North Point, while the Tsat Tsz Mui is east of North Point.

==History==


The name &#x27;North Point&#x27; was first used by Royal Engineer lieutenant Collinson (1821–1902) in 1845. Appearing in his official survey map to mark the northernmost point in Hong Kong Island.

Although the exact location of North Point was uninhabited before 1845, areas in around North Point have been inhabited since before the British arrived, with Tsat Tsz Mui Village considered as the oldest settlement in the vicinity, most likely established during the early 19th century.

=== Early development ===
During the early period of the Colonization of Hong Kong, North Point remained relatively barren when compared to other areas on Hong Kong Island such as the vibrant Sheung Wan and Central districts. This was mainly due to lack of flat land around north point.

The first developments in North Point centered around Shaukiwan Road (now Kings Road), such as The Metropole Hotel built in 1899, used until 1906, where the Metropole Building stands today. The hotel was described in an advertisement as a popular resort occupying a charming seaside location, with first class refreshments and dinners. It was later rebranded as Belle View Hotel from 1906 to 1916 (Late Metropole Hotel). and North Point Hotel from 1917 to 1919, which was easily accessible by a tram service every few minutes.

In 1919, the Hongkong Electric Company started operation of the territory&#x27;s second power station at North Point. Being the first industrial development in North Point, it was built on reclaimed land off the coast. The two original steam turbines of the power station were sourced from Dawson City, Yukon Canada, and were a prized purchase that provided relatively cleaner energy than older generation turbines. Within 10 years the station had increased it&#x27;s generating power from 3,000 to 28,000 kilowatts, a testament to the rapidly expanding electricity needs of Hong Kong Island. Though in 1978 the power station is replaced by City Garden, the adjacent streets Electric Street, Power Street, and Tin Chong Street () reference the historical power station.

During the 1920s, Ming Yuen () Amusement Park was built on the hillsides of North Point, and became a popular entertainment venue on Hong Kong Island. The park was easily accessible by tram, there was also a bus service from Shek Tong Tsui. It featured a variety of programs such as circus performances, boxing matches, and open theaters, all of which are often well attended. It was also famous for organizing Dragon Boat racing events off the coast at North Point. Due to various reasons, including competition from the adjacent Lee Garden, the park closed down in the end of the 1930s. Today, Ming Yuen West Street retains the name of the park.

During the 1930s, the beaches of North Point became one of the most popular places for holding swimming gala in Hong Kong.

In 1938, the North Point Refugee Camp was built to accommodate the influx of refugees from the Mainland. The camp comprised 26 huts. Access to the camp was via Kam Hong Road and Marble Road. During World War II, the camp was renamed the North Point Camp, and used as a prisoner of war camp for captured Canadian soldiers during the Japanese occupation.

=== &#x27;Little Shanghai&#x27;, and &#x27;Little Fujian&#x27; ===
During the Sino-Japanese War, and the Chinese Civil War, a large number of the rich and middle class from Shanghai such as the Jiangzhe people fled to Hong Kong to escape the turmoil of war, many of whom settled in North Point. In 1950, North Point became known as &quot;Little Shanghai&quot;, since in the minds of many, it has already become the replacement for the surrendered Shanghai in China. With entertainment venues being ubiquitous in Shanghai, emigrant Merchants opened Entertainment venues in North Point, first being Ritz Ballroom, Swimming Pool, and Garden, then the amusement park containing Sky Room nightclub: Luna Park, and a series of theatres such as the now iconic State Theatre (Empire Theatre before 1959). The first wave of emigrants also introduced Shanghai-style restaurants, beauty parlours, tailors, and barbershops. As a result, both Fort Street and Tsat Tsz Mui Road became the epicenter of middle-class Shanghaiese life in Hong Kong. They also learned Cantonese and intermarried with people of other dialect groups. During the 1950s, North Point was the premiere place of residence for these emigrants, leading to a massive population boom; by the end of 1960, North Point was listed as the most densely populated place on earth by the &quot;Guinness Book of Records&quot;. The first school in Hong Kong to use Mandarin as the main medium of instruction, Kiangsu and Chekiang Primary School, was founded in 1953 in North Point by these early Shanghainese immigrants. Shanghai at the time was heavily associated with leftist movements; leftist-supported businesses in North Point such as the Sunbeam Theatre (which now showcases Cantonese Opera), are a legacy of their influence.

The second group that moved to North Point were the Hokkien Fujianese, who were mostly displaced by political events in China but then soon mostly moved to countries in Southeast Asia, such as the Philippines and Indonesia. During the late 1960s North Point became known as &quot;Little Fujian&quot;. Small Indonesian specialist grocery shops selling coffee, coconuts, and bumbu are some of the remaining traces of their identity. The Fujianese set up Grocery shops on Chun Yeung Street, which offer a variety of traditional Fujianese foods, such as &quot;misua&quot;, &quot;tokwa&quot;, &quot;tikoy&quot;, &quot;lumpia&quot; &amp; &quot;green bean cake&quot;, all of which are also staples of Chinese Filipino cuisine in the Philippines. The Fujianese also rented apartments to set up apartment-temples in North Point to worship Pan-Chinese Deities such as Gwan Yin, and the Fujianese deity Sheng Gung (Kong Tek Chun Ong, 廣澤尊王). Many of these apartment-temples were established by Monks and Nuns who escaped Fujian when the Chinese Cultural Revolution attacked old religious organizations.

==Culture==
After Cantonese, Hokkien Min Nan is the most widely spoken language in North Point. Many Min Nan associations () are based in North Point to bring people from the same towns or villages together. North Point is also home to several Min Nan-speaking churches serving the Min Nan Christians.


Today, North Point comprises a mix of new luxury developments and older Chinese buildings.
==Economy==
The head office of Sino United Publishing is in the S U P Tower () in North Point.

==Housing==

City Garden, built from 1983 to 1986, is a private housing estate consisting of 14 blocks, each 28 storeys tall. Part of the site was occupied North Point Power Station before 1983.
North Point Estate, which stood next to the North Point Ferry Pier, was demolished in 2003.

==Education==
There are three government primary schools in North Point. Located at 888 King&#x27;s Road, the North Point Government Primary School (NPGPS) opened in 1954. The North Point Island Place Primary and Kindergarten School is located on Tanner Road and is in the Island Place Estate. The North Point Government Primary School (Cloud View Road) abbreviated as NPCVR, also opened in 1954, is located at 22 Cloud View Road. All three schools are whole-day, co-ed and have nominated secondary school status with Shau Kei Wan GSS, Shau Kei Wan East GSS and Clementi Secondary School.

Belilios Public School, a government secondary school for girls, is in North Point.

The Chinese International School is located on Hau Yuen Path in Braemar Hill and is a private, co-educational school providing education to students from Reception to Year 13. Established in 1983, the school has a diverse student body with over 30 nationalities represented. Secondary school students pursue the IB Primary Years Programme before moving on to the IB Diploma.

North Point is in Primary One Admission (POA) School Net 14. Within the school net are multiple aided schools (operated independently but funded with government money) and North Point Government Primary School.

; Former schools
* Java Road Government Primary School
* The Hong Kong Japanese School&#x27;s Secondary Section was formerly on Braemar Hill in North Point. In April 2018 the junior high school moved to the Happy Valley campus.

==Transport==

;MTR
North Point is served by the Island line and the Tseung Kwan O line of the MTR rapid transit railway system. North Point station is the terminus of the Tseung Kwan O line.

;Tramway
North Point is also served by Hong Kong Tramways, of which it is one of the seven terminal points.

;Bus
Kowloon Motor Bus, New World First Bus and Citybus have routes through North Point. North Point is also served by public light buses.

;Ferry
At North Point Ferry Pier, Sun Ferry operates routes to Hung Hom, and Kowloon City . While Fortune Ferry operates route to Kwun Tong route, and Kai Tak. In the past. these routes were operated by Hongkong and Yaumati Ferry.

As part of Hong Kong Ferry, Hongkong and Yaumati Ferry operates a North Point/Kwun Tong Licensed Dangerous Goods Vehicular Ferry Service. It also operates the sightseeing service Harbour Cruise Bauhinia on public holidays.

During the annual Tin Hau Festival, special ferries operate from North Point Ferry Pier to Joss House Bay.

;Thoroughfares
There is one highway, Island Eastern Corridor, serving North Point; it runs along the waterfront of the area.

Streets in North Point include:

* Boat Street
* Cheung Hong Street
* Ching Wah Street
* Chun Yeung Street
* City Garden Road
* Comfort Terrace
* Electric Road
* Fort Street
* Fortress Hill Road
* Hei Wo Street
* Java Road
* Kai Yuen Street
* Kam Hong Street
* Kam Ping Street
* Kin Wah Street
* King&#x27;s Road (partially)
* Marble Road
* Ming Yuen Western Street
* North Point Estate Lane
* North Point Road
* North View Street
* Oil Street
* Peacock Road
* Power Street
* Shu Kuk Street
* Tanner Road
* Tin Chiu Street
* Tin Chong Street
* Tin Hau Temple Road () (partially)
* Tong Shui Road
* Tsat Tsz Mui Road
* Wharf Road ()
* Yuet Tuen Street
==See also==
* List of places in Hong Kong
* State Theatre (Hong Kong)
* Fujianese organized crime

==References==
== General Bibliography ==
* &quot;History of North Point&quot;, in &quot;Heritage Impact Assessment on the Former Clubhouse of Royal Hong Kong Yacht Club at 12 Oil Street&quot; Vol 1 Part 1, pp. 9–70
* Pang, Amy (March 2019). Chan, Tara (ed.). 北角香港: 口述歷史 [North Point, Hong Kong: Oral History]. Translated by Tse, Winnie. Hong Kong: The Conservancy Association Center for Heritage. ISBN 9789881422477.

== Further reading ==

==External links==
* Sun Ferry
* Fortune Ferry
* Sunbeam Theatre website (in Chinese)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1045310" start="0" end="11" title="North Point" label="North Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q727054" start="45" end="61" title="Eastern District, Hong Kong" label="Eastern District"/>
<link wikidata="Q19483" start="112" end="128" title="Hong Kong Island" label="Hong Kong Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q564732" start="169" end="181" title="Causeway Bay" label="Causeway Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849433" start="186" end="198" title="Tsat Tsz Mui" label="Tsat Tsz Mui"/>
<link wikidata="Q837119" start="221" end="232" title="Kowloon Bay (body of water)" label="Kowloon Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7223371" start="274" end="284" title="Oil Street" label="Oil Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q155643" start="342" end="358" title="Victoria Harbour" label="Victoria Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955326" start="376" end="388" title="Braemar Hill" label="Braemar Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807757" start="407" end="419" title="Tin Hau, Hong Kong" label="Causeway Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849433" start="470" end="482" title="Tsat Tsz Mui" label="Tsat Tsz Mui"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="573" end="587" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19483" start="701" end="717" title="Hong Kong Island" label="Hong Kong Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054923" start="853" end="864" title="British Hong Kong" label="the British"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849433" start="879" end="891" title="Tsat Tsz Mui" label="Tsat Tsz Mui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054923" start="1066" end="1091" title="British Hong Kong" label="Colonization of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016845" start="1201" end="1211" title="Sheung Wan" label="Sheung Wan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14767" start="1216" end="1233" title="Central, Hong Kong" label="Central districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490741" start="1351" end="1365" title="Shau Kei Wan Road" label="Shaukiwan Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411080" start="1371" end="1381" title="King&amp;#x27;s Road, Hong Kong" label="Kings Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q116507488" start="1792" end="1796" title="Trams in Hong Kong" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q709104" start="1838" end="1863" title="Hongkong Electric" label="Hongkong Electric Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056385" start="1906" end="1926" title="North Point Power Station" label="second power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="2014" end="2028" title="Land reclamation" label="reclaimed land"/>
<link wikidata="Q189859" start="2061" end="2074" title="steam turbine" label="steam turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q372324" start="2115" end="2126" title="Dawson City" label="Dawson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="2128" end="2133" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2134" end="2140" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123173" start="2466" end="2477" title="City Garden" label="City Garden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2614" end="2623" title="Ming Yuen" label="Ming Yuen"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="2627" end="2641" title="Amusement park" label="Amusement Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19483" start="2729" end="2745" title="Hong Kong Island" label="Hong Kong Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307298" start="2821" end="2835" title="Shek Tong Tsui" label="Shek Tong Tsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q47928" start="2879" end="2898" title="Circus" label="circus performances"/>
<link wikidata="Q57589" start="3007" end="3018" title="Dragon boat" label="Dragon Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513644" start="3127" end="3137" title="Lee Garden" label="Lee Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3567" end="3579" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056368" start="3606" end="3622" title="North Point Camp" label="North Point Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="3638" end="3653" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoner of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="3672" end="3680" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q701967" start="3701" end="3720" title="Japanese occupation of Hong Kong" label="Japanese occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="3801" end="3818" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="3828" end="3845" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="3896" end="3904" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307095" start="3917" end="3925" title="Wu (region)" label="Jiangzhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15951987" start="4476" end="4489" title="State Theatre (Hong Kong)" label="State Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10930588" start="4653" end="4664" title="Fort Street, Hong Kong" label="Fort Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543299" start="4669" end="4686" title="Tsat Tsz Mui Road" label="Tsat Tsz Mui Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q835063" start="4724" end="4735" title="Shanghainese people" label="Shanghaiese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="4773" end="4782" title="Standard Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="5063" end="5087" title="Guinness Book of Records" label="Guinness Book of Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="5132" end="5140" title="Standard Mandarin" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403820" start="5176" end="5211" title="Kiangsu and Chekiang Primary School" label="Kiangsu and Chekiang Primary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="5337" end="5344" title="leftist" label="leftist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113185" start="5412" end="5427" title="Sunbeam Theatre" label="Sunbeam Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708318" start="5449" end="5464" title="Cantonese opera" label="Cantonese Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624231" start="5553" end="5560" title="Hokkien" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q703914" start="5561" end="5570" title="Hoklo people" label="Fujianese"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="5621" end="5626" title="Mainland China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="5670" end="5684" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="5698" end="5709" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="5714" end="5723" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="5808" end="5817" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q697230" start="5874" end="5879" title="bumbu (cuisine)" label="bumbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448587" start="6195" end="6219" title="Filipino Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese Filipino cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="6227" end="6238" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q715162" start="6359" end="6367" title="Guanyin" label="Gwan Yin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288712" start="6405" end="6422" title="Kong Tek Chun Ong" label="Kong Tek Chun Ong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="6534" end="6553" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624231" start="6622" end="6629" title="Hokkien" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q36495" start="6630" end="6637" title="Min Nan" label="Min Nan"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="6883" end="6893" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q15912494" start="7019" end="7041" title="Sino United Publishing" label="Sino United Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123173" start="7097" end="7108" title="City Garden" label="City Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246209" start="7140" end="7162" title="Private housing estates in Hong Kong" label="private housing estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056385" start="7240" end="7265" title="North Point Power Station" label="North Point Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056371" start="7279" end="7297" title="North Point Estate" label="North Point Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131479" start="7934" end="7959" title="Clementi Secondary School" label="Clementi Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882842" start="7962" end="7984" title="Belilios Public School" label="Belilios Public School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103465" start="8051" end="8079" title="Chinese International School" label="Chinese International School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955326" start="8111" end="8123" title="Braemar Hill" label="Braemar Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="8133" end="8140" title="Private school" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="8142" end="8156" title="co-educational" label="co-educational"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="8322" end="8338" title="Secondary school" label="Secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q900760" start="8359" end="8385" title="IB Primary Years Programme" label="IB Primary Years Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861491" start="8410" end="8420" title="IB Diploma" label="IB Diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11667675" start="8696" end="8721" title="Hong Kong Japanese School" label="Hong Kong Japanese School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955326" start="8763" end="8775" title="Braemar Hill" label="Braemar Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q312436" start="8842" end="8854" title="Happy Valley, Hong Kong" label="Happy Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q989316" start="8913" end="8924" title="Island line (MTR)" label="Island line"/>
<link wikidata="Q989347" start="8933" end="8951" title="Tseung Kwan O line" label="Tseung Kwan O line"/>
<link wikidata="Q14751" start="8959" end="8962" title="MTR" label="MTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q838864" start="8993" end="9012" title="North Point station" label="North Point station"/>
<link wikidata="Q385245" start="9096" end="9114" title="Hong Kong Tramways" label="Hong Kong Tramways"/>
<link wikidata="Q312243" start="9171" end="9188" title="Kowloon Motor Bus" label="Kowloon Motor Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408488" start="9190" end="9209" title="New World First Bus" label="New World First Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124055" start="9214" end="9221" title="Citybus (Hong Kong)" label="Citybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389972" start="9285" end="9301" title="public light bus" label="public light bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056373" start="9316" end="9338" title="North Point Ferry Pier" label="North Point Ferry Pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012535" start="9340" end="9349" title="Sun Ferry" label="Sun Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043091" start="9369" end="9377" title="Hung Hom" label="Hung Hom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189342" start="9383" end="9395" title="Kowloon City" label="Kowloon City"/>
<link wikidata="Q303135" start="9404" end="9417" title="Fortune Ferry" label="Fortune Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045119" start="9436" end="9445" title="Kwun Tong" label="Kwun Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531700" start="9457" end="9464" title="Kai Tak Cruise Terminal" label="Kai Tak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5895876" start="9509" end="9535" title="Hongkong and Yaumati Ferry" label="Hongkong and Yaumati Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060513" start="9549" end="9564" title="Hong Kong Ferry" label="Hong Kong Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5895876" start="9566" end="9592" title="Hongkong and Yaumati Ferry" label="Hongkong and Yaumati Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q55613385" start="9717" end="9740" title="Harbour Cruise Bauhinia" label="Harbour Cruise Bauhinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q418226" start="9780" end="9796" title="Tin Hau" label="Tin Hau Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291047" start="9853" end="9867" title="Joss House Bay" label="Joss House Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="9898" end="9905" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083114" start="9907" end="9930" title="Island Eastern Corridor" label="Island Eastern Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357481" start="10142" end="10155" title="Electric Road" label="Electric Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q10930588" start="10158" end="10169" title="Fort Street, Hong Kong" label="Fort Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165021" start="10209" end="10218" title="Java Road" label="Java Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q106776249" start="10221" end="10236" title="Kai Yuen Street" label="Kai Yuen Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411080" start="10292" end="10308" title="King&amp;#x27;s Road (Hong Kong)" label="King&amp;#x27;s Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7223371" start="10429" end="10439" title="Oil Street" label="Oil Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807739" start="10503" end="10518" title="Tin Chiu Street" label="Tin Chiu Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807759" start="10540" end="10559" title="Tin Hau Temple Road" label="Tin Hau Temple Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820937" start="10577" end="10591" title="Tong Shui Road" label="Tong Shui Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q841899" start="10662" end="10689" title="List of places in Hong Kong" label="List of places in Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15951987" start="10692" end="10717" title="State Theatre (Hong Kong)" label="State Theatre (Hong Kong)"/>
<link wikidata="Q73711811" start="10720" end="10745" title="Fujianese organized crime" label="Fujianese organized crime"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544210" wikidata="Q965422" url="?curid=544210" title="Walk This Way">
<text>&quot;Walk This Way&quot; is a song by the American rock band Aerosmith. Written by Steven Tyler and Joe Perry, the song was originally released as the second single from the album &quot;Toys in the Attic&quot; (1975). It peaked at number 10 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 in early 1977, part of a string of successful hit singles for the band in the 1970s. In addition to being one of the songs that helped break Aerosmith into the mainstream in the 1970s, it also helped revitalize their career in the 1980s when it was covered by hip hop group Run-D.M.C. (in collaboration with Aerosmith) on their 1986 album &quot;Raising Hell&quot;. This cover was a touchstone for the new musical subgenre of rap rock, or the melding of rock and hip hop. It became an international hit, reaching number 4 on the Billboard charts, and won both groups a Soul Train Music Award for Best Rap Single in 1987 Soul Train Music Awards. Both versions are in the Grammy Hall of Fame.

==Production==
===Music===
The song starts out with a two measure drum beat intro by Joey Kramer, followed by a guitar riff composed by Joe Perry. The song proceeds with the main riff, with Perry and Brad Whitford on guitar with Tom Hamilton on bass. The song continues with rapid fire lyrics by Steven Tyler.

In December 1974, Aerosmith opened for the Guess Who in Honolulu. During the sound check, guitarist Joe Perry was &quot;fooling around with riffs and thinking about the Meters,&quot; a group guitarist Jeff Beck had turned him on to. Loving &quot;their riffy New Orleans funk, especially &#x27;Cissy Strut&#x27; and &#x27;People Say&#x27;&quot;, he asked the drummer &quot;to lay down something flat with a groove on the drums.&quot; The guitar riff to what would become &quot;Walk This Way&quot; just &quot;came off [his] hands.&quot; Needing a bridge, he:

===Lyrics===
When bandmate Steven Tyler heard Perry playing that riff, he &quot;ran out and sat behind the drums and [they] jammed.&quot; Tyler scatted &quot;nonsensical words initially to feel where the lyrics should go before adding them later.&quot;

When the group was halfway through recording &quot;Toys in the Attic&quot; in early 1975 at Record Plant in New York City, they found themselves stuck for material. They had written three or four songs for the album, having &quot;to write the rest in the studio.&quot; They decided to give the song Perry had come up with in Hawaii a try, but it did not have lyrics or a title yet. Deciding to take a break from recording, band members and producer Jack Douglas went down to Times Square to see Mel Brooks&#x27; &quot;Young Frankenstein&quot;. Returning to the studio, they were laughing about Marty Feldman telling Gene Wilder to follow him in the film, saying &quot;walk this way&quot; and limping. Douglas suggested this as a title for their song. But they still needed lyrics.

At the hotel that night Tyler wrote lyrics for the song, but left them in the cab on the way to the studio next morning. He says: &quot;I must have been stoned. All the blood drained out of my face, but no one believed me. They thought I never got around to writing them.&quot; Upset, he took a cassette tape with the instrumental track the band had recorded and a portable tape player with headphones and &quot;disappeared into the stairwell.&quot; He &quot;grabbed a few No. 2 pencils&quot; but forgot to take paper. He wrote the lyrics on the wall at &quot;the Record Plant&#x27;s top floor and then down a few stairs of the back stairway.&quot; After &quot;two or three hours&quot; he &quot;ran downstairs for a legal pad and ran back up and copied them down.&quot;

Perry thought the &quot;lyrics were so great,&quot; saying that Tyler, being a drummer, &quot;likes to use words as a percussion element.&quot; He says:
Perry always liked to wait until Tyler recorded his vocal so he &quot;could weave around his vocal attack,&quot; but Tyler wanted Perry to record first for the same reason. After a &quot;tug-of-war&quot;, Tyler&#x27;s vocal was recorded first with Perry&#x27;s guitar track overdubbed.

The lyrics, which tell the story of a high school boy losing his virginity, are sung quite fast by Tyler, with heavy emphasis being placed on the rhyming lyrics (e.g., &quot;so I took a big &quot;chance&quot; at the high school &quot;dance&quot;&quot;).

Between the elaborately detailed verses, the chorus primarily consists of a repetition of &quot;Walk this way, talk this way&quot;.

Live in concert, Tyler often has the audience, combined with members of the band, sing &quot;talk this way&quot;. There is also a lengthy guitar solo at the end of the song, and in concert, Tyler will often harmonize his voice to mimic the sounds of the guitar.

==Reception==
&quot;Cash Box&quot; said that &quot;Steve Tyler&#x27;s vocal is aggressive, gritty and right on as he literally spits out a slew of lyrics while never losing clarity&quot; and that &quot;the music itself is hardboiled rock.&quot; &quot;Record World&quot; said that &quot;the pattern that sent &#x27;Dream On&#x27; up the charts is again being established.&quot; In 2022, it was included in the list &quot;The story of &quot;NME&quot; in 70 (mostly) seminal songs&quot;, at number 26.

== Personnel ==

* Steven Tyler – lead and backing vocals
* Joe Perry – lead guitar, slide guitar, talk box, backing vocals
* Brad Whitford – rhythm guitar
* Tom Hamilton – bass guitar
* Joey Kramer – drums, triangle

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==Certifications==



==Legacy==
&quot;Walk This Way&quot; was one of two hit singles by the band to hit the Top 10 of the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 in the 1970s, the other one being a re-release of &quot;Dream On&quot;. &quot;Walk This Way&quot; helped &quot;Toys in the Attic&quot; to be the bestselling Aerosmith album, and one of the most critically acclaimed. Aerosmith&#x27;s version of &quot;Walk This Way&quot; often competes with &quot;Sweet Emotion&quot; and &quot;Dream On&quot; for the title of Aerosmith&#x27;s signature song, being one of the band&#x27;s most important, influential, and recognizable songs. The band rarely omits it from their concert setlist, still performing their classic version of the song to this day. The song has also long been a staple of rock radio, garnering regular airplay on mainstream rock, classic rock, and album-oriented rock radio stations. In 2009, it was named the eighth greatest hard rock song of all time by VH1.

Fee Waybill, Steve Lukather, Tim Bogert and Tommy Aldridge covered the song for the Aerosmith tribute album &quot;Not the Same Old Song and Dance&quot; (Eagle Records, 1999).

Aerosmith reference lyrics from the song in &quot;Legendary Child&quot;. The line &quot;I took a chance at the high school dance never knowing wrong from right&quot; references lyrics from the songs &quot;Walk This Way&quot; and &quot;Adam&#x27;s Apple&quot; respectively. Both songs first appeared on the album &quot;Toys in the Attic&quot;.

In 2019, the song was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame.

== Run-DMC/Aerosmith version ==
In 1986, the hip hop group Run-DMC covered &quot;Walk This Way&quot;, in collaboration with Aerosmith (with its leaders Steven Tyler and Joe Perry on vocals and guitars, respectively). While working on &quot;Raising Hell&quot;, Rick Rubin pulled out &quot;Toys in the Attic&quot;. At shows, Run-DMC had freestyled over the first few seconds of the song on a loop, not knowing what the full song sounded like, or even hearing the lyrics. While Joseph Simmons and Darryl McDaniels had no idea who Aerosmith were at that time, Rubin suggested remaking the song. Neither Simmons nor McDaniels liked the idea, and considered the lyrics &quot;hillbilly gibberish&quot;, though Jam Master Jay was open to it. Rubin brought in Tyler and Perry to re-record their parts; initially, Run and DMC intended to mimic Tyler&#x27;s delivery, but were convinced by Jam Master Jay to do it in a more natural rap flow. Perry also recorded the bass tracks for the song; the studio didn&#x27;t have a bass at hand, so one of the Beastie Boys, who happened to hang around the studio, went home and brought in his bass for Perry to use.

Even after recording with Tyler and Perry, Run-DMC did not want the record to be released as a single, and were shocked when it was played on both urban and rock radio stations. &quot;I never even thought &#x27;Walk This Way&#x27; would be a single,&quot; Rubin recalled. &quot;Not that I didn&#x27;t like it, but I didn&#x27;t think in those terms.&quot; DMC called it &quot;a beautiful thing&quot; in a trailer for &quot;Guitar Hero: Aerosmith&quot;. This version of &quot;Walk This Way&quot; charted higher on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 than the original, peaking at number 4, becoming Run-DMC&#x27;s biggest hit. It was also the first hip hop single to reach the top five on the Billboard charts, as well as one of the first big hip hop singles in the UK, peaking at number 8.

&quot;Cash Box&quot; called it &quot;a raucous, sure-to- please version of the Aerosmith classic.&quot;

The song marked a major comeback for Aerosmith, as they had been largely out of mainstream pop culture for several years while Tyler battled addiction and Perry and Brad Whitford were out of the band. Their 1985 comeback album, &quot;Done with Mirrors,&quot; had also not met commercial expectations. Aerosmith followed &quot;Walk This Way&quot; with multi-platinum albums and Top 40 hits, starting with &quot;Permanent Vacation&quot; and its hit &quot;Dude (Looks Like a Lady)&quot; in 1987.

In 2008, &quot;Walk This Way&quot; was ranked number 4 on VH1&#x27;s &quot;100 Greatest Songs of Hip Hop&quot;.

The chorus of Run-DMC&#x27;s cover contains a pitch alternation that Aerosmith adopted in most future live performances. In collaborations, the other singer often says &quot;talk this way&quot; every alternate line of the chorus. This rap-style delivery may explain why the song worked so well as a hip hop song when it was covered eleven years later.

===Music video===
The 1986 video for &quot;Walk This Way&quot; symbolically places a rock band and Run-DMC in a musical duel in neighbouring studios before Steven Tyler literally breaks through the wall that separates them. The video segues to the bands&#x27; joint performance on stage. Guitarist Perry recalls the experience and the impact on the network: &quot;It was fun going down there and recording with them, and when they said, &#x27;It&#x27;s gonna go on the record. Do you want to do this video of you guys playing, and then you break down a wall, and we&#x27;re side by side?&#x27; We said, &#x27;Yeah, let&#x27;s do it,&#x27; that was pretty amazing. It was amazing because it really did break down walls. At the time, I don&#x27;t think that they were any minority acts on MTV, except for Michael Jackson, up to that point. If there was, it wasn&#x27;t a lot, and I think it definitely opened some doors, and I&#x27;m really proud of that. I&#x27;d like to say we planned it and that we knew that it was going to happen, but we didn&#x27;t. I&#x27;m just glad it was Aerosmith and Run-DMC that did it.&quot;

The video was directed by Jon Small and filmed at the Park Theater in Union City, New Jersey. Small had an office at 1775 Broadway, the same building where Run-DMC&#x27;s label Profile Records were based: Profile&#x27;s co-owner Steve Plotnicki approached Small about directing the video, as he had directed another video by a black act that had broken through into rotation onto the then predominantly white rock-oriented MTV, Whitney Houston&#x27;s &quot;The Greatest Love of All&quot;. Small believed that for the video to break into heavy play on MTV, it had to feature Tyler and Perry: he developed the concept of the bands playing on either side of a wall that was subsequently breached. The video&#x27;s budget was a modest $67,000.

Aside from Tyler and Perry, none of the other rock musicians in the video are the Aerosmith members; instead, they were played by Roger Lane, J. D. Malo, and Matt Stelutto—respectively rhythm guitarist, bassist, and drummer of the largely unknown hair metal outfit Smashed Gladys. According to VH1&#x27;s &quot;Pop Up Video&quot;, Run-DMC could not afford to use the entire Aerosmith band, just Tyler and Perry. As only Tyler and Perry had traveled to record the cover, they were the only Aerosmith members to appear, even though the entire band was credited in some releases of the remake.

According to journalist Geoff Edgers, Tyler and Perry were initially ambivalent about appearing in the video: when Small phoned Tyler to discuss the video concept, Tyler told him: &quot;Just don&#x27;t make fools of us... I don&#x27;t want people laughing at us&quot;. Plotnicki described the atmosphere on set as &quot;beyond chilly&quot;, whilst Smashed Gladys lead guitarist Bart Lewis was struck by the fact that interaction between the members of Aerosmith and Run-DMC was minimal. However, according to Edgers, the frosty relations did thaw as the shoot went on.

The guitar that Perry is playing is a Guild X-100 Bladerunner. The Guild X100 Bladerunner was originally developed and patented by David Newell and Andrew Desrosiers of David Andrew Guitars. The patent was licensed to Guild Guitars for 17 years and entered the public domain in 2006. During initial manufacture, Newell and Desrosiers worked directly with Guild craftsman to develop the final product. The guitar used in this video was one of these early issues.

=== Credits and personnel ===
* Rev. Run, Darryl McDaniels – rap
* Steven Tyler – featured vocals
* Joe Perry – featured lead guitarist, backing vocals
* Brad Whitford – rhythm guitar
* Tom Hamilton – bass guitar
* Joey Kramer – drums, cowbell
* Jam Master Jay, Rev. Run – co-producer
* Howie Weinberg – mastering engineer

===Charts and certifications===

====Weekly charts====

====Year-end charts====
====Certifications====



==Later collaborations==
At the Super Bowl XXXV halftime show in January 2001, performers *NSYNC, Britney Spears, Mary J. Blige, and Nelly joined Aerosmith onstage for an encore performance of &quot;Walk This Way&quot; with Spears and members of *NSYNC singing different parts of the second verse, Blige adding background harmony, and Nelly performing a rap towards the end of the song.

DMC and Steve Tyler closed-out the July 2005 &quot;Celebration of the Seas&quot; event on Key Largo with a stage performance of &quot;Walk This Way&quot;.

Aerosmith and Run-DMC performed &quot;Walk This Way&quot; at the 62nd Annual Grammy Awards in 2020.

==Awards and accolades==
===Song===
* The song won both groups a Soul Train Music Award for Best Rap - Single in 1987.
* &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked the original version of &quot;Walk This Way&quot; at number 346 on their list of the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time, and the version by Run-D.M.C. was ranked at number 293 in 2010.
* In 2000, &quot;VH1: 100 Greatest Rock Songs&quot; included &quot;Walk This Way&quot; at number 35.
* In March 2005, &quot;Q&quot; magazine placed it at number 23 in its list of the 100 Greatest Guitar Tracks.
* In 2008, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked the original version of &quot;Walk This Way&quot; at number 34 on their list of the 100 Greatest Guitar Songs of All Time.
* In 2009, VH1&#x27;s &quot;100 Greatest Hard Rock Songs&quot; included &quot;Walk This Way&quot; at number 8.
* VH1 ranked the version by Run-D.M.C. at number 4 on VH1 100 Greatest Hip Hop Songs.

===Music video===
* In 1993, &quot;Rolling Stone: The Top 100 Music Videos&quot; included &quot;Walk This Way&quot; (with Run-D.M.C.) at number 11.
* In 1999, &quot;MTV: 100 Greatest Videos Ever Made&quot; included &quot;Walk This Way&quot; (with Run-D.M.C.) at number 5.
* In 2001, &quot;VH1: 100 Greatest Videos&quot; included &quot;Walk This Way&quot; (with Run-D.M.C.) at number 11.
* In 2007, &quot;Fuse: 25 Greatest Music Videos&quot; included &quot;Walk This Way&quot; (with Run-D.M.C.) at number 24.

===Track listing===
*CD Single
# Walk This Way – 4:46
# Little Hands – 8:16
# Rhythm of the Road – 6:08
# San Jose – 8:53
==Sugababes vs. Girls Aloud version==

In 2007, both British girl groups Girls Aloud and Sugababes recorded their mash-up cover of &quot;Walk This Way&quot; as the official Comic Relief charity single. Their version was produced by American producer Dallas Austin, making it Girls Aloud&#x27;s first single not to be produced by Xenomania. The track charted at number one on the UK Singles Chart, giving Girls Aloud their third number 1 and Sugababes their fifth.

The music video was a comic re-enactment of the Run-D.M.C. video. &quot;Walk This Way&quot; was promoted through numerous live appearances and has been included on tours by both Girls Aloud and Sugababes. Contemporary music critics criticised the cover version, but supported the single due to its fundraising nature.

While the Run-D.M.C. cover is nearly identical to the original version, the Girls Aloud/Sugababes version has a few changes tweaked into the song; the additional line &quot;Walk this way, you wanna talk this way&quot; is added, the lyrics are moved around, and the beat is slightly sped up and realized on a drum machine to add a further dance feel to the song.

===Background and release===
The idea of a Girls Aloud and Sugababes collaboration came from Comic Relief co-founder and trustee Richard Curtis. Several songs were possibilities, including Blur&#x27;s &quot;Girls &amp; Boys&quot; and Candi Staton&#x27;s &quot;You Got the Love&quot;, which was Girls Aloud member Nicola Roberts&#x27; idea and favourite choice. &quot;Walk This Way&quot; is notably the first Girls Aloud single to date not to feature production from Brian Higgins and Xenomania, who have also worked with Sugababes. Girls Aloud and Sugababes launched the charity appeal on January 31. Kimberley Walsh of Girls Aloud said, &quot;It&#x27;s a fantastic song and hopefully will raise tons of money for people living in really difficult situations here and in Africa.&quot;

Cheryl and Amelle perform the refrain, Kimberley and Nadine sang the first verse, Keisha and Heidi sang the second verse, and Sarah, Nicola, and Amelle rap in the middle eight.

The single was released on March 12, 2007, on just one CD single format, which included a remix of the single and its music video. It was also available as a digital download.

===Chart performance===
&quot;Walk This Way&quot; entered the UK Singles Chart at number 1 on March 18, 2007 ― for the week ending date March 24, 2007. The following week, the single dropped to number 2; it was dethroned by another Comic Relief single, &quot;I&#x27;m Gonna Roll (500 Miles)&quot; by The Proclaimers with Peter Kay and Matt Lucas. In its third week on the chart, &quot;Walk This Way&quot; dropped twelve places out of the top ten, placing itself at number 14.

The song also charted at number 8 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; European Hot 100 Singles chart.

===Music video===
The music video premiered on The Box on February 2, 2007, and was shown on Channel 4&#x27;s &quot;Popworld&quot; the following day. The video was filmed over three days in January 2007 – Sugababes on the first, Cheryl Cole, Nicola Roberts, and Kimberley Walsh on the second, and Nadine Coyle and Sarah Harding on the third and final day. The video includes cameos from Davina McCall, Lily Cole, Stephen Mangan, Graham Norton, Ruby Wax and Natalie Cassidy.

===Track listing and formats===
These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of &quot;Walk This Way&quot;.

UK CD single 
# &quot;Walk This Way&quot; – 2:52
# &quot;Walk This Way&quot; [Yoad Mix] – 3:01
# &quot;Walk This Way&quot; – 3:07
# Behind the Scenes Footage – 3:15

UK digital copy &amp; International Digital EP 
# &quot;Walk This Way&quot; – 2:52
# &quot;Walk This Way&quot; [Yoad Mix] – 3:01

===Credits and personnel===
* Engineer: Rick Shepherd, Graham Archer (assistant recording)
* Keyboards: Brian Higgins, Tim Powell
* Mixing: Jeremy Wheatley, Richard Edgeler (assistant)
* Production: Dallas Austin
* Vocals: Girls Aloud, Sugababes

===Charts===

====Weekly charts====

====Year-end charts====

==References==
==External links==
* Lyrics of this song at Lyrically </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q965422" start="6" end="19" title="Walk This Way" label="Walk This Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="52" end="56" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="62" end="71" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q194045" start="84" end="96" title="Steven Tyler" label="Steven Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q313378" start="101" end="110" title="Joe Perry (musician)" label="Joe Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q683019" start="187" end="204" title="Toys in the Attic (album)" label="Toys in the Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="249" end="278" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q159351" start="553" end="563" title="Run-D.M.C." label="Run-D.M.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q521828" start="624" end="636" title="Raising Hell (album)" label="Raising Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q877693" start="704" end="712" title="rap rock" label="rap rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="741" end="748" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564369" start="847" end="889" title="Soul Train Music Award for Best Rap Single" label="Soul Train Music Award for Best Rap Single"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583898" start="893" end="921" title="1987 Soul Train Music Awards" label="1987 Soul Train Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="948" end="967" title="Grammy Hall of Fame" label="Grammy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q848601" start="1055" end="1066" title="Joey Kramer" label="Joey Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056320" start="1170" end="1183" title="Brad Whitford" label="Brad Whitford"/>
<link wikidata="Q317302" start="1199" end="1211" title="Tom Hamilton (musician)" label="Tom Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141238" start="1320" end="1333" title="the Guess Who" label="the Guess Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="1337" end="1345" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q313378" start="1381" end="1390" title="Joe Perry (musician)" label="Joe Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887369" start="1446" end="1456" title="the Meters" label="the Meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q192474" start="1482" end="1491" title="Jeff Beck" label="Jeff Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="1539" end="1550" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="1551" end="1555" title="Funk music" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961558" start="1574" end="1585" title="Cissy Strut" label="Cissy Strut"/>
<link wikidata="Q460730" start="1725" end="1729" title="riff" label="riff"/>
<link wikidata="Q623202" start="1983" end="1990" title="scat singing" label="scatted"/>
<link wikidata="Q683019" start="2144" end="2161" title="Toys in the Attic (album)" label="Toys in the Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="2568" end="2580" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q104266" start="2588" end="2598" title="Mel Brooks" label="Mel Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q651923" start="2611" end="2629" title="Young Frankenstein" label="Young Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q332670" start="2687" end="2700" title="Marty Feldman" label="Marty Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q191966" start="2709" end="2720" title="Gene Wilder" label="Gene Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962133" start="2755" end="2792" title="Walk this way (humor)" label="&amp;quot;walk this way&amp;quot; and limping"/>
<link wikidata="Q170538" start="4151" end="4160" title="virginity" label="virginity"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="4757" end="4765" title="Cash Box" label="Cash Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422110" start="4988" end="5000" title="Record World" label="Record World"/>
<link wikidata="Q686850" start="5051" end="5059" title="Dream On (Aerosmith song)" label="Dream On"/>
<link wikidata="Q194045" start="5256" end="5268" title="Steven Tyler" label="Steven Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q313378" start="5297" end="5306" title="Joe Perry (musician)" label="Joe Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q428152" start="5322" end="5334" title="slide guitar" label="slide guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778683" start="5336" end="5344" title="talk box" label="talk box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056320" start="5363" end="5376" title="Brad Whitford" label="Brad Whitford"/>
<link wikidata="Q317302" start="5395" end="5407" title="Tom Hamilton (musician)" label="Tom Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q848601" start="5424" end="5435" title="Joey Kramer" label="Joey Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201735" start="5445" end="5453" title="Triangle (musical instrument)" label="triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="5634" end="5663" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q686850" start="5720" end="5728" title="Dream On (Aerosmith song)" label="Dream On"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520996" start="5960" end="5973" title="Sweet Emotion" label="Sweet Emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q64167917" start="6039" end="6053" title="signature song" label="signature song"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526653" start="6335" end="6350" title="mainstream rock" label="mainstream rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096120" start="6352" end="6364" title="classic rock" label="classic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q428656" start="6370" end="6389" title="album-oriented rock" label="album-oriented rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="6478" end="6481" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441158" start="6484" end="6495" title="Fee Waybill" label="Fee Waybill"/>
<link wikidata="Q318483" start="6497" end="6511" title="Steve Lukather" label="Steve Lukather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936441" start="6513" end="6523" title="Tim Bogert" label="Tim Bogert"/>
<link wikidata="Q366588" start="6528" end="6542" title="Tommy Aldridge" label="Tommy Aldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q962120" start="6710" end="6725" title="Legendary Child" label="Legendary Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="7044" end="7063" title="Grammy Hall of Fame" label="Grammy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="7111" end="7118" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q159351" start="7125" end="7132" title="Run-DMC" label="Run-DMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q194045" start="7218" end="7230" title="Steven Tyler" label="Steven Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q313378" start="7235" end="7244" title="Joe Perry (musician)" label="Joe Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q587361" start="7326" end="7336" title="Rick Rubin" label="Rick Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q384181" start="7401" end="7411" title="Freestyle rap" label="freestyled"/>
<link wikidata="Q742642" start="7541" end="7555" title="Joseph Simmons" label="Joseph Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255350" start="7560" end="7576" title="Darryl McDaniels" label="Darryl McDaniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q462735" start="7769" end="7783" title="Jam Master Jay" label="Jam Master Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q214039" start="8105" end="8117" title="Beastie Boys" label="Beastie Boys"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8635" end="8657" title="Guitar Hero: Aerosmith" label="Guitar Hero: Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="8729" end="8758" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="9007" end="9015" title="Cash Box" label="Cash Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="9197" end="9208" title="pop culture" label="pop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264936" start="9340" end="9357" title="Done with Mirrors" label="Done with Mirrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="9483" end="9489" title="Top 40" label="Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463631" start="9516" end="9534" title="Permanent Vacation (Aerosmith album)" label="Permanent Vacation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313633" start="9559" end="9583" title="Dude (Looks Like a Lady)" label="Dude (Looks Like a Lady)"/>
<link wikidata="Q159351" start="10165" end="10172" title="Run-DMC" label="Run-DMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q194045" start="10222" end="10234" title="Steven Tyler" label="Steven Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="10869" end="10884" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11215" end="11224" title="Jon Small" label="Jon Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137918" start="11243" end="11255" title="Park Performing Arts Center" label="Park Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="11311" end="11319" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11592" end="11615" title="MTV#Breaking the &amp;#x27;color barrier&amp;#x27;" label="white rock-oriented MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q34389" start="11617" end="11632" title="Whitney Houston" label="Whitney Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q787102" start="11646" end="11670" title="The Greatest Love of All" label="The Greatest Love of All"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="12012" end="12021" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="12177" end="12187" title="Glam metal" label="hair metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962986" start="12195" end="12209" title="Smashed Gladys" label="Smashed Gladys"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="12224" end="12227" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812317" start="12241" end="12253" title="Pop Up Video" label="Pop Up Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534122" start="12546" end="12558" title="Geoff Edgers" label="Geoff Edgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q742642" start="13587" end="13595" title="Joseph Simmons" label="Rev. Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255350" start="13597" end="13613" title="Darryl McDaniels" label="Darryl McDaniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q462735" start="13801" end="13815" title="Jam Master Jay" label="Jam Master Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5922144" start="13842" end="13856" title="Howie Weinberg" label="Howie Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q625210" start="14017" end="14032" title="Super Bowl XXXV" label="Super Bowl XXXV"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="14075" end="14081" title="*NSYNC" label="*NSYNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="14083" end="14097" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q228909" start="14099" end="14112" title="Mary J. Blige" label="Mary J. Blige"/>
<link wikidata="Q218992" start="14118" end="14123" title="Nelly" label="Nelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="14131" end="14140" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q65077171" start="14594" end="14619" title="62nd Annual Grammy Awards" label="62nd Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564369" start="14695" end="14739" title="Soul Train Music Award for Best Rap - Single" label="Soul Train Music Award for Best Rap - Single"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="14757" end="14770" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q286102" start="14869" end="14899" title="500 Greatest Songs of All Time" label="500 Greatest Songs of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="15083" end="15105" title="Q magazine" label="&amp;quot;Q&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q641066" start="16233" end="16243" title="girl group" label="girl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q205473" start="16245" end="16256" title="Girls Aloud" label="Girls Aloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q193697" start="16261" end="16270" title="Sugababes" label="Sugababes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="16345" end="16357" title="Comic Relief (charity)" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956148" start="16358" end="16372" title="charity single" label="charity single"/>
<link wikidata="Q951373" start="16422" end="16435" title="Dallas Austin" label="Dallas Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438472" start="16501" end="16510" title="Xenomania" label="Xenomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="16551" end="16567" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q355300" start="17448" end="17462" title="Richard Curtis" label="Richard Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="17508" end="17512" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713436" start="17526" end="17542" title="Girls &amp;amp; Boys (Blur song)" label="Girls &amp;amp; Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q449200" start="17553" end="17565" title="Candi Staton" label="Candi Staton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757886" start="17579" end="17595" title="You Got the Love" label="You Got the Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072383" start="17632" end="17646" title="Nicola Roberts" label="Nicola Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964044" start="17785" end="17798" title="Brian Higgins (producer)" label="Brian Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438472" start="17803" end="17812" title="Xenomania" label="Xenomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q256824" start="17920" end="17935" title="Kimberley Walsh" label="Kimberley Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="18522" end="18538" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676212" start="18719" end="18750" title="I&amp;#x27;m Gonna Be (500 Miles)" label="I&amp;#x27;m Gonna Roll (500 Miles)"/>
<link wikidata="Q289622" start="18760" end="18775" title="The Proclaimers" label="The Proclaimers"/>
<link wikidata="Q712796" start="18781" end="18790" title="Peter Kay" label="Peter Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q317251" start="18795" end="18805" title="Matt Lucas (comedian)" label="Matt Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="18984" end="18993" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q266102" start="19000" end="19024" title="European Hot 100 Singles" label="European Hot 100 Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719573" start="19080" end="19087" title="The Box (UK TV channel)" label="The Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="19126" end="19135" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229843" start="19149" end="19157" title="Popworld" label="Popworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q212772" start="19262" end="19273" title="Cheryl Cole" label="Cheryl Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072383" start="19275" end="19289" title="Nicola Roberts" label="Nicola Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q256824" start="19295" end="19310" title="Kimberley Walsh" label="Kimberley Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q977999" start="19330" end="19342" title="Nadine Coyle" label="Nadine Coyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q254962" start="19347" end="19360" title="Sarah Harding" label="Sarah Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q448757" start="19420" end="19433" title="Davina McCall" label="Davina McCall"/>
<link wikidata="Q235455" start="19435" end="19444" title="Lily Cole" label="Lily Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067683" start="19446" end="19460" title="Stephen Mangan" label="Stephen Mangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19154" start="19462" end="19475" title="Graham Norton" label="Graham Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q460549" start="19477" end="19485" title="Ruby Wax" label="Ruby Wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621135" start="19490" end="19505" title="Natalie Cassidy" label="Natalie Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198063" start="20301" end="20310" title="Lyrically" label="Lyrically"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544213" wikidata="Q3122537" url="?curid=544213" title="Gwenc'hlan">
<text>Gwenc&#x27;hlan is the cognomen of a legendary 6th century Breton druid and bard called Kian, the subject and purported author of a Breton song called &quot;Diougan Gwenc&#x27;hlan&quot; (Gwenc&#x27;hlan&#x27;s prophecy), published by Hersart de la Villemarqué in his 1839 anthology &quot;Barzaz Breiz&quot;.

In this song, Gwenc&#x27;hlan is imprisoned after having his eyes gouged out for refusing to convert to Christianity, sings out that he isn&#x27;t afraid to die and makes a prophecy wherein he will be avenged. The motive of the blinded prisoner is reminiscent of the historical fate of Boethius.

One Gwenc&#x27;hlan or Guinclaff around 1450 wrote a &quot;chant royal&quot;, or &quot;Dialogue between King Arthur and Gwenc&#x27;hlan&quot;, quoted by Dom Le Pelletier and Gregory of Rostrenen. The poem was rediscovered in 1924. The Breton used by this Gwenc&#x27;hlan is already deeply pervaded by French. The legend of the 6th century bard is largely a creation of de la Villemarqué&#x27;s, but he may have based his account on the 15th century author, as well as on other traditional Breton tales. He quotes 6th to 12th century Welsh poems attributed to the bards Aneurin, Taliesin and Llywarch Hen as his sources.

==Literature==
*Mary-Ann Constantine &quot;Prophecy and Pastiche in the Breton ballads: Groac&#x27;h Ahès and Gwenc&#x27;hlan&quot;, Cambrian Medieval Celtic Studies 30, (Winter, 1995) 87-121.
*Antone Minard, &quot;The Dialogue between King Arthur and Gwenc&#x27;hlan: a translation&quot; in: Comitatus. A journal of medieval and renaissance studies 30 (1999), 167-177.

==See also==
* Blind musicians

==External links==
*Data
*Info</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3122537" start="0" end="15" title="Gwenc&amp;#x27;hlan" label="Gwenc&amp;#x27;hlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q309197" start="59" end="65" title="Breton people" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q131081" start="66" end="71" title="Druidry" label="druid"/>
<link wikidata="Q215144" start="76" end="80" title="bard" label="bard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122537" start="88" end="92" title="Gwenc&amp;#x27;hlan" label="Kian"/>
<link wikidata="Q309197" start="132" end="138" title="Breton people" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391034" start="235" end="260" title="Hersart de la Villemarqué" label="Hersart de la Villemarqué"/>
<link wikidata="Q809694" start="289" end="301" title="Barzaz Breiz" label="Barzaz Breiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="414" end="426" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q102851" start="596" end="604" title="Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius" label="Boethius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122537" start="611" end="626" title="Gwenc&amp;#x27;hlan" label="Gwenc&amp;#x27;hlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122537" start="630" end="639" title="Gwenc&amp;#x27;hlan" label="Guinclaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q20590199" start="694" end="742" title="An Dialog etre Arzur Roe d&amp;#x27;an Bretounet ha Guynglaff" label="Dialogue between King Arthur and Gwenc&amp;#x27;hlan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="760" end="776" title="Dom Le Pelletier" label="Dom Le Pelletier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="781" end="801" title="Gregory of Rostrenen" label="Gregory of Rostrenen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="1140" end="1145" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q514898" start="1176" end="1183" title="Aneirin" label="Aneurin"/>
<link wikidata="Q357835" start="1185" end="1193" title="Taliesin" label="Taliesin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434699" start="1198" end="1210" title="Llywarch Hen" label="Llywarch Hen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926655" start="1614" end="1629" title="Blind musicians" label="Blind musicians"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544217" wikidata="Q248956" url="?curid=544217" title="Giles County">
<text>Giles County is the name of two counties in the United States: 

* Giles County, Tennessee 
* Giles County, Virginia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q502479" start="67" end="90" title="Giles County, Tennessee" label="Giles County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q951290" start="94" end="116" title="Giles County, Virginia" label="Giles County, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544220" wikidata="Q233156" url="?curid=544220" title="Gibson County">
<text>Gibson County may refer to:

*Gibson County, Indiana
*Gibson County, Tennessee

==See also==
* Gibson County Courthouse (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233156" start="0" end="13" title="Gibson County" label="Gibson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q506168" start="30" end="52" title="Gibson County, Indiana" label="Gibson County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q502442" start="54" end="78" title="Gibson County, Tennessee" label="Gibson County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522996" start="95" end="136" title="Gibson County Courthouse (disambiguation)" label="Gibson County Courthouse (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544223" wikidata="Q1300625" url="?curid=544223" title="Public humiliation">
<text>Public humiliation or public shaming is a form of punishment whose main feature is dishonoring or disgracing a person, usually an offender or a prisoner, especially in a public place. It was regularly used as a form of judicially sanctioned punishment in previous centuries, and is still practiced by different means (e.g. schools) in the modern era.

In the United States, it was a common punishment from the beginning of European colonization through the 19th century. It fell out of common use in the 20th century, though it has seen a revival starting in the 1990s. With the rise of social media, public shaming moved to the digital sphere, exposing and humiliating people daily, sometimes without their knowledge.

== Shameful exposure ==

Public humiliation exists in many forms. In general, a criminal sentenced to one of many forms of this punishment could expect themselves be placed (restrained) in a central, public, or open location so that their fellow citizens could easily witness the sentence and, in some cases, participate as a form of &quot;mob justice&quot;.

Just like painful forms of corporal punishment, it has parallels in educational and other rather private punishments (but with some audience), in school or domestic disciplinary context, and as a rite of passage. Physical forms include being forced to wear some sign such as &quot;donkey ears&quot; (simulated in paper, as a sign one is—or at least behaved—proverbially stupid), wearing a dunce cap, having to stand, kneel or bend over in a corner, or repeatedly write something on a blackboard (&quot;I will not spread rumors&quot;, for example). Here different levels of physical discomfort can be added, such as having to hold heavy objects, or kneeling on an uneven surface. Like physical punishment and harsh hazing, these have become controversial in most modern societies, in many cases leading to legal restrictions and/or (sometimes voluntary) abolishment.

Head shaving can be a humiliating punishment prescribed in law, but also something done as &quot;mob justice&quot;—a stark example of which was the thousands of European women who had their heads shaved in front of cheering crowds in the wake of World War II, as punishment for associating with occupying Nazis during the war. Public shaving was applied to (true or alleged) collaborators after the Allied liberated occupied territories from the Nazi troops.

Further means of public humiliation and degradation consist in forcing people to wear typifying clothes, which can be penitential garb or prison uniforms. Forcing arrestees or prisoners to wear restraints (such as handcuffs or shackles) may also increase public humiliation. In countries such as Japan, France, and South Korea, handcuffs on arrested persons are blurred in media broadcasts and hidden wherever possible to prevent feelings of &quot;personal shame&quot; in the accused and to make the public more likely to maintain a presumption of innocence before trial.

Forcing people to go barefoot has been used as a more subtle form of humiliation in past and present cultures. The exposure of bare feet has served as an indicator for imprisonment and slavery throughout ancient and modern history. Even today prisoners officially have to go barefoot in many countries of the world and are also presented in court and in public unshod.

== Corporal punishment ==


Apart from specific methods essentially aiming at humiliation, several methods combine pain and humiliation or even death and humiliation. In some cases, the pain—or at least discomfort—is insignificant or rather secondary to the humiliation.

=== Public punishment ===
The simplest is to administer painful corporal punishment in public - the major aim may be deterrence of potential offenders - so the public will witness the perpetrator&#x27;s fear and agony. This can either take place in a town square or other public gathering location such as a school, or take the form of a procession through the streets. This was not uncommon in the sentences to &quot;Staupenschlag&quot; (flagellation by whipping or birching, generally on the bare buttocks) in various European states, till the 19th century. A naval equivalent was Flogging round the fleet on a raft taken from ship to ship for consecutive installments of a great total of lashes. In some countries, the punishment of foot whipping is executed in public to this day.

=== Torture marks ===
The humiliation can be extended; intentionally or not; by leaving visible marks, such as scars. This can even be the main intention of the punishment, as in the case of scarifications, such as human branding. Other examples of physical torture or modification used as public humiliation throughout history include ear cropping (starting in ancient Assyrian law and the Babylonian Code of Hammurabi and extending into the 1800s in parts of the US) and tarring and feathering.

== Psychological effects ==

Public shaming can result in negative psychological effects and devastating consequences, regardless of the punishment being justifiable or not. It could cause depression, suicidal thoughts and other severe mental problems. The humiliated individuals may develop a variety of symptoms including apathy, paranoia, anxiety, PTSD, or others. The rage and fury may arise in the persecuted individual, themselves lashing out against innocent victims, as they seek revenge or as a means of release.

==Historical examples==
* Crucifixion was used by the Romans to add public humiliation to a death penalty. Josephus describes how the Roman soldiers would crucify people naked, and using different tortuous positions as a way to further humiliate them. Crucified bodies were left to decay on the cross for weeks, and crows would come to feed on the corpses; this can be seen as post-mortem public humiliation. See also gibbeting.
* The punishment of public humiliation has taken many forms, ranging from an offender being forced to relate his crime, to a &#x27;shame flute&#x27; (for untalented musicians), to the wearing of conspicuous clothing or jewelry (such as an oversized rosary (, &quot;stones of shame&quot;) for someone late to church). The offender could alternatively be sentenced to remain exposed in a specific exposed place, in a restraining device such as a yoke or public stocks.
* In the Low Countries, the (&quot;Chair of shame&quot;), the or (&quot;pole of shame&quot;, a simple type of pillory), the were customary for adulteresses, and the , a scaffolding from which one is kicked off to land in mud and dirt.
* In the more extreme cases, being subjected to verbal and physical abuse from the crowd could have serious consequences, especially when the hands were bound, preventing self-protection. Some sentences actually prescribed additional humiliation, such as shaving, or would combine it with painful corporal punishments, see below.
* In colonial America, common forms of public humiliation were the stocks and pillory, imported from Europe. Nearly every sizable town had such instruments of public humiliation, usually at the town square. In pre-Tokugawa Japan, adulterers were publicly exposed purely to shame them.
* In Liberia, boy soldiers stripped civilian women to humiliate them; this was described with the verb phrase &quot;to naked someone else.&quot;
* In Siam, an adulteress was paraded with a hibiscus behind the ear. Thieves were tattooed on their faces. Other criminals were paraded with a device made of woven cane on the forehead, or lengths of bamboo hung around the neck. Errant Brahmans had to wear a string of oversize beads.
* Send under the yoke was used in ancient Italy.
* Some have considered sex offender registries in the United States to be a form of public humiliation as judicial punishment. A convicted sex offender&#x27;s placement on the sex offender registry is public via a state run website in all 50 states. In 2018, a judge in the United States District Court for the District of Colorado declared Colorado&#x27;s sex offender scheme as unconstitutional, citing cruel and unusual punishment. In 2020, the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit overturned that decision.

== See also ==
==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;So You&#x27;ve Been Publicly Shamed&quot;, a 2015 book by Jon Ronson on the modern phenomenon of online public shaming on Twitter, Tumblr, and elsewhere on social media.

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1300625" start="0" end="18" title="Public humiliation" label="Public humiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300625" start="22" end="36" title="Public humiliation" label="public shaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q186361" start="50" end="60" title="punishment" label="punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q207333" start="83" end="91" title="dishonor" label="dishonor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862087" start="144" end="152" title="prisoner" label="prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="423" end="444" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q191031" start="1060" end="1071" title="mob justice" label="mob justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131696" start="1276" end="1291" title="rite of passage" label="rite of passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314690" start="1469" end="1478" title="dunce cap" label="dunce cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660870" start="1947" end="1959" title="Head shaving" label="Head shaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2193" end="2205" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="2252" end="2257" title="Nazism" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="2346" end="2362" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied liberated"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="2393" end="2404" title="Sturmabteilung" label="Nazi troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861384" start="2493" end="2502" title="typifying" label="typifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q3411830" start="2525" end="2536" title="penitential" label="penitential"/>
<link wikidata="Q659964" start="2545" end="2559" title="prison uniform" label="prison uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q15808" start="2621" end="2630" title="handcuffs" label="handcuffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478548" start="2634" end="2642" title="legcuffs" label="shackles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3001" end="3009" title="barefoot#Imprisonment and slavery" label="barefoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="3148" end="3160" title="imprisonment" label="imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="3165" end="3172" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="3686" end="3705" title="corporal punishment" label="corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q332142" start="3739" end="3749" title="deterrence (psychological)" label="deterrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q174782" start="3873" end="3884" title="town square" label="town square"/>
<link wikidata="Q779753" start="4040" end="4053" title="Staupenschlag" label="Staupenschlag"/>
<link wikidata="Q779753" start="4061" end="4073" title="flagellation" label="flagellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q865593" start="4089" end="4097" title="birching" label="birching"/>
<link wikidata="Q42165" start="4121" end="4129" title="buttocks" label="buttocks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4205" end="4229" title="Cat o&amp;#x27; nine tails#Flogging round the fleet" label="Flogging round the fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q810668" start="4358" end="4371" title="foot whipping" label="foot whipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q206060" start="4519" end="4523" title="scar" label="scar"/>
<link wikidata="Q570784" start="4599" end="4612" title="scarification" label="scarification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602017" start="4623" end="4637" title="branding persons" label="human branding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187980" start="4744" end="4756" title="cropping (punishment)" label="ear cropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q691173" start="4778" end="4790" title="Assyrian law" label="Assyrian law"/>
<link wikidata="Q93304" start="4810" end="4827" title="Code of Hammurabi" label="Code of Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163931" start="4881" end="4903" title="tarring and feathering" label="tarring and feathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q309406" start="5230" end="5236" title="apathy" label="apathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="5238" end="5246" title="paranoia" label="paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="5248" end="5255" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="5257" end="5261" title="PTSD" label="PTSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712140" start="5394" end="5401" title="revenge" label="revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235597" start="5455" end="5466" title="Crucifixion" label="Crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="5483" end="5489" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="5521" end="5534" title="death penalty" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="5536" end="5544" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113114" start="5563" end="5576" title="Roman soldier" label="Roman soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q48422" start="5777" end="5783" title="corpse" label="corpse"/>
<link wikidata="Q41482" start="5806" end="5817" title="post-mortem" label="post-mortem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198167" start="5847" end="5856" title="gibbeting" label="gibbeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="5995" end="6000" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q132539" start="6107" end="6113" title="rosary" label="rosary"/>
<link wikidata="Q203290" start="6302" end="6306" title="yoke" label="yoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484064" start="6317" end="6323" title="stocks" label="stocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="6334" end="6347" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q10682443" start="6435" end="6442" title="pillory" label="pillory"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="6468" end="6480" title="adultery" label="adulteresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q233320" start="6494" end="6502" title="scaffold" label="scaffold"/>
<link wikidata="Q170449" start="6546" end="6549" title="mud" label="mud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138174" start="6608" end="6614" title="verbal abuse" label="verbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827132" start="6619" end="6633" title="physical abuse" label="physical abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="6857" end="6876" title="corporal punishment" label="corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="6895" end="6911" title="colonial America" label="colonial America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484064" start="6957" end="6963" title="stocks" label="stocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10682443" start="6968" end="6975" title="pillory" label="pillory"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="7120" end="7129" title="adulterer" label="adulterer"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="7325" end="7329" title="Thailand" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q157124" start="7364" end="7372" title="hibiscus" label="hibiscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386914" start="7607" end="7626" title="Send under the yoke" label="Send under the yoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404298" start="7677" end="7700" title="Sex offender registry" label="sex offender registries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889767" start="7928" end="7985" title="United States District Court for the District of Colorado" label="United States District Court for the District of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q286918" start="8102" end="8154" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895954" start="8240" end="8275" title="So You&amp;#x27;ve Been Publicly Shamed" label="So You&amp;#x27;ve Been Publicly Shamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400803" start="8298" end="8308" title="Jon Ronson" label="Jon Ronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567104" start="8337" end="8358" title="online shaming" label="online public shaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="8362" end="8369" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q384060" start="8371" end="8377" title="Tumblr" label="Tumblr"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="8396" end="8408" title="social media" label="social media"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544226" wikidata="Q6596782" url="?curid=544226" title="List of Sesame Street puppeteers">
<text>This list of &quot;[[Sesame Street]]&quot; puppeteers includes all who have worked on the show, as a regular, backup, guest puppeteer, etc., and by no means should be taken as complete, as many Muppeteers only have done one skit on the show, and thus aren&#x27;t credited.

==Jim Henson’s Muppets==
* Pam Arciero: (1984–present)
Grundgetta, Crystal of the Squirrelles (puppeteering only), Mae (2005), Black and White Moo Wave Cow, Nani Bird, Various

* Heather Asch: (2006–2009; 2019)
Hansel (2006), Various 

* Billy Barkhurst: (2009–2018)
Ernie (voice for &quot;Sesame Street Live&quot; shows (2009–2014); regular performer (2014–2018))

* Jennifer Barnhart: (2003–present)
Zoe (2016–present), Gladys the Cow (2003–present), Mama Bear (2003–present), Francine Lloyd Wright, Granny Snuffle, Goldilocks (2005), Super Chicken (2005), Granny Bird (2018–present), Mommy Snuffleupagus (2000s), Various

* Bill Barretta: (2001–2010)
Louie, Various 

*Cheryl Blaylock: (1979–1984; 1990–present)
Mona Monster, Cookie Monster&#x27;s Grandma (1982), Forgetful Jones&#x27; Mother and Forgetful Jones&#x27; cousin, Various

* Camille Bonora: (1987–1996)
Meryl Sheep, Ruby, Clementine (1987–1992), Goldilocks (1991–1996), Mama Bear (1993–1996), Gladys the Cow (1992-1996), Juliet, Loretta, Stella, Countess von Backwards (1990), Ingrid (Anything Muppet), Velma the Grouch, Grandma Count, Herry Monster&#x27;s Mother (1993), Polly Darton (1990), Various

* Rickey Boyd: (2006–2013)
The Twiddlebugs (voices for CGI segments), Cookie Monster&#x27;s Grandmother

* Fran Brill: (1970–2015)
Prairie Dawn (1970–2015), Zoe (1993–2015), Betty Lou (1970–1984), Little Bird, Roxie Marie, Polly Darton, Mrs. Crustworthy, Wanda Cousteau, Countess von Backwards (1994–2005), Nora Nicks, Helena, Goldilocks (2007), Mae (2006–2015), Gladys the Cow (1996-2003), Various

* Lisa Buckley: (1993–2008; 2019)
Betty Lou (1993–1998), Darlene of the Squirrelles, Various

* Julianne Buescher: (1991–1995; 2001-2020)
Sherry Netherland (1993–1995), Betty Lou&#x27;s Mommy, Mama Countess, Sophie (1995), Various

* Warrick Brownlow-Pike: (2017–present)
Gonger, Various

* Tyler Bunch: (1993–present)
Louie (2007–present), Mr. Can You Guess, Big Bad Wolf (2007–2013), Super Chicken (2008), Various

* Northern Calloway:
Same Sound Brown, The Hipster, Various

* Leslie Carrara-Rudolph: (2006–present)
Abby Cadabby, Goldilocks (2012–present), Rosa, Rose, Gretel (2006), Velvet, Mae (2006), Baby Natasha (2014-present), Various

* Christopher Cerf: (1973–2012) (voice only)
Little Chrissy, Bruce Stringbean, Mick Swagger, lead Frazzletone, Chrissy from Little Jerry and the Monotones, Captain (&quot;Imagine That&quot;), How Now Brown, Various

* Kevin Clash: (1980; 1984–2013)
Elmo (1985–2012), Hoots the Owl (1985–2012), Baby Natasha (1989-2012), Benny Rabbit (1990-2007), Wolfgang the Seal, Kingston Livingston III, The Grand High Triangle Lover, Clementine (1985–1987), Dr. Nobel Price (1984–1988), Chip Cat, Ferlinghetti Donizetti (1984–1986), Mel, Big Bad Wolf (1980s—2008), Preposterous, Watson, Segi (puppetry), Mario, Professor D. Rabbit, Dexter (head), J. P., Baby Fats Domino, Oliver, Gus, Warren Wolf, Buster the Horse (1980), Sophie (1985), Big Jeffy (1988), Cookie Monster&#x27;s Mommy (2004), One of the Fuzzy Funk, One of the Git Along Little Doggies, One of the Rockheads, Various

* R. Bruce Connelly: (1993–present)
Barkley, Various

* Frankie Cordero: (2016–present)
Rudy, Various

* Austin Michael Costello: (2016–present)
Assistant puppeteer

* Melissa Creighton: (2007–2010; 2014–present)
Various 

* Stephanie D&#x27;Abruzzo: (1993–present)
Prairie Dawn (2016–present), Curly Bear, Mae (2004; 2019–present), Lulu, Elizabeth, Mrs. Crustworthy (2016–present), Googel, Cookie Monster&#x27;s Mommy (2016), Grover&#x27;s Mommy (2001; 2016), Herry Monster&#x27;s Mother (1998), Diva D&#x27;Abruzzo, Various

* Dorien Davies: (2017–present)
Various

* Emilio Delgado: (2005)
Rosita&#x27;s Abuela

* Ryan Dillon: (2005–present)
Elmo (2013–present), Roosevelt Franklin (puppetry - 2019–present), Lefty the Salesman (2019–present), Don Music (2019–present), Dr. Nobel Price (2019), Various

* Alice Dinnean Vernon: (1994–2009; 2019)
Mama Bear (1996–2002), Goldilocks (1996–2004), Sherry Netherland (1995–1998), Little Murray Sparkles, Loretta (1996–1998), Phoebe (2001–2002), Various

* Michael Earl: (1978–1981; 2007-2009)
Snuffy, Poco Loco, Leslie Mostly, Slimey the Worm, Forgetful Jones, Cowboy X, Sullivan, Tarnish Brother, Various 

* Artie Esposito: (2007)
Various

* Olga Felgemacher: (1977–1979)
Mrs. Bolinski, Various

* Michael Frith: (1987-1999; 2003-2009)
Various 

* Peter Friedman: (1976–1978)
Mr. Snuffleupagus (back end), Two-Headed Monster (right head (1978) debut sketch), Various

* Fred &quot;Garbo&quot; Garver: (1984–1993)
Barkley, Dexter (hands), Garbo Gorilla, Various 

* Dave Goelz: (1992–2011; 2019)
Various

* Louise Gold: (1991–1996)
Sally Messy Yuckyael, Loretta (1993), Various

* Stacey Gordon: (2017–present)
Julia

* Tim Gosley: (1985-1990)
Mr. Honker (&quot;Follow That Bird&quot;), Various 

* Liz Hara: (2016–present)
Gladys the Cow (2021-present), Various

* James Godwin (1995-2011; 2019) 
Various

* Chris Hayes: (2017–present)
Hoots the Owl, Various 

* Andy Hayward: (2007)
Various

* Terri Hardin (2000-2004; 2009)
Various

* Brian Henson: (1998-2013)
Various

* Jane Henson: (1973–1974)
Various 

* Jim Henson: (1969–1990; credited up until 2002)
Ernie, Kermit the Frog, Guy Smiley, Little Chrissy (puppetry), Bip Bippadotta, Thomas Twiddlebug, Sinister Sam, Bad Bart, Little Bird (1969), Granny Fanny Nesselrode (1970; 1972), Spaceship Surprise Captain, The Genie (1973), Barry Rhymie (1978), Captain Vegetable (debut sketch), Charlie (occasionally), Yip Yip Martian, Two-Headed Monster&#x27;s Mother, Harvey Monster (occasionally), Beautiful Day Monster, Various

* Richard Hunt: (1972–1992; credited up until 2000)
Two-Headed Monster (right half), Forgetful Jones (1981–1991), Gladys the Cow, Sully, Don Music, Placido Flamingo, Elmo (1984–1985), Sonny Friendly, Ferlinghetti Donizietti (1980–1984), Aristotle, Leo the Party Monster, Dip Cat, Brad, Timmy Twiddlebug, Captain Vegetable, Gilbert, Dr. Kvetch, Richard, Zero, Spaceship Surprise Mate, Worby the Grouch, Earl, Green Alphabeat, The Beetles&#x27; Lead Singer, Tarnish Brother, Grandpa Count, Grandpa Grouch, Larry Rhymie (1978), Mrs. Bolinski (1982), Tough Eddie (1984), Frazzle (1989), Harvey Monster (occasionally), Maurice Monster (occasionally), Yip Yip Martian, Mr. Snuffleupagus (back half, 1970s), Slimey the Worm (1978), Duke, One of the Rockheads, Various

* Michael Elizabeth Huston: (1986–1987)
Juliet, Various

* Eric Jacobson: (1994–present)
Grover (1998–present), Bert (1998–present), Oscar the Grouch (2015–present), Guy Smiley (2005–present), Two-Headed Monster (left half) (2016–present), Harvey Kneeslapper (2019), Various

* Haley Jenkins: (2014–present)
Mama Bear (2019-present), Karli, Various

* Frank Kane: (1979)
Mr. Snuffleupagus (back end)

* John Kennedy: (1993–present)
The Amazing Mumford (2004; 2018–present), Various

* Kathleen Kim: (2016–present)
Elena, Betty Lou (2017-present), Various

* Donna Kimball (2004-2016; 2019)
Various

* Jim Kroupa: (1983–2000)
One of the Rockheads, Various

* Sonia Manzano: (1973; 2013–2014)
Smart Tina (1973), Rosita&#x27;s Abuela (2013–2014)

* Tim Lagasse: (1998–2016; 2019–present)
Various

* Peter Linz: (1991–present)
Ernie (2017–present), Herry Monster (2017–present), Osvaldo, el Gruñón, Timmy Twiddlebug, Samuel, Hansel (2005), Elmo (voice only, &quot;Spaghetti Space Chase&quot; grand opening ceremony) (2013), Captain Vegetable (2019), Various

* Loretta Long: (1969–1970; 1975)
Roosevelt Franklin&#x27;s Mother (voice only), Piccolo player (voice only; &quot;I Am a Fine Musician&quot;), Suzetta Something, Various

* Spencer Lott: (2016–present)
Samuel, Various.

* Sarah Lyle: (2008-2011)
Maisie Weatherberry and Samson Bookworm (series 2 on &quot;Sesame Tree&quot;)

* Rick Lyon: (1988–2008)
Various

* Peter MacKennan: (1987–1994)
Various

* Lara MacLean: (2001–present)
Zoe (2020-present), Various

* Noel MacNeal: (1983–present)
Daddy Snuffle, Mommy Snuffleupagus (1980s–1990s), Granny Snufflie (occasionally), Gretel (2005–2006), Smiley (2014-present), Various

* Amanda Maddock (2006–2007)
Mary, Various

* Jim Martin (1989–2013; 2019)
Preston Rabbit, Lassie, Irvine (1991), Betty Lou&#x27;s Dad, Various

* Drew Massey: (2011-present)
Various

* Joey Mazzarino: (1990–2015)
Murray Monster, Papa Bear, Two-Headed Monster (left head) (2001–2016), Horatio the Elephant, Stinky the Stinkweed, Ingrid, Narf, Joey Monkey, Merry Monster, Colambo, Baby Tooth, Bernie Broccoli, The Fairy Godperson, Cousin Bear, Figby, The Tooth Fairy, Cyranose de Bergerac (2007), Frazzle (2014), The Big Bad Wolf (occasionally), Various

* Paul McGinnis: (2007–present)
Various

* Tracie Mick: (2007–present)
Zoe (puppetry only), Prairie Dawn (puppetry only), Tina, Various

* Alison Mork: (1991–1993; 2009)
Various

* Brian Muehl: (1978–1984; 1988; 1993–1994; 2009-2019)
Barkley (1978–1984; 1987), Telly Monster (1980–1984), Elmo (1980–1984), Dr. Nobel Price, Grundgetta (1980–1984), Clementine, Pearl, Rusty, Alphabet Bates, Tarnish Brother, Gilbert (1980), One of the Rockheads, Various

* Kathryn Mullen: (1978–1994)
Grover&#x27;s Mommy (1981), proto-Elmo (1981), Telly&#x27;s Mom, Various

* Jerry Nelson: (1970–2012)
Count von Count (1972–2012), Mr. Snuffleupagus (1971–1978), Herry Monster (1970–2003), Mr. Johnson (1971–2012), Two-Headed Monster (left half) (1978–2000), The Amazing Mumford (1970–2011), Biff, Sherlock Hemlock, Little Jerry, Frazzle, Fred the Wonder Horse, Farley, Simon Soundman, Sam the Robot (occasionally), Herbert Birdsfoot, Big Bad Wolf (1971–2012), Poco Loco (1974–1976), Tina Twiddlebug, Rodeo Rosie, Mr. Chatterly, Noel Cowherd, Phil Harmonic, Sir John Feelgood, Tough Eddie, Cyranose de Bergerac, H. Ross Parrot, Japanese Storyteller, The Genie, Ernest the Grouch, Granny Grouch, Lefty&#x27;s Boss, Marty, Joe Busby, Jack Be Nimble, Lord Hog, Vern, Cousin Monster, Jackman Wolf, Mary Rhymie (1978), Barry Rhymie (1980), Dr. Kvetch (1997), Cookie Monster&#x27;s Pop, Cookie Monster&#x27;s Sister, Charlie (occasionally), Harvey Monster (occasionally), Tarnish Brother, Mommy Snuffleupagus (1970s), proto-Elmo (1980), Yip Yip Martian, Officer Krupky (Episode 0441), Various

* Carmen Osbahr: (1990–present)
Rosita, Ovejita, Various

* Frank Oz: (1969–2000; occasionally - 2001–2013)
Bert (1969–2000; occasionally - 2003–2006), Cookie Monster (1969–2000; occasionally - 2001–2004), Grover (1969–2000; occasionally - 2002–2012), Roosevelt Franklin (puppetry), Harvey Kneeslapper, Lefty the Salesman, Professor Hastings, Tessie Twiddlebug (1974–1982), Prince Charming, Rufus, Officer Krupky (Episode 0581), Moe Busby, Beautiful Day Monster, Bart, Betty Lou (1969–1970), Charlie (occasionally), Harvey Monster (occasionally), Tarnish Brother, Larry Rhymie (1980), Various

* Bob Payne: (1978–1980)
Telly Monster (1979 debut), Georgie, Slimey the Worm (1978), Mary Rhymie (1980), Various

* Annie Peterle: (2008)
Various

* Karen Prell: (1979–1981; 2003; 2019–2020)
Deena, Masha, Various

* Gord Robertson (1985-2002)
Daddy Dodo (puppeteer), Various on &quot;Sesame Park&quot;

* Martin P. Robinson: (1981–present)
Snuffy, Telly Monster (1984–present), Slimey the Worm, Fluffy, Buster the Horse, Irvine, Monty, Vincent Twice, Mrs. Grouch, Sullivan, Shelley the Turtle, Old MacDonald, Dicky Tick, Ralphie, Tito, Otto the Grouch, Earl (1995), Bart (2017), Mommy Snuffleupagus (1980s), Freddy (2018), Big Bad Wolf (occasionally), One of the Rockheads, Various

* Matt Robinson (1970-1975)
Roosevelt Franklin (voice only)

* David Rudman: (1986–present)
Cookie Monster (2001–present), Baby Bear, Two-Headed Monster (right half) (1998–present), Humphrey, Chicago the Lion, Davey Monkey, Athena, Flo Bear, Sully (1993–1999, 2020–present), Sonny Friendly (1992–2000), Tessie Twiddlebug (1987–1996), Norman, Dr. Edwynn, Ernestine, Rudder Rabbit, Velma Blank, Duane, Tyrone, Freddy (2017), One of the Fuzzy Funk, One of the Git Along Little Doggies, Granny Snuffle (1989), Dip Cat (1992), Cookie Monster&#x27;s Grandma (1994), Mommy Snuffleupagus (1990s), Yip Yip Martian, Various

* Daniel Seagren: (1969–1978)
Big Bird (occasionally), Guy Smiley (debut sketch), Various

* Judy Sladky: (1987–2010)
Alice Snuffleupagus

* Caroll Spinney: (1969–2018)
Big Bird, Oscar the Grouch, Bruno the Trashman, Granny Bird, Granny Fanny Nesselrode, Sam the Robot (occasionally), Shivers the Penguin, Lefty the Salesman (occasionally - 1970), proto-Cookie Monster (1970 sketch), proto-Grover (1970 sketch), Beautiful Day Monster, Various

* David Stephens: (2008)
Various

* Andy Stone: (1999; 2003; 2007)
Various 

* John Tartaglia: (1994–present)
Alfred Duck, Ernie (&quot;Play with Me Sesame&quot;, &quot;Sesame Street 4-D Magic&quot; - 2003), Phoebe (2002), Cookie Monster&#x27;s Mommy (in Episode 4059), Yip Yip Martian, Various

* Toby Towson: (1978)
Barkley

* Allan Trautman: (2002–2010; 2019) 
Various

* Gabriel Velez: (1984–1985; 1998; 2007; 2017-present)
Osvaldo, el Gruñón, Dani

* Matt Vogel: (1997–present)
Big Bird (1997-present), Count von Count (2013–present), Mr. Johnson (2014–present), Herb, Hansel (2006–present), Harvey Kneeslapper (2010), Forgetful Jones (2012; 2019), The Big Bad Wolf (2013), Kermit the Frog (2019), Sherlock Hemlock (2019), Biff (2020–present), Various

* Julie Westwood: (2015-2017)
Bebe (from &quot;The Furchester Hotel&quot;)

* Steve Whitmire: (1993–2014)
Ernie, Kermit the Frog, Dr. Feel, Various

* Caroly Wilcox: (1969–1977)
Various 

* Victor Yerrid: (1998-2010; 2019)
Various 

* Bryant Young: (1979–present)
Snuffy (back end)

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6596782" start="5" end="53" title="List of Sesame Street puppeteers" label="list of &amp;quot;[[Sesame Street]]&amp;quot; puppeteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191037" start="276" end="288" title="Jim Henson" label="Jim Henson’s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128906" start="301" end="312" title="Pam Arciero" label="Pam Arciero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="329" end="339" title="Grundgetta" label="Grundgetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q52704131" start="453" end="465" title="Heather Asch" label="Heather Asch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829" start="485" end="491" title="Hansel and Gretel" label="Hansel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371967" start="541" end="546" title="Bert and Ernie" label="Ernie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178101" start="642" end="659" title="Jennifer Barnhart" label="Jennifer Barnhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="676" end="679" title="Zoe (Sesame Street)" label="Zoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="696" end="710" title="Gladys the Cow" label="Gladys the Cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272355" start="901" end="914" title="Bill Barretta" label="Bill Barretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092695" start="946" end="961" title="Cheryl Blaylock" label="Cheryl Blaylock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754267" start="1003" end="1017" title="Cookie Monster" label="Cookie Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="1041" end="1056" title="Forgetful Jones" label="Forgetful Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="1074" end="1089" title="Forgetful Jones" label="Forgetful Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q51754935" start="1115" end="1129" title="Camille Bonora" label="Camille Bonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="1233" end="1247" title="Gladys the Cow" label="Gladys the Cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="1376" end="1389" title="Herry Monster" label="Herry Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754267" start="1512" end="1526" title="Cookie Monster" label="Cookie Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665614" start="1549" end="1559" title="Fran Brill" label="Fran Brill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="1599" end="1602" title="Zoe (Sesame Street)" label="Zoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898897" start="1616" end="1625" title="Betty Lou" label="Betty Lou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="1652" end="1663" title="Roxie Marie" label="Roxie Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="1805" end="1819" title="Gladys the Cow" label="Gladys the Cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898897" start="1876" end="1885" title="Betty Lou" label="Betty Lou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307858" start="1938" end="1955" title="Julianne Buescher" label="Julianne Buescher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898897" start="2011" end="2020" title="Betty Lou" label="Betty Lou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970688" start="2076" end="2097" title="Warrick Brownlow-Pike" label="Warrick Brownlow-Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859963" start="2133" end="2144" title="Tyler Bunch" label="Tyler Bunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367867" start="2202" end="2214" title="Big Bad Wolf" label="Big Bad Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241583" start="2261" end="2278" title="Northern Calloway" label="Northern Calloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096996" start="2322" end="2344" title="Leslie Carrara-Rudolph" label="Leslie Carrara-Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664447" start="2361" end="2373" title="Abby Cadabby" label="Abby Cadabby"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829" start="2414" end="2420" title="Hansel and Gretel" label="Gretel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="2449" end="2461" title="Baby Natasha" label="Baby Natasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112078" start="2489" end="2505" title="Christopher Cerf (producer)" label="Christopher Cerf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029467" start="2705" end="2716" title="Kevin Clash" label="Kevin Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q762250" start="2736" end="2740" title="Elmo" label="Elmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="2754" end="2767" title="Hoots the Owl" label="Hoots the Owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="2781" end="2793" title="Baby Natasha" label="Baby Natasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="2807" end="2819" title="Benny Rabbit" label="Benny Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367867" start="3012" end="3024" title="Big Bad Wolf" label="Big Bad Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754267" start="3230" end="3244" title="Cookie Monster" label="Cookie Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="3393" end="3400" title="Barkley (Muppet character)" label="Barkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596782" start="3413" end="3428" title="Frankie Cordero" label="Frankie Cordero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="3445" end="3449" title="List of Sesame Street Muppets" label="Rudy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608255" start="3582" end="3606" title="Stephanie D&amp;#x27;Abruzzo" label="Stephanie D&amp;#x27;Abruzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="3652" end="3662" title="Curly Bear" label="Curly Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754267" start="3748" end="3762" title="Cookie Monster" label="Cookie Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914465" start="3784" end="3790" title="Grover" label="Grover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="3818" end="3831" title="Herry Monster" label="Herry Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371852" start="3927" end="3941" title="Emilio Delgado" label="Emilio Delgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q51754194" start="3974" end="3985" title="Ryan Dillon" label="Ryan Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q762250" start="4002" end="4006" title="Elmo" label="Elmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879465" start="4023" end="4041" title="Roosevelt Franklin" label="Roosevelt Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="4069" end="4087" title="Lefty the Salesman" label="Lefty the Salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="4104" end="4113" title="Don Music" label="Don Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725820" start="4165" end="4185" title="Alice Dinnean" label="Alice Dinnean Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830052" start="4359" end="4371" title="Michael Earl Davis" label="Michael Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929202" start="4396" end="4402" title="Mr. Snuffleupagus" label="Snuffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="4447" end="4462" title="Forgetful Jones" label="Forgetful Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="4474" end="4482" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831766" start="4603" end="4616" title="Michael K. Frith" label="Michael Frith"/>
<link wikidata="Q682752" start="4653" end="4667" title="Peter Friedman" label="Peter Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929202" start="4681" end="4698" title="Mr. Snuffleupagus" label="Mr. Snuffleupagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17038697" start="4711" end="4729" title="Two-Headed Monster" label="Two-Headed Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="4818" end="4825" title="Barkley (Sesame Street)" label="Barkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761980" start="4870" end="4880" title="Dave Goelz" label="Dave Goelz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688762" start="4911" end="4922" title="Louise Gold" label="Louise Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187034" start="4985" end="4998" title="Stacey Gordon" label="Stacey Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612763" start="5015" end="5020" title="Julia (Sesame Street)" label="Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803559" start="5024" end="5034" title="Tim Gosley" label="Tim Gosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="5048" end="5058" title="Honkers (Sesame Street)" label="Mr. Honker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234280" start="5066" end="5082" title="Follow That Bird" label="Follow That Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="5128" end="5142" title="Gladys the Cow" label="Gladys the Cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="5241" end="5254" title="Hoots the Owl" label="Hoots the Owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284236" start="5342" end="5354" title="Brian Henson" label="Brian Henson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866176" start="5379" end="5390" title="Jane Henson" label="Jane Henson"/>
<link wikidata="Q191037" start="5416" end="5426" title="Jim Henson" label="Jim Henson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371967" start="5464" end="5469" title="Bert and Ernie" label="Ernie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107971" start="5471" end="5486" title="Kermit the Frog" label="Kermit the Frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881846" start="5488" end="5498" title="Guy Smiley" label="Guy Smiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="5769" end="5784" title="Yip Yips" label="Yip Yip Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17038697" start="5786" end="5804" title="Two-Headed Monster" label="Two-Headed Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137237" start="5851" end="5872" title="Beautiful Day Monster" label="Beautiful Day Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q561809" start="5885" end="5897" title="Richard Hunt (puppeteer)" label="Richard Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17038697" start="5935" end="5953" title="Two-Headed Monster" label="Two-Headed Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="5968" end="5983" title="Forgetful Jones" label="Forgetful Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="5997" end="6011" title="Gladys the Cow" label="Gladys the Cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="6013" end="6018" title="Biff and Sully" label="Sully"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="6020" end="6029" title="Don Music" label="Don Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q762250" start="6049" end="6053" title="Elmo" label="Elmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="6206" end="6213" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="6450" end="6457" title="Frazzle" label="Frazzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="6529" end="6544" title="Yip Yips" label="Yip Yip Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929202" start="6546" end="6563" title="Mr. Snuffleupagus" label="Mr. Snuffleupagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550087" start="6704" end="6717" title="Eric Jacobson" label="Eric Jacobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914465" start="6734" end="6740" title="Grover" label="Grover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371967" start="6757" end="6761" title="Bert and Ernie" label="Bert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663574" start="6778" end="6794" title="Oscar the Grouch" label="Oscar the Grouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881846" start="6811" end="6821" title="Guy Smiley" label="Guy Smiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17038697" start="6838" end="6856" title="Two-Headed Monster" label="Two-Headed Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="6885" end="6903" title="Harvey Kneeslapper" label="Harvey Kneeslapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929202" start="7016" end="7033" title="Mr. Snuffleupagus" label="Mr. Snuffleupagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242859" start="7048" end="7060" title="John Kennedy (puppeteer)" label="John Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="7077" end="7096" title="The Amazing Mumford" label="The Amazing Mumford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730853" start="7130" end="7142" title="Kathleen Kim" label="Kathleen Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898897" start="7166" end="7175" title="Betty Lou" label="Betty Lou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561732" start="7303" end="7316" title="Sonia Manzano" label="Sonia Manzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803791" start="7391" end="7402" title="Tim Lagasse" label="Tim Lagasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175476" start="7441" end="7451" title="Peter Linz" label="Peter Linz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371967" start="7468" end="7473" title="Bert and Ernie" label="Ernie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="7490" end="7503" title="Herry Monster" label="Herry Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829" start="7566" end="7572" title="Hansel and Gretel" label="Hansel"/>
<link wikidata="Q762250" start="7581" end="7585" title="Elmo" label="Elmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q299342" start="7702" end="7714" title="Loretta Long" label="Loretta Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456010" start="8006" end="8017" title="Sesame Tree" label="Sesame Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331562" start="8028" end="8037" title="Rick Lyon" label="Rick Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="8131" end="8134" title="Zoe (Sesame Street)" label="Zoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047085" start="8162" end="8174" title="Noel MacNeal" label="Noel MacNeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829" start="8273" end="8279" title="Hansel and Gretel" label="Gretel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360987" start="8354" end="8358" title="Mary Had a Little Lamb" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q176078" start="8371" end="8381" title="Jim Martin (puppeteer)" label="Jim Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898897" start="8439" end="8448" title="Betty Lou" label="Betty Lou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404078" start="8472" end="8483" title="Drew Massey" label="Drew Massey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885548" start="8511" end="8525" title="Joey Mazzarino" label="Joey Mazzarino"/>
<link wikidata="Q17038697" start="8566" end="8584" title="Two-Headed Monster" label="Two-Headed Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="8821" end="8828" title="Frazzle" label="Frazzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152349" start="8881" end="8894" title="Paul McGinnis" label="Paul McGinnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964758" start="9060" end="9071" title="Brian Meehl" label="Brian Muehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="9113" end="9120" title="Barkley (Muppet character)" label="Barkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="9140" end="9153" title="Telly Monster" label="Telly Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q762250" start="9167" end="9171" title="Elmo" label="Elmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="9202" end="9212" title="Grundgetta" label="Grundgetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="9285" end="9292" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377099" start="9334" end="9348" title="Kathryn Mullen" label="Kathryn Mullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914465" start="9362" end="9368" title="Grover" label="Grover"/>
<link wikidata="Q762250" start="9396" end="9400" title="Elmo" label="Elmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="9409" end="9414" title="Telly Monster" label="Telly"/>
<link wikidata="Q468028" start="9438" end="9450" title="Jerry Nelson" label="Jerry Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12345" start="9464" end="9479" title="Count von Count" label="Count von Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929202" start="9493" end="9510" title="Mr. Snuffleupagus" label="Mr. Snuffleupagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="9524" end="9537" title="Herry Monster" label="Herry Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="9551" end="9562" title="Mr. Johnson (Sesame Street)" label="Mr. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17038697" start="9576" end="9594" title="Two-Headed Monster" label="Two-Headed Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="9620" end="9639" title="The Amazing Mumford" label="The Amazing Mumford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="9653" end="9657" title="Biff and Sully" label="Biff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495073" start="9659" end="9675" title="Sherlock Hemlock" label="Sherlock Hemlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="9691" end="9698" title="Frazzle" label="Frazzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="9723" end="9729" title="Farley (Sesame Street)" label="Farley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="9747" end="9760" title="Sam the Robot" label="Sam the Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367867" start="9796" end="9808" title="Big Bad Wolf" label="Big Bad Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="9862" end="9873" title="Rodeo Rosie" label="Rodeo Rosie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059422" start="10093" end="10107" title="Jack Be Nimble" label="Jack Be Nimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754267" start="10215" end="10229" title="Cookie Monster" label="Cookie Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754267" start="10242" end="10256" title="Cookie Monster" label="Cookie Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q762250" start="10379" end="10383" title="Elmo" label="Elmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="10392" end="10407" title="Yip Yips" label="Yip Yip Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043534" start="10451" end="10464" title="Carmen Osbahr" label="Carmen Osbahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368975" start="10481" end="10487" title="Rosita (Sesame Street)" label="Rosita"/>
<link wikidata="Q311319" start="10509" end="10517" title="Frank Oz" label="Frank Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371967" start="10557" end="10561" title="Bert and Ernie" label="Bert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754267" start="10601" end="10615" title="Cookie Monster" label="Cookie Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914465" start="10655" end="10661" title="Grover" label="Grover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879465" start="10701" end="10719" title="Roosevelt Franklin" label="Roosevelt Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="10732" end="10750" title="Harvey Kneeslapper" label="Harvey Kneeslapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="10752" end="10770" title="Lefty the Salesman" label="Lefty the Salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="10772" end="10790" title="Professor Hastings" label="Professor Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137237" start="10889" end="10910" title="Beautiful Day Monster" label="Beautiful Day Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898897" start="10918" end="10927" title="Betty Lou" label="Betty Lou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933611" start="11045" end="11054" title="Bob Payne" label="Bob Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="11068" end="11081" title="Telly Monster" label="Telly Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116718" start="11193" end="11204" title="Karen Prell" label="Karen Prell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455980" start="11328" end="11339" title="Sesame Park" label="Sesame Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648580" start="11349" end="11367" title="Martin P. Robinson" label="Martin P. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929202" start="11384" end="11390" title="Mr. Snuffleupagus" label="Snuffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="11392" end="11405" title="Telly Monster" label="Telly Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="11508" end="11516" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q860184" start="11538" end="11551" title="Old MacDonald" label="Old MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367867" start="11667" end="11679" title="Big Bad Wolf" label="Big Bad Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757958" start="11729" end="11742" title="Matt Robinson (actor)" label="Matt Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879465" start="11755" end="11773" title="Roosevelt Franklin" label="Roosevelt Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469960" start="11790" end="11802" title="David Rudman" label="David Rudman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754267" start="11819" end="11833" title="Cookie Monster" label="Cookie Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="11850" end="11859" title="Baby Bear (Sesame Street)" label="Baby Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q17038697" start="11861" end="11879" title="Two-Headed Monster" label="Two-Headed Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="11969" end="11974" title="Biff and Sully" label="Sully"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754267" start="12249" end="12263" title="Cookie Monster" label="Cookie Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="12316" end="12331" title="Yip Yips" label="Yip Yip Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q242562" start="12372" end="12380" title="Big Bird" label="Big Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881846" start="12397" end="12407" title="Guy Smiley" label="Guy Smiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711164" start="12435" end="12446" title="Judy Schwomeyer" label="Judy Sladky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="12460" end="12479" title="Alice Snuffleupagus" label="Alice Snuffleupagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q561765" start="12483" end="12497" title="Caroll Spinney" label="Caroll Spinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q242562" start="12511" end="12519" title="Big Bird" label="Big Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663574" start="12521" end="12537" title="Oscar the Grouch" label="Oscar the Grouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="12597" end="12610" title="Sam the Robot" label="Sam the Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="12648" end="12666" title="Lefty the Salesman" label="Lefty the Salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754267" start="12696" end="12710" title="Cookie Monster" label="Cookie Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914465" start="12732" end="12738" title="Grover" label="Grover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137237" start="12754" end="12775" title="Beautiful Day Monster" label="Beautiful Day Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240068" start="12788" end="12802" title="David Stephens" label="David Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260257" start="12865" end="12879" title="John Tartaglia" label="John Tartaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371967" start="12909" end="12914" title="Bert and Ernie" label="Ernie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235315" start="12922" end="12941" title="Play with Me Sesame" label="Play with Me Sesame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754267" start="13009" end="13023" title="Cookie Monster" label="Cookie Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="13056" end="13071" title="Yip Yips" label="Yip Yip Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811901" start="13084" end="13095" title="Toby Towson" label="Toby Towson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="13104" end="13111" title="Barkley (Muppet character)" label="Barkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731007" start="13115" end="13129" title="Allan Trautman" label="Allan Trautman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241560" start="13242" end="13252" title="Matt Vogel (puppeteer)" label="Matt Vogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q242562" start="13269" end="13277" title="Big Bird" label="Big Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q12345" start="13294" end="13309" title="Count von Count" label="Count von Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="13326" end="13337" title="Mr. Johnson (Sesame Street)" label="Mr. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829" start="13360" end="13366" title="Hansel and Gretel" label="Hansel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="13383" end="13401" title="Harvey Kneeslapper" label="Harvey Kneeslapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="13410" end="13425" title="Forgetful Jones" label="Forgetful Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367867" start="13440" end="13456" title="The Big Bad Wolf" label="The Big Bad Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107971" start="13465" end="13480" title="Kermit the Frog" label="Kermit the Frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495073" start="13489" end="13505" title="Sherlock Hemlock" label="Sherlock Hemlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596780" start="13514" end="13518" title="Biff and Sully" label="Biff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308580" start="13546" end="13560" title="Julie Westwood" label="Julie Westwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154938" start="13591" end="13611" title="The Furchester Hotel" label="The Furchester Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34939" start="13622" end="13636" title="Steve Whitmire" label="Steve Whitmire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371967" start="13650" end="13655" title="Bert and Ernie" label="Ernie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107971" start="13657" end="13672" title="Kermit the Frog" label="Kermit the Frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926467" start="13734" end="13747" title="Victor Yerrid" label="Victor Yerrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449975" start="13779" end="13791" title="Bryant Young" label="Bryant Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929202" start="13808" end="13814" title="Mr. Snuffleupagus" label="Snuffy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544227" wikidata="Q2565212" url="?curid=544227" title="Random-access machine">
<text>In computer science, random-access machine (RAM or RA-machine) is a model of computation that describes an abstract machine in the general class of register machines. The RA-machine is very similar to the counter machine but with the added capability of &#x27;indirect addressing&#x27; of its registers. The &#x27;registers&#x27; are intuitively equivalent to main memory of a common computer, except for the additional ability of registers to store natural numbers of any size. Like the counter machine, the RA-machine contains the execution instructions in the finite-state portion of the machine (the so-called Harvard architecture).

The RA-machine&#x27;s equivalent of the universal Turing machinewith its program in the registers as well as its datais called the random-access stored-program machine or RASP-machine. It is an example of the so-called von Neumann architecture and is closest to the common notion of a computer.

Together with the Turing machine and counter-machine models, the RA-machine and RASP-machine models are used for computational complexity analysis. Van Emde Boas (1990) calls these three together with the pointer machine, &quot;sequential machine&quot; models, to distinguish them from &quot;parallel random-access machine&quot; models.

==Informal description==

An RA-machine consists of the following:

* an infinite number of memory locations called &quot;registers&quot;; each register has an address which is a natural number or zero; each register can store exactly one natural number of any size, or a zero
* the instruction table, or just &quot;table&quot;, containing execution instructions; the exact instruction set varies depending on the author; common instructions include: increment, decrement, clear to zero, copy, conditional jump, halt; other instructions are unnecessary because they can be created by combinations of instructions from the instruction set
* one special register called the &quot;instruction register&quot; (IR); this register points to the instruction being executed in the instruction table 
For a description of a similar concept, but humorous, see the esoteric programming language Brainfuck.

==Introduction to the model==
The concept of a random-access machine (RAM) starts with the simplest model of all, the so-called counter machine model. Two additions move it away from the counter machine, however. The first enhances the machine with the convenience of indirect addressing; the second moves the model toward the more conventional accumulator-based computer with the addition of one or more auxiliary (dedicated) registers, the most common of which is called &quot;the accumulator&quot;.

=== Formal definition ===
A &quot;random-access machine&quot; (RAM) is an abstract computational-machine model identical to a multiple-register counter machine with the addition of indirect addressing. At the discretion of instruction from its finite-state machine&#x27;s TABLE, the machine derives a &quot;target&quot; register&#x27;s address either (i) directly from the instruction itself, or (ii) indirectly from the &quot;contents&quot; (e.g. number, label) of the &quot;pointer&quot; register specified in the instruction.

By definition: A &quot;register&quot; is a location with both an &quot;address&quot; (a unique, distinguishable designation/locator equivalent to a natural number) and a &quot;content&quot;a single natural number. For precision we will use the quasi-formal symbolism from Boolos-Burgess-Jeffrey (2002) to specify a register, its contents, and an operation on a register:
* [r] means &quot;the contents of register with address r&quot;. The label &quot;r&quot; here is a &quot;variable&quot; that can be filled with a natural number or a letter (e.g. &quot;A&quot;) or a name.
* → means &quot;copy/deposit into&quot;, or &quot;replaces&quot;, but without destruction of the source
:: Example: [3] +1 → 3; means &quot;The contents of source register with address &quot;3&quot;, plus 1, is put into destination register with address &quot;3&quot; (here source and destination are the same place). If [3]=37, that is, the contents of register 3 is the number &quot;37&quot;, then 37+1 = 38 will be put into register 3.

:: Example: [3] → 5; means &quot;The contents of source register with address &quot;3&quot; is put into destination register with address &quot;5&quot;. If [3]=38, that is, the contents of register 3 is the number 38, then this number will be put into register 5. The contents of register 3 are not disturbed by this operation, so [3] continues to be 38, now the same as [5].

Definition: A &quot;direct&quot; instruction is one that specifies &quot;in the instruction itself&quot; the address of the source or destination register whose contents will be the subject of the instruction.
Definition: An &quot;indirect instruction&quot; is one that specifies a &quot;pointer register&quot;, the contents of which is the address of a &quot;target&quot; register. The target register can be either a source or a destination (the various COPY instructions provide examples of this). A register can address itself indirectly.
:For want of a standard/convention this article will specify &quot;direct/indirect&quot;, abbreviated as &quot;d/i&quot;, as a parameter (or parameters) in the instruction:
::Example: COPY ( d, A, i, N ) means directly d get the source register&#x27;s address (register &quot;A&quot;) from the instruction itself but indirectly i get the destination address from pointer-register N. Suppose [N]=3, then register 3 is the destination and the instruction will do the following: [A] → 3.

Definition: The contents of &quot;source register&quot; is used by the instruction. The source register&#x27;s address can be specified either (i) directly by the instruction, or (ii) indirectly by the pointer register specified by the instruction.

Definition: The contents of the &quot;pointer register&quot; is the &quot;address&quot; of the &quot;target&quot; register.

Definition: The contents of the &quot;pointer register&quot; points to the &quot;target register&quot;the &quot;target&quot; may be either a source or a destination register.

Definition: The &quot;destination register&quot; is where the instruction deposits its result. The source register&#x27;s address can be specified either (i) directly by the instruction, or (ii) indirectly by the pointer register specified by the instruction. The source and destination registers can be one.

=== Refresher: The counter-machine model ===
:&quot;Melzak (1961) provides an easy visualization of a counter machine: its &quot;registers&quot; are holes in the ground, and these holes hold pebbles. Per an instruction, into and out of these holes &quot;the computer&quot; (person or machine) adds (INCrements) or removes (DECrements) a single pebble. As needed, additional pebbles come from, and excess pebbles go back into, an infinite supply; if the hole is too small to accommodate the pebbles the &quot;computer&quot; digs the hole bigger.&quot;

:&quot;Minsky (1961) and Hopcroft-Ullman 1979 (p. 171) offer the visualization of a multi-tape Turing machine with as many left-ended tapes as &quot;registers&quot;. Each tape&#x27;s length is unbounded to the right, and every square is blank except for the left end, which is marked. The &quot;distance&quot; of a tape&#x27;s &quot;head&quot; from its left end, measured in numbers of tape-squares, represents the natural number in &quot;the register&quot;. To DECrement the count of squares the tape head moves left; INCrement it moves right. There is no need to print or erase marks on the tape; the only conditional instructions are to check to see if the head is at the left end, by testing a left-end mark with a &quot;Jump-if-marked instruction&quot;.&quot;

:&quot;The following instruction &quot;mnemonics&quot; e.g. &quot;CLR (r)&quot; are arbitrary; no standard exists.&quot;

The register machine has, for a memory external to its finite-state machinean unbounded (cf: footnote|countable and unbounded) collection of discrete and uniquely labelled locations with &quot;unbounded&quot; capacity, called &quot;registers&quot;. These registers hold only natural numbers (zero and positive integers). Per a list of sequential instructions in the finite-state machine&#x27;s TABLE, a few (e.g. 2) types of primitive operations operate on the contents of these &quot;registers&quot;. Finally, a &quot;conditional-expression&quot; in the form of an &quot;IF-THEN-ELSE&quot; is available to test the contents of one or two registers and &quot;branch/jump&quot; the finite-state machine out of the default instruction-sequence.

Base model 1: The model closest to Minsky&#x27;s (1961) visualization and to Lambek (1961):
* { INCrement contents of register r, DECrement contents of register r, &quot;IF&quot; contents of register r is Zero &quot;THEN&quot; Jump to instruction Iz &quot;ELSE&quot; continue to next instruction }:

Base model 2: The &quot;successor&quot; model (named after the successor function of the Peano axioms):
* { INCrement the contents of register r, CLeaR the contents of register r, &quot;IF&quot; contents of register rj Equals the contents of register rk &quot;THEN&quot; Jump to instruction Iz &quot;ELSE&quot; goto to next instruction }

Base model 3: Used by Elgot-Robinson (1964) in their investigation of bounded and unbounded RASPsthe &quot;successor&quot; model with COPY in the place of CLEAR:
* { INCrement the contents of register r, COPY the contents of register rj to register rk, &quot;IF&quot; contents of register rj Equals the contents of register rk &quot;then&quot; Jump to instruction Iz &quot;ELSE&quot; goto to next instruction }

===Creating &quot;convenience instructions&quot; from the base sets===
The three base sets 1, 2, or 3 above are equivalent in the sense that one can create the instructions of one set using the instructions of another set (an interesting exercise: a hint from Minsky (1967)declare a reserved register e.g. call it &quot;0&quot; (or Z for &quot;zero&quot; or E for &quot;erase&quot;) to contain the number 0). The choice of model will depend on which an author finds easiest to use in a demonstration, or a proof, etc.

Moreover, from base sets 1, 2, or 3 we can create &quot;any&quot; of the primitive recursive functions ( cf Minsky (1967), Boolos-Burgess-Jeffrey (2002) ). (How to cast the net wider to capture the &quot;total&quot; and &quot;partial&quot; mu recursive functions will be discussed in context of indirect addressing). However, building the primitive recursive functions is difficult because the instruction sets are so ... primitive (tiny). One solution is to expand a particular set with &quot;convenience instructions&quot; from another set:
:&quot;These will not be subroutines in the conventional sense but rather &quot;blocks&quot; of instructions created from the base set and given a mnemonic. In a formal sense, to use these blocks we need to either (i) &quot;expand&quot; them into their base-instruction equivalentsthey will require the use of temporary or &quot;auxiliary&quot; registers so the model must take this into account, or (ii) design our machines/models with the instructions &#x27;built in&#x27;.&quot;
:Example: Base set 1. To create CLR (r) use the block of instructions to count down register r to zero. Observe the use of the hint mentioned above:
:* CLR (r) =equiv
:* &quot;loop&quot;: JZ (r, &quot;exit&quot;)
::* DEC (r)
::* JZ (0, &quot;loop&quot;)
:* &quot;exit&quot;: etc.

Again, all of this is for convenience only; none of this increases the model&#x27;s intrinsic power.

For example: the most expanded set would include each unique instruction from the three sets, plus unconditional jump J (z) i.e.:
* { CLR (r), DEC (r), INC (r), CPY ( rs, rd ), JZ (r, z), JE ( rj, rk, z ), J(z) }

Most authors pick one or the other of the conditional jumps, e.g. Shepherdson-Sturgis (1963) use the above set minus JE (to be perfectly accurate they use JNZJump if &quot;Not&quot; Zero in place of JZ; yet another possible convenience instruction).

== The &quot;indirect&quot; operation ==

=== Example of indirect addressing ===
In our daily lives the notion of an &quot;indirect operation&quot; is not unusual.
:Example: A treasure hunt.
:At location &quot;Tom_&amp;_Becky&#x27;s_cave_in_pirate_chest&quot; will be where we can find a map directing us to &quot;the treasure&quot;:
::(1) We go to location &quot;Tom_&amp;_Becky&#x27;s_cave...&quot; and dig around until we find a wooden box
::(2) Inside the box is a map to the location of the treasure: &quot;under_Thatcher&#x27;s_front_porch&quot;
::(3) We go to location &quot;under_Thatcher&#x27;s_front_porch&quot;, jackhammer away the concrete, and discover &quot;the treasure&quot;: a sack of rusty door-knobs.

Indirection specifies a location identified as the pirate chest in &quot;Tom_&amp;_Becky&#x27;s_cave...&quot; that acts as a &quot;pointer&quot; to any other location (including itself): its contents (the treasure map) provides the &quot;address&quot; of the &quot;target&quot; location
&quot;under_Thatcher&#x27;s_front_porch&quot; where the real action is occurring.

===Why the need for an indirect operation: Two major problems with the counter-machine model===
In the following one must remember that these models are abstract models with two fundamental differences from anything physically real: unbounded numbers of registers each with unbounded capacities. The problem appears most dramatically when one tries to use a counter-machine model to build a RASP that is Turing equivalent and thus compute any partial mu recursive function:
* &quot;Melzak (1961) added indirection to his &quot;hole-and-pebble&quot; model so that his model could modify itself with a &quot;computed goto&quot; and provides two examples of its use (&quot;Decimal representation in the scale of d&quot; and &quot;Sorting by magnitude&quot;, whether these are used in his proof that the model is Turing equivalent is unclear since &quot;the program itself is left to the reader as an exercise&quot; (p. 292)). Minsky (1961, 1967) was able to demonstrate that, with suitable (but difficult-to-use) Gödel number encoding, the register model did not need indirection to be Turing equivalent; but it did need at least one unbounded register. As noted below, Minsky (1967) hints at the problem for a RASP but doesn&#x27;t offer a solution. Elgot and Robinson (1964) proved that their RASP model P0it has no indirection capabilitycannot compute all &quot;recursive sequential functions&quot; (ones that have parameters of arbitrary length) if it does not have the capability of modifying its own instructions, but it can via Gödel numbers if it does (p. 395-397; in particular figure 2 and footnote p. 395). On the other hand their RASP model P&#x27;0 equipped with an &quot;index register&quot; (indirect addressing) can compute all the &quot;partial recursive sequential functions&quot; (the mu recursive functions) (p. 397-398).&quot;
:&quot;Cook and Reckhow (1973) say it most succinctly:&quot;
::&quot;The indirect instructions are necessary in order for a fixed program to access an unbounded number of registers as the inputs vary.&quot; (p. 73)&quot;
* Unbounded &quot;capacities&quot; of registers versus bounded capacities of state-machine instructions: The so-called &quot;finite&quot; state part of the machine is supposed to beby the normal definition of algorithm&quot;very&quot; finite both in the number of &quot;states&quot; (instructions) and the instructions&#x27; sizes (their capacity to hold symbols/signs). So how does a state machine move an arbitrarily large constant directly into a register, e.g. MOVE (k, r) (Move constant k to register r)? If huge constants are necessary they must either start out in the registers themselves or be created by the state machine using a finite number of instructions e.g. multiply and add subroutines using INC and DEC (but not a quasi-infinite number of these!).
::&quot;Sometimes the constant k will be created by use of CLR ( r ) followed by INC ( r ) repeated k timese.g. to put the constant k=3 into register r, i.e. 3 → r, so at the end of the instruction [r]=3: CLR (r), INC (r), INC (r), INC (r). This trick is mentioned by Kleene (1952) p. 223. The problem arises when the number to be created exhausts the number of instructions available to the &quot;finite&quot; state machine; there is always a bigger constant than the number of instructions available to the &quot;finite&quot; state machine.&quot;
* Unbounded &quot;numbers&quot; of registers versus bounded state-machine instructions: This is more severe than the first problem. In particular, this problem arises when we attempt to build a so-called RASP, a &quot;universal machine&quot; (see more at Universal Turing machine) that uses its finite-state machine to interpret a &quot;program of instructions&quot; located in its registersi.e. we are building what is nowadays called a computer with the von Neumann architecture.

:Observe that the counter machine&#x27;s finite-state machine must call out a register &quot;explicitly&quot; (directly) by its name/number: INC (65,356) calls out register number &quot;65,365&quot; &quot;explicitly&quot;. If the number of registers exceeds the capability of the &quot;finite&quot; state machine to address them, then registers outside the bounds will be unreachable. For example, if the finite-state machine can only reach 65,536 = 216 registers then how can it reach the 65,537th?

So how &quot;do&quot; we address a register beyond the bounds of the finite-state machine? One approach would be to modify the &quot;program&quot;-instructions (the ones stored in the registers) so that they contain more than one command. But this too can be exhausted unless an instruction is of (potentially) unbounded size. So why not use just one &quot;über-instruction&quot;one really really big numberthat contains &quot;all&quot; the program instructions encoded into it! This is how Minsky solves the problem, but the Gödel numbering he uses represents a great inconvenience to the model, and the result is nothing at all like our intuitive notion of a &quot;stored program computer&quot;.

Elgot and Robinson (1964) come to a similar conclusion with respect to a RASP that is &quot;finitely determined&quot;. Indeed it can access an unbounded number of registers (e.g. to fetch instructions from them) but only if the RASP allows &quot;self modification&quot; of its &quot;program&quot; instructions, and has encoded its &quot;data&quot; in a Gödel number (Fig. 2 p. 396).

In the context of a more computer-like model using his RPT (repeat) instruction Minsky (1967) tantalizes us with a solution to the problem (cf p. 214, p. 259) but offers no firm resolution. He asserts:
:&quot;In general a RPT operation could not be an instruction in the finite-state part of the machine ... this might exhaust any particular amount of storage allowed in the finite part of the computer [sic, his name for his RAM models]. RPT operations require infinite registers of their own.&quot; (p. 214).

He offers us a &quot;bounded&quot; RPT that together with CLR (r) and INC (r) can compute any primitive recursive function, and he offers the unbounded RPT quoted above that as playing the role of μ operator; it together with CLR (r) and INC (r) can compute the mu recursive functions. But he does not discuss &quot;indirection&quot; or the RAM model per se.

From the references in Hartmanis (1971) it appears that Cook (in his lecture notes while at UC Berkeley, 1970) has firmed up the notion of indirect addressing. This becomes clearer in the paper of Cook and Reckhow (1973)Cook is Reckhow&#x27;s Master&#x27;s thesis advisor. Hartmanis&#x27; modelquite similar to Melzak&#x27;s (1961) modeluses two and three-register adds and subtracts and two parameter copies; Cook and Reckhow&#x27;s model reduce the number of parameters (registers called out in the program instructions) to one call-out by use of an accumulator &quot;AC&quot;.

The solution in a nutshell: Design our machine/model with unbounded indirectionprovide an &quot;unbounded&quot; &quot;address&quot; register that can potentially name (call out) any register no matter how many there are. For this to work, in general, the &quot;unbounded&quot; register requires an ability to be cleared and then incremented (and, possibly, decremented) by a potentially infinite loop. In this sense the solution represents the unbounded μ operator that can, if necessary, hunt ad infinitum along the unbounded string of registers until it finds what it is looking for. The pointer register is exactly like any other register with one exception: under the circumstances called &quot;indirect addressing&quot; it provides &quot;its&quot; contents, rather than the address-operand in the state machine&#x27;s TABLE, to be the address of the target register (including possibly itself!).

=== Bounded indirection and the primitive recursive functions ===
If we eschew the Minsky approach of one monster number in one register, and specify that our machine model will be &quot;like a computer&quot; we have to confront this problem of indirection if we are to compute the recursive functions (also called the μ-recursive functions )both total and partial varieties.

Our simpler counter-machine model can do a &quot;bounded&quot; form of indirectionand thereby compute the sub-class of primitive recursive functionsby using a primitive recursive &quot;operator&quot; called &quot;definition by cases&quot; (defined in Kleene (1952) p. 229 and Boolos-Burgess-Jeffrey p. 74). Such a &quot;bounded indirection&quot; is a laborious, tedious affair. &quot;Definition by cases&quot; requires the machine to determine/distinguish the contents of the pointer register by attempting, time after time until success, to match this contents against a number/name that the case operator &quot;explicitly&quot; declares. Thus the definition by cases starts from e.g. the lower bound address and continues ad nauseam toward the upper bound address attempting to make a match:
: &quot;Is the number in register N equal to 0? If not then is it equal to 1? 2? 3? ... 65364? If not then we&#x27;re at the last number 65365 and this had better be the one, else we have a problem!&quot;

&quot;Bounded&quot; indirection will not allow us to compute the partial recursive functionsfor those we need &quot;unbounded&quot; indirection aka the μ operator.
:&quot;Suppose we had been able to continue on to number 65367, and in fact that register had what we were looking for. Then we could have completed our calculation successfully! But suppose 65367 didn&#x27;t have what we needed. How far should we continue to go?&quot;

To be Turing equivalent the counter machine needs to either use the unfortunate single-register Minsky Gödel number method, or be augmented with an ability to explore the ends of its register string, ad infinitum if necessary. (A failure to find something &quot;out there&quot; defines what it means for an algorithm to fail to terminate; cf Kleene (1952) pp. 316ff &quot;Chapter XII Partial Recursive Functions&quot;, in particular p. 323-325.) See more on this in the example below.

=== Unbounded indirection and the partial recursive functions ===
For &quot;unbounded&quot; indirection we require a &quot;hardware&quot; change in our machine model. Once we make this change the model is no longer a counter machine, but rather a random-access machine.

Now when e.g. INC is specified, the finite-state machine&#x27;s instruction will have to specify &quot;where&quot; the address of the register of interest will come from. This &quot;where&quot; can be either (i) the state machine&#x27;s instruction that provides an &quot;explicit label&quot;, or (ii) the &quot;pointer-register&quot; whose &quot;contents&quot; is the address of interest. Whenever an instruction specifies a register address it now will &quot;also&quot; need to specify an additional parameter &quot;i/d&quot;&quot;indirect/direct&quot;. In a sense this new &quot;i/d&quot; parameter is a &quot;switch&quot; that flips one way to get the direct address as specified in the instruction or the other way to get the indirect address from the pointer register (which pointer registerin some models every register can be a pointer registeris specified by the instruction). This &quot;mutually exclusive but exhaustive choice&quot; is yet another example of &quot;definition by cases&quot;, and the arithmetic equivalent shown in the example below is derived from the definition in Kleene (1952) p. 229.

:Example: CPY ( indirectsource, rsource, directdestination, rdestination )

:Assign a code to specify direct addressing as d=&quot;0&quot; and indirect addressing as i=&quot;1&quot;. Then our machine can determine the source address as follows:
:: i*[rs] + (1-i)*rs
:For example, suppose the contents of register 3 are &quot;5&quot; (i.e. [3]=5 ) and the contents of register 4 are &quot;2&quot; (i.e. [4]=2 ):

:: Example: CPY ( 1, 3, 0, 4 ) = CPY ( indirect, reg 3, direct, reg 4 )
::: 1*[3] + 0*3 = [3] = source-register address 5
::: 0*[4] + 1*4 = 4 = destination-register address 4

:: Example: CPY ( 0, 3, 0, 4 )
::: 0*[3] + 1*3 = 3 = source-register address 3
::: 0*[4] + 1*4 = 4 = destination-register address 4

:: Example: CPY ( 0, 3, 1, 4 )
::: 0*[3] + 1*3 = 3 = source-register address 3
::: 1*[4] + 0*4 = [4] = destination-register address 2

=== The indirect COPY instruction ===
Probably the most useful of the added instructions is COPY. Indeed, Elgot-Robinson (1964) provide their models P0 and P&#x27;0 with the COPY instructions, and Cook-Reckhow (1973) provide their accumulator-based model with only two indirect instructionsCOPY to accumulator indirectly, COPY from accumulator indirectly.

A plethora of instructions: Because any instruction acting on a single register can be augmented with its indirect &quot;dual&quot; (including conditional and unconditional jumps, cf the Elgot-Robinson model), the inclusion of indirect instructions will double the number of single parameter/register instructions (e.g. INC (d, r), INC (i, r)). Worse, every two parameter/register instruction will have 4 possible varieties, e.g.:

: CPY (d, rs, d, rd ) = COPY directly from source-register directly to destination-register
: CPY (i, rsp, d, rd ) = COPY to destination-register indirectly using the source address to be found in the source-pointer register rsp.
: CPY (d, rs, i, rdp ) = COPY contents of source-register indirectly into register using destination address to be found in the destination-pointer register rdp.
: CPY (i, rsp, i, rdp ) = COPY indirectly the contents of the source register with address to be found in source-pointer register rsp, into the destination register with address to be found in the destination-pointer register rdp)

In a similar manner every three-register instruction that involves two source registers rs1 rs2 and a destination register rd will result in 8 varieties, for example the addition:
:: [rs1] + [rs2] → rd

will yield:
* ADD ( d, rs1, d, rs2, d, rd )
* ADD ( i, rsp1, d, rs2, d, rd )
* ADD ( d, rs1, i, rsp2, d, rd )
* ADD ( i, rsp1, i, rsp2, d, rd )
* ADD ( d, rs1, d, rs2, i, rdp )
* ADD ( i, rsp1, d, rs2, i, rdp )
* ADD ( d, rs1, i, rsp2, i, rdp )
* ADD ( i, rsp1, i, rsp2, i, rdp )

If we designate one register to be the &quot;accumulator&quot; (see below) and place strong restrictions on the various instructions allowed then we can greatly reduce the plethora of direct and indirect operations. However, one must be sure that the resulting reduced instruction-set is sufficient, and we must be aware that the reduction will come at the expense of more instructions per &quot;significant&quot; operation.

== The notion of &quot;accumulator A&quot; ==
Historical convention dedicates a register to the accumulator, an &quot;arithmetic organ&quot; that literally accumulates its number during a sequence of arithmetic operations:
:&quot;The first part of our arithmetic organ ... should be a parallel storage organ which can receive a number and add it to the one already in it, which is also able to clear its contents and which can store what it contains. We will call such an organ an &quot;Accumulator&quot;. It is quite conventional in principle in past and present computing machines of the most varied types, e.g. desk multipliers, standard IBM counters, more modern relay machines, the ENIAC&quot; (boldface in original: Goldstine and von Neumann, 1946; p. 98 in Bell and Newell 1971).

However, the accumulator comes at the expense of more instructions per arithmetic &quot;operation&quot;, in particular with respect to what are called &#x27;read-modify-write&#x27; instructions such as &quot;Increment indirectly the contents of the register pointed to by register r2 &quot;. &quot;A&quot; designates the &quot;accumulator&quot; register A:

If we stick with a specific name for the accumulator, e.g. &quot;A&quot;, we can imply the accumulator in the instructions, for example,
: INC ( A ) = INCA
However, when we write the CPY instructions without the accumulator called out the instructions are ambiguous or they must have empty parameters:
: CPY ( d, r2, d, A ) = CPY (d, r2, , )
: CPY ( d, A, d, r2 ) = CPY ( , , d, r2)

Historically what has happened is these two CPY instructions have received distinctive names; however, no convention exists. Tradition (e.g. Knuth&#x27;s (1973) imaginary MIX computer) uses two names called LOAD and STORE. Here we are adding the &quot;i/d&quot; parameter:
: LDA ( d/i, rs ) =def CPY ( d/i, rs, d, A )
: STA ( d/i, rd ) =def CPY ( d, A, d/i, rd )

The typical accumulator-based model will have all its two-variable arithmetic and constant operations (e.g. ADD (A, r), SUB (A, r) ) use (i) the accumulator&#x27;s contents, together with (ii) a specified register&#x27;s contents. The one-variable operations (e.g. INC (A), DEC (A) and CLR (A) ) require only the accumulator. Both instruction-types deposit the result (e.g. sum, difference, product, quotient or remainder) in the accumulator.
: Example: INCA = [A] +1 → A
: Example: ADDA (rs) = [A] + [rs] → A
: Example: MULA (rs) = [A] * [rs] → A

If we so choose, we can abbreviate the mnemonics because at least one source-register and the destination register is always the accumulator A. Thus we have :
:{ LDA (i/d, rs), STA (i/d, rd), CLRA, INCA, DECA, ADDA (rs), SUBA (rs), MULA (rs), DIVA (rs), etc.)

== The notion of indirect address register &quot;N&quot; ==
If our model has an &quot;unbounded accumulator&quot; can we &quot;bound&quot; all the other registers? Not until we provide for at least one unbounded register from which we derive our indirect addresses.

The minimalist approach is to use itself (Schönhage does this).

Another approach (Schönhage does this too) is to declare a specific register the &quot;indirect address register&quot; and confine indirection relative to this register (Schonhage&#x27;s RAM0 model uses both A and N registers for indirect as well as direct instructions). Again our new register has no conventional nameperhaps &quot;N&quot; from &quot;iNdex&quot;, or &quot;iNdirect&quot; or &quot;address Number&quot;.

For maximum flexibility, as we have done for the accumulator Awe will consider N just another register subject to increment, decrement, clear, test, direct copy, etc. Again we can shrink the instruction to a single-parameter that provides for direction and indirection, for example.
: LDAN (i/d) = CPY (i/d, N, d, A); LoaD Accumulator via iNdirection register
: STAN (i/d) = CPY (d, A, i/d, N). STore Accumulator via iNdirection register

Why is this such an interesting approach? At least two reasons:

(1) An instruction set with no parameters:

Schönhage does this to produce his RAM0 instruction set. See section below.

(2) Reduce a RAM to a Post-Turing machine:

Posing as minimalists, we reduce all the registers excepting the accumulator A and indirection register N e.g. r = { r0, r1, r2, ... } to an unbounded string of (very-) bounded-capacity pigeon-holes. These will do nothing but hold (very-) bounded numbers e.g. a lone bit with value { 0, 1 }. Likewise we shrink the accumulator to a single bit. We restrict any arithmetic to the registers { A, N }, use indirect operations to pull the contents of registers into the accumulator and write 0 or 1 from the accumulator to a register:
:{ LDA (i, N), STA (i, N), CLR (A/N), INC (A/N), DEC(N), JZ (A/N, Iz), JZ (Iz), H }

We push further and eliminate A altogether by the use of two &quot;constant&quot; registers called &quot;ERASE&quot; and &quot;PRINT&quot;: [ERASE]=0, [PRINT]=1.
:{ CPY (d, ERASE, i, N), CPY (d, PRINT, i, N), CLR (N), INC (N), DEC (N), JZ (i, N, Iz), JZ (Iz), H }

Rename the COPY instructions and call INC (N) = RIGHT, DEC (N) = LEFT and we have the same instructions as the Post-Turing machine, plus an extra CLRN :
:{ ERASE, PRINT, CLRN, RIGHT, LEFT, JZ (i, N, Iz), JZ (Iz), H }

== Turing equivalence of the RAM with indirection ==
In the section above we informally showed that a RAM with an unbounded indirection capability produces a Post–Turing machine. The Post–Turing machine is Turing equivalent, so we have shown that the RAM with indirection is Turing equivalent.

We give here a slightly more formal demonstration. Begin by designing our model with three reserved registers &quot;E&quot;, &quot;P&quot;, and &quot;N&quot;, plus an unbounded set of registers 1, 2, ..., n to the right. The registers 1, 2, ..., n will be considered &quot;the squares of the tape&quot;. Register &quot;N&quot; points to &quot;the scanned square&quot; that &quot;the head&quot; is currently observing. The &quot;head&quot; can be thought of as being in the conditional jumpobserve that it uses indirect addressing (cf Elgot-Robinson p. 398). As we decrement or increment &quot;N&quot; the (apparent) head will &quot;move left&quot; or &quot;right&quot; along the squares. We will move the contents of &quot;E&quot;=0 or &quot;P&quot;=1 to the &quot;scanned square&quot; as pointed to by N, using the indirect CPY.

The fact that our tape is left-ended presents us with a minor problem: Whenever LEFT occurs our instructions will have to test to determine whether or not the contents of &quot;N&quot; is zero; if so we should leave its count at &quot;0&quot; (this is our choice as designersfor example we might have the machine/model &quot;trigger an event&quot; of our choosing).

:Instruction set 1 (augmented): { INC (N), DEC (N), CLR (N), CPY (d, rs,i, N), JZ ( i, r, z ), HALT }

The following table both defines the Post-Turing instructions in terms of their RAM equivalent instructions and gives an example of their functioning. The (apparent)location of the head along the tape of registers r0-r5 . . . is shown shaded:
== Example: Bounded indirection yields a machine that is not Turing equivalent ==
Throughout this demonstration we have to keep in mind that the instructions in the finite-state machine&#x27;s TABLE is &quot;bounded&quot;, i.e. &quot;finite&quot;:
:&quot;Besides a merely being a &quot;finite set of rules&quot; which gives a sequence of operations for solving a specific type of problem, an algorithm has five important features [Finiteness, Definiteness, Input, Output, Effectiveness]&quot; (italics added, Knuth p. 4-7).

:&quot;The difficulty arises because the registers have explicit &quot;names&quot; (numbers) and our machine must call each out by name in order to &quot;access&quot; it.&quot;

We will build the indirect CPY ( i, q, d, φ ) with the CASE operator. The address of the target register will be specified by the contents of register &quot;q&quot;; once the CASE operator has determined what this number is, CPY will directly deposit the contents of the register with that number into register &quot;φ&quot;. We will need an additional register that we will call &quot;y&quot;it serves as an up-counter.

:&quot;So the following is actually a constructive demonstration or proof that we can indeed simulate the indirect CPY ( i, q, d, φ ) without a &quot;hardware&quot; design change to our counter machine/model. However, note that because this indirect CPY is &quot;bounded&quot; by the size/extent of the finite-state machine, a RASP using this indirect CPY can only calculate the primitive recursive functions, not the full suite of mu recursive functions.&quot;

The CASE &quot;operator&quot; is described in Kleene (1952) (p. 229) and in Boolos-Burgess-Jeffrey (2002) (p. 74); the latter authors emphasize its utility. The following definition is per Kleene but modified to reflect the familiar &quot;IF-THEN-ELSE&quot; construction.

The CASE operator &quot;returns&quot; a natural number into φ depending on which &quot;case&quot; is satisfied, starting with &quot;case_0&quot; and going successively through &quot;case_last&quot;; if no case is satisfied then the number called &quot;default&quot; (aka &quot;woops&quot;) is returned into φ (here x designates some selection of parameters, e.g. register q and the string r0, ... rlast )):

&quot;Definition by cases&quot; φ (x, y):
:* case_0: IF Q0(x, y) is true THEN φ0(x, y) ELSE
:* case_1: IF Q1(x, y) is true THEN φ1(x, y) ELSE
:* cases_2 through case_next_to_last: etc. . . . . . . . . ELSE
:* case_last: IF Qlast(x, y) is true THEN φlast(x, y) ELSE
:* default: do φdefault(x, y)

Kleene require that the &quot;predicates&quot; Qn that doing the testing are all mutually exclusive&quot;predicates&quot; are functions that produce only { true, false } for output; Boolos-Burgess-Jeffrey add the requirement that the cases are &quot;exhaustive&quot;.

We begin with a number in register q that represents the address of the target register. But what is this number? The &quot;predicates&quot; will test it to find out, one trial after another: JE (q, y, z) followed by INC (y). Once the number is identified explicitly, the CASE operator directly/explicitly copies the contents of this register to φ:

:&quot;Definition by cases&quot; CPY (i, q, d, φ) =def φ (q, r0, ..., rlast, y) =
:* case_0: IF CLR (y), [q] - [y]=0 THEN CPY ( r0, φ ), J (exit) ELSE
:* case_1: IF INC (y), [q] = [y]=1 THEN CPY ( r1, φ ), J (exit) ELSE
:* case_2 through case n: IF . . . THEN . . . ELSE
:* case_n: IF INC (y), [q] = [y]=n THEN CPY ( rn, φ ), J (exit) ELSE
:* case_n+1 to case_last: IF . . . THEN . . . ELSE
:* case_last: IF INC (y), [q] = [y]=&quot;last&quot; THEN CPY ( rlast, φ ), J (exit) ELSE
:* default: woops

Case_0 ( the base step of the recursion on y) looks like this:
:* &quot;case_0&quot;:
::* CLR ( y ) ; set register y = 0
::* JE ( q, y, &quot;_φ0&quot; )
::* J ( &quot;case_1&quot; )
:::* &quot;_φ0:&quot; CPY ( r0, φ )
:::* J ( &quot;exit&quot; )
:* &quot;case_1:&quot; etc.

Case_n (the induction step) looks like this; remember, each instance of &quot;n&quot;, &quot;n+1&quot;, ..., &quot;last&quot; must be an explicit natural number:
:* &quot;case_n&quot;:
::* INC ( y )
::* JE ( q, y, &quot;_φn&quot; )
::* J ( &quot;case_n+1&quot;)
:::* &quot;_φn:&quot; CPY ( rn, φ )
:::* J ( &quot;exit&quot; )
:*&quot;case__n+1:&quot; etc.

Case_last stops the induction and bounds the CASE operator (and thereby bounds the &quot;indirect copy&quot; operator):
:* &quot;case_last&quot;:
::* INC ( y )
::* JE ( q, y, &quot;_φlast&quot; )
::* J ( &quot;woops&quot; )
:::* &quot;_φlast&quot;: CPY ( rlast, φ )
:::* J ( &quot;exit&quot; )
:*&quot;woops:&quot; how do we handle an out-of-bounds attempt?
:*&quot;exit:&quot; etc.

If the CASE could continue ad infinitum it would be the mu operator. But it can&#x27;tits finite-state machine&#x27;s &quot;state register&quot; has reached its maximum count (e.g. 65365 = 11111111,111111112 ) or its table has run out of instructions; it is a &quot;finite&quot; machine, after all.

== Examples of models ==

=== Register-to-register (&quot;read-modify-write&quot;) model of Cook and Reckhow (1973) ===
The commonly encountered Cook and Rechkow model is a bit like the ternary-register Malzek model (written with Knuth mnemonicsthe original instructions had no mnemonics excepting TRA, Read, Print).

:*codice_1, C is any integer
:: Example: codice_2 will clear register 5.
:*codice_3, the registers can be the same or different;
::Example: codice_4 will double the contents of register A.
:*codice_5, the registers can be the same or different:
::Example: codice_6 will clear register 3.
:*codice_7, Indirectly copy the contents of the source-register pointed to by pointer-register rp into the destination register.
:*codice_8. Copy the contents of source register rs into the destination-register pointed to by the pointer-register rp.
:*codice_9 Conditional jump if [r] is positive; i.e. IF [r] &gt; 0 THEN jump to instruction z else continue in sequence (Cook and Reckhow call this: &quot;TRAnsfer control to line m if Xj &gt; 0&quot;)
:*codice_10 copy &quot;the input&quot; into destination register rd
:*codice_11 copy the contents of source register rs to &quot;the output.&quot;

=== Schönhage&#x27;s RAM0 and RAM1 (1980) ===
Schönhage (1980) describes a very primitive, atomized model chosen for his proof of the equivalence of his SMM pointer machine model:
:&quot;In order to avoid any explicit addressing the RAM0 has the accumulator with contents &quot;z&quot; and an additional address register with current contents &quot;n&quot; (initially 0)&quot; (p. 494)

RAM1 model: Schönhage demonstrates how his construction can be used to form the more common, usable form of &quot;successor&quot;-like RAM (using this article&#x27;s mnemonics):
::*codice_12, k is a constant, an explicit number such as &quot;47&quot;
::*codice_13 directly load A
::*codice_14 indirectly load A
::*codice_15 directly store A
::*codice_16 indirectly store A
::*codice_17
::*codice_18

RAM0 model: Schönhage&#x27;s RAM0 machine has 6 instructions indicated by a single letter (the 6th &quot;C xxx&quot; seems to involve &#x27;skip over next parameter&#x27;. Schönhage designated the accumulator with &quot;z&quot;, &quot;N&quot; with &quot;n&quot;, etc. Rather than Schönhage&#x27;s mnemonics we will use the mnemonics developed above.
::*codice_19
::*codice_20
::*codice_21
::*codice_22; contents of A points to register address; put register&#x27;s contents into A
::*codice_23; contents of N points to register address; put contents of A into register pointed to by N
::*codice_24; ambiguous in his treatment

Indirection comes (i) from CPYAN (copy/transfer contents A to N) working with store_A_via_N STAN, and from (ii) the peculiar indirection instruction codice_25.

==Footnotes==

=== Finite vs unbounded ===
The definitional fact that any sort of counter machine without an unbounded register-&quot;address&quot; register must specify a register &quot;r&quot; by name indicates that the model requires &quot;r&quot; to be &quot;finite&quot;, although it is &quot;unbounded&quot; in the sense that the model implies no upper limit to the number of registers necessary to do its job(s). For example, we do not require r &lt; 83,617,563,821,029,283,746 nor r &lt; 2^1,000,001, etc.

:Thus our model can &quot;expand&quot; the number of registers, if necessary to perform a certain computation. However this &quot;does&quot; mean that whatever number the model expands to must be &quot;finite&quot;it must be indexable with a natural number: &quot;ω is not an option&quot;.

We can escape this restriction by providing an unbounded register to provide the address of the register that specifies an indirect address.

==See also==
* Real RAM
* Transdichotomous model

==External links==
* Random Access Machine Emulator
* Random Access Machine Emulator
* Random Access Machine Emulator

==References==

With a few exceptions, these references are the same as those at Register machine.
** Goldstine, Herman H., and von Neumann, John, &quot;Planning and Coding of the Problems for an Electronic Computing Instrument&quot;, Rep. 1947, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton. Reprinted on pp. 92–119 in Bell, C. Gordon and Newell, Allen (1971), &quot;Computer Structures: Readings and Examples&quot;, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York. }.
* George Boolos, John P. Burgess, Richard Jeffrey (2002), &quot;Computability and Logic: Fourth Edition&quot;, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England. The original Boolos-Jeffrey text has been extensively revised by Burgess: more advanced than an introductory textbook. &quot;Abacus machine&quot; model is extensively developed in Chapter 5 &quot;Abacus Computability&quot;; it is one of three models extensively treated and comparedthe Turing machine (still in Boolos&#x27; original 4-tuple form) and recursion the other two.
* Arthur Burks, Herman Goldstine, John von Neumann (1946), &quot;Preliminary discussion of the logical design of an electronic computing instrument&quot;, reprinted pp. 92ff in Gordon Bell and Allen Newell (1971), &quot;Computer Structures: Readings and Examples&quot;, mcGraw-Hill Book Company, New York. .
* Stephen A. Cook and Robert A. Reckhow (1973), &quot;Time-bounded random access machines&quot;, Journal of Computer Systems Science 7(4):354-375.
* Martin Davis (1958), &quot;Computability &amp; Unsolvability&quot;, McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc. New York.
* Calvin Elgot and Abraham Robinson (1964), &quot;Random-Access Stored-Program Machines, an Approach to Programming Languages&quot;, Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, Vol. 11, No. 4 (October, 1964), pp. 365–399.
* J. Hartmanis (1971), &quot;Computational Complexity of Random Access Stored Program Machines,&quot; Mathematical Systems Theory 5, 3 (1971) pp. 232–245.
* John Hopcroft, Jeffrey Ullman (1979). &quot;Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages and Computation&quot;, 1st ed., Reading Mass: Addison-Wesley. . A difficult book centered around the issues of machine-interpretation of &quot;languages&quot;, NP-Completeness, etc.
* Stephen Kleene (1952), &quot;Introduction to Metamathematics&quot;, North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, Netherlands. .
* Donald Knuth (1968), &quot;The Art of Computer Programming&quot;, Second Edition 1973, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts. Cf pages 462-463 where he defines &quot;a new kind of abstract machine or &#x27;automaton&#x27; which deals with linked structures.&quot;
* Joachim Lambek (1961, received 15 June 1961), &quot;How to Program an Infinite Abacus&quot;, Mathematical Bulletin, vol. 4, no. 3. September 1961 pages 295-302. In his Appendix II, Lambek proposes a &quot;formal definition of &#x27;program&#x27;. He references Melzak (1961) and Kleene (1952) &quot;Introduction to Metamathematics&quot;.
* Z. A. Melzak (1961, received 15 May 1961), &quot;An informal Arithmetical Approach to Computability and Computation&quot;, Canadian Mathematical Bulletin, vol. 4, no. 3. September 1961 pages 279-293. Melzak offers no references but acknowledges &quot;the benefit of conversations with Drs. R. Hamming, D. McIlroy and V. Vyssots of the Bell telephone Laborators and with Dr. H. Wang of Oxford University.&quot;
* In particular see chapter 11: &quot;Models Similar to Digital Computers&quot; and chapter 14: &quot;Very Simple Bases for Computability&quot;. In the former chapter he defines &quot;Program machines&quot; and in the later chapter he discusses &quot;Universal Program machines with Two Registers&quot; and &quot;...with one register&quot;, etc.
* John C. Shepherdson and H. E. Sturgis (1961) received December 1961 &quot;Computability of Recursive Functions&quot;, Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery (JACM) 10:217-255, 1963. An extremely valuable reference paper. In their Appendix A the authors cite 4 others with reference to &quot;Minimality of Instructions Used in 4.1: Comparison with Similar Systems&quot;.
:*Kaphengst, Heinz, &quot;Eine Abstrakte programmgesteuerte Rechenmaschine&quot;&#x27;, Zeitschrift fur mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik:&quot;5&quot; (1959), 366-379.
:*Ershov, A. P. &quot;On operator algorithms&quot;, (Russian) Dok. Akad. Nauk 122 (1958), 967-970. English translation, Automat. Express 1 (1959), 20-23.
:*Péter, Rózsa &quot;Graphschemata und rekursive Funktionen&quot;, Dialectica 12 (1958), 373.
:*Hermes, Hans &quot;Die Universalität programmgesteuerter Rechenmaschinen.&quot; Math.-Phys. Semsterberichte (Göttingen) 4 (1954), 42-53.
* Arnold Schönhage (1980), &quot;Storage Modification Machines&quot;, Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, SIAM J. Comput. Vol. 9, No. 3, August 1980. Wherein Schōnhage shows the equivalence of his SMM with the &quot;successor RAM&quot; (Random Access Machine), etc. resp. &quot;Storage Modification Machines&quot;, in &quot;Theoretical Computer Science&quot; (1979), pp. 36–37
* Peter van Emde Boas, &quot;Machine Models and Simulations&quot; pp. 3–66, in: Jan van Leeuwen, ed. &quot;Handbook of Theoretical Computer Science. Volume A: Algorithms and Complexity&quot;, The MIT PRESS/Elsevier, 1990. (volume A). QA 76.H279 1990. van Emde Boas&#x27;s treatment of SMMs appears on pp. 32–35. This treatment clarifies Schōnhage 1980it closely follows but expands slightly the Schōnhage treatment. Both references may be needed for effective understanding.
* Hao Wang (1957), &quot;A Variant to Turing&#x27;s Theory of Computing Machines&quot;, JACM (Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery) 4; 63-92. Presented at the meeting of the Association, June 23–25, 1954.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="3" end="19" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565212" start="21" end="42" title="Random-access machine" label="random-access machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565212" start="44" end="47" title="Random-access machine" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565212" start="51" end="61" title="Random-access machine" label="RA-machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651576" start="68" end="88" title="model of computation" label="model of computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q787114" start="107" end="123" title="abstract machine" label="abstract machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930388" start="148" end="164" title="register machine" label="register machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879073" start="205" end="220" title="counter machine" label="counter machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="360" end="371" title="Random-access memory" label="main memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q641044" start="614" end="634" title="Harvard architecture" label="Harvard architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703890" start="678" end="702" title="universal Turing machine" label="universal Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="711" end="718" title="Computer program" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="Q3842021" start="769" end="805" title="random-access stored-program machine" label="random-access stored-program machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189088" start="857" end="881" title="von Neumann architecture" label="von Neumann architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="923" end="931" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="952" end="966" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176889" start="971" end="992" title="counter-machine model" label="counter-machine model"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="1047" end="1080" title="computational complexity analysis" label="computational complexity analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208369" start="1139" end="1154" title="pointer machine" label="pointer machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754095" start="1226" end="1256" title="parallel random-access machine" label="parallel random-access machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="1364" end="1380" title="Random-access memory" label="memory locations"/>
<link wikidata="Q835713" start="1432" end="1439" title="Memory address" label="address"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="1451" end="1465" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="1646" end="1661" title="Instruction set architecture" label="instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q244627" start="2156" end="2165" title="Brainfuck" label="Brainfuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q218825" start="2215" end="2228" title="random-access" label="random-access"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879073" start="2296" end="2311" title="counter machine" label="counter machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="2531" end="2539" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879073" start="2815" end="2830" title="counter machine" label="counter machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="2915" end="2935" title="finite-state machine" label="finite-state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="7131" end="7145" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930388" start="7928" end="7944" title="register machine" label="register machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q842755" start="9057" end="9069" title="Peano axioms" label="Peano axioms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570472" start="10311" end="10339" title="primitive recursive function" label="primitive recursive function"/>
<link wikidata="Q284164" start="10478" end="10499" title="mu recursive function" label="mu recursive function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171224" start="12832" end="12843" title="Indirection" label="Indirection"/>
<link wikidata="Q197970" start="13606" end="13623" title="Turing completeness" label="Turing equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q284164" start="13653" end="13674" title="mu recursive function" label="mu recursive function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451046" start="14212" end="14224" title="Gödel number" label="Gödel number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703890" start="16839" end="16863" title="Universal Turing machine" label="Universal Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="17022" end="17030" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189088" start="17040" end="17064" title="von Neumann architecture" label="von Neumann architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451046" start="18094" end="18106" title="Gödel number" label="Gödel number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570472" start="19257" end="19285" title="primitive recursive function" label="primitive recursive function"/>
<link wikidata="Q307772" start="20558" end="20568" title="μ operator" label="μ operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q284164" start="21325" end="21345" title="μ-recursive function" label="μ-recursive function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570472" start="21502" end="21530" title="primitive recursive function" label="primitive recursive function"/>
<link wikidata="Q307772" start="22535" end="22545" title="μ operator" label="μ operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q197970" start="22824" end="22841" title="Turing completeness" label="Turing equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451046" start="22921" end="22933" title="Gödel number" label="Gödel number"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="29542" end="29547" title="Donald Knuth" label="Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q371805" start="29572" end="29575" title="MIX (abstract machine)" label="MIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574032" start="33253" end="33272" title="Post–Turing machine" label="Post–Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570472" start="36438" end="36467" title="primitive recursive functions" label="primitive recursive functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q284164" start="36491" end="36512" title="mu recursive function" label="mu recursive function"/>
<link wikidata="Q307772" start="39691" end="39702" title="mu operator" label="mu operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208369" start="41298" end="41313" title="pointer machine" label="pointer machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301028" start="43679" end="43687" title="Real RAM" label="Real RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833959" start="43690" end="43712" title="Transdichotomous model" label="Transdichotomous model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930388" start="43914" end="43930" title="Register machine" label="Register machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="44079" end="44107" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute for Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392740" start="44286" end="44299" title="George Boolos" label="George Boolos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251515" start="44301" end="44316" title="John P. Burgess" label="John P. Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326846" start="44318" end="44333" title="Richard Jeffrey" label="Richard Jeffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q711833" start="44821" end="44833" title="Arthur Burks" label="Arthur Burks"/>
<link wikidata="Q93005" start="44835" end="44851" title="Herman Goldstine" label="Herman Goldstine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="44853" end="44869" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q92875" start="44996" end="45007" title="Gordon Bell" label="Gordon Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q439245" start="45012" end="45024" title="Allen Newell" label="Allen Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q62870" start="45129" end="45144" title="Stephen Cook" label="Stephen A. Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239172" start="45276" end="45288" title="Martin Davis (mathematician)" label="Martin Davis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45387" end="45399" title="Calvin Elgot" label="Calvin Elgot"/>
<link wikidata="Q330567" start="45404" end="45420" title="Abraham Robinson" label="Abraham Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45617" end="45629" title="J. Hartmanis" label="J. Hartmanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q62874" start="45772" end="45785" title="John Hopcroft" label="John Hopcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q92794" start="45787" end="45801" title="Jeffrey Ullman" label="Jeffrey Ullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q335148" start="46043" end="46057" title="Stephen Kleene" label="Stephen Kleene"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="46173" end="46185" title="Donald Knuth" label="Donald Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029256" start="46440" end="46454" title="Joachim Lambek" label="Joachim Lambek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46780" end="46792" title="Z. A. Melzak" label="Z. A. Melzak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030309" start="46903" end="46933" title="Canadian Mathematical Bulletin" label="Canadian Mathematical Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47538" end="47557" title="John C. Shepherdson" label="John C. Shepherdson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47562" end="47575" title="H. E. Sturgis" label="H. E. Sturgis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961494" start="48107" end="48120" title="Andrey Ershov" label="Ershov, A. P."/>
<link wikidata="Q453518" start="48261" end="48273" title="Rózsa Péter" label="Péter, Rózsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q78106" start="48494" end="48510" title="Arnold Schönhage" label="Arnold Schönhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q15840190" start="48883" end="48902" title="Peter van Emde Boas" label="Peter van Emde Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812791" start="48961" end="48976" title="Jan van Leeuwen" label="Jan van Leeuwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q707977" start="49358" end="49366" title="Hao Wang (academic)" label="Hao Wang"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544228" wikidata="Q1982537" url="?curid=544228" title="Egerton, Greater Manchester">
<text>Egerton, (pronounced &quot;edgerton&quot;), is a village in the northern part of the Metropolitan Borough of Bolton, Greater Manchester, England. Historically a part of Lancashire, it is situated three miles north of Bolton and 12 miles north west of Manchester city centre within the West Pennine Moors.

Egerton was originally part of the township of Turton in the ancient parish of Bolton-le-Moors and consisted of a small, remote, farming community known as Walmsley. The name Egerton was brought to the area in 1663 when Ralph Egerton married the step-daughter of James Walmsley, after which their property became known as Egerton&#x27;s. The village developed in the 1830s when Henry and Edmund Ashworth set up cotton mills. Egerton formed part of the Turton Urban District in Lancashire between 1894 and 1974, when the district was abolished. The more urban southern part of the district, including Egerton, was then transferred to Bolton in Greater Manchester.

The village is a commuter suburb for Bolton, Blackburn and Manchester.
Egerton is located a short distance from Bromley Cross and Tonge Moor, close to Canon Slade School in Bradshaw and Turton School.

Parts of Egerton were designated a conservation area by Bolton Council in 1981 to protect the character of the village. The conservation area contains a wide variety of buildings dating from the early 19th Century to the present day. It contains two Grade II listed buildings, and comprises frontages to the Blackburn Road (A666) and a number of side streets, Egerton Cricket Ground, Egerton Park, the grounds of Egerton House and Christ Church.

To the west of Egerton is Gale Clough and Shooterslee Wood, a Site of Special Scientific Interest designated for its biological interest. The site is and is important due to its broad-leaved woodland which is among the most important in Greater Manchester.

Egerton was the birthplace of Bolton Wanderers F.C., which started there as Christ Church F.C. in 1874.

==See also==

*Listed buildings in South Turton

== References ==


== External links ==

* Photos and information about Egerton
* Turton Local History Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1982537" start="0" end="7" title="Egerton, Greater Manchester" label="Egerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364541" start="85" end="115" title="Metropolitan Borough of Bolton" label="Metropolitan Borough of Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23099" start="117" end="135" title="Greater Manchester" label="Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138494" start="146" end="158" title="Historic counties of England" label="Historically"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865209" start="169" end="179" title="History of Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q184579" start="217" end="223" title="Bolton" label="Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166304" start="251" end="273" title="Manchester city centre" label="Manchester city centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986192" start="285" end="303" title="West Pennine Moors" label="West Pennine Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830212" start="341" end="349" title="Township (England)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039190" start="353" end="359" title="Turton, Lancashire" label="Turton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="367" end="381" title="ancient parish" label="ancient parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940251" start="385" end="400" title="Bolton-le-Moors" label="Bolton-le-Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5717475" start="684" end="689" title="Henry Ashworth (nonconformist)" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q946725" start="717" end="728" title="cotton mill" label="cotton mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856489" start="758" end="779" title="Turton Urban District" label="Turton Urban District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568680" start="865" end="894" title="South Turton" label="southern part of the district"/>
<link wikidata="Q184579" start="1007" end="1013" title="Bolton" label="Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q188313" start="1015" end="1024" title="Blackburn" label="Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="1029" end="1039" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926012" start="1082" end="1095" title="Bromley Cross" label="Bromley Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821065" start="1100" end="1110" title="Tonge Moor" label="Tonge Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033272" start="1121" end="1139" title="Canon Slade School" label="Canon Slade School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955101" start="1143" end="1151" title="Bradshaw, Greater Manchester" label="Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856487" start="1156" end="1169" title="Turton School" label="Turton School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162904" start="1207" end="1224" title="Conservation area (United Kingdom)" label="conservation area"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952682" start="1228" end="1242" title="Bolton Council" label="Bolton Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1431" end="1446" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649570" start="1496" end="1500" title="A666 road" label="A666"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108723" start="1603" end="1616" title="Christ Church, Walmsley" label="Christ Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="1681" end="1716" title="Site of Special Scientific Interest" label="Site of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q148993" start="1797" end="1809" title="Broad-leaved tree" label="broad-leaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241565" start="1810" end="1818" title="woodland" label="woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="1907" end="1928" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q30685621" start="1997" end="2029" title="Listed buildings in South Turton" label="Listed buildings in South Turton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544233" wikidata="Q1852722" url="?curid=544233" title="Rio, Greece">
<text>Rio (, &quot;Río&quot;, formerly , &quot;Rhíon&quot;; Latin: &quot;Rhium&quot;) is a town in the suburbs of Patras and a former municipality in Achaea, Western Greece, Greece. Since the 2011 local government reform it is part of the municipality Patras, of which it is a municipal unit. The municipal unit has an area of 98.983 km2. The municipal unit had a population of 14,219 in 2021. The campus of the University of Patras and the Casino Rio is located in Rio.

== Geography ==

Rion is the northernmost municipal unit of the Peloponnese peninsula. It stretches along the southeastern coast of the Gulf of Patras, about 7 km northeast of Patras city centre. The nearby Strait of Rio, crossed by the Rio–Antirrio bridge, separates the Gulf of Patras from the Gulf of Corinth to the east. The town is dominated by the Panachaiko mountain to the southeast.

==Town layout==

The town centre is also known as &quot;Agios Georgios Riou&quot;. This is where the Rio railway station, on the line from Patras to Corinth, is located. The quarter Kastellokampos lies to the southwest of the centre. The ferry terminals, with services to Antirrio, are in the north, on both sides of the Rio–Antirrio bridge. There is a large fortress with bastions next to the bridge. The campus of the University of Patras and the hospital lie in the southeast, across the Greek National Road 8A. There are sandy beaches along the coast, and a port north of town centre.

===Subdivisions===
The municipal unit Rio is subdivided into the following communities (constituent villages in brackets):
*Agios Vasileios
*Aktaio
*Ano Kastritsi
*Arachovitika (Arachovitika, Kato Arachovitika)
*Argyra
*Drepano
*Kato Kastritsi (Kato Kastritsi, Magoula)
*Pititsa
*Platani
*Psathopyrgos (Psathopyrgos, Kato Rodini)
*Rio
*Sella

== History ==

The name &quot;Rio&quot; (and its older form &quot;Rhion&quot;) derives from the Greek (&quot;rhion&quot;), generally meaning &quot;jutting part&quot;, perhaps from (&quot;rhis&quot;), meaning &quot;nose&quot;, but also &quot;spur of land&quot;. The earliest attested form of the word is the Mycenaean Greek , &quot;ri-jo&quot;, written in Linear B syllabic script.

The site of Rio has been a strategic point since antiquity. Early 19th century, there stood an old Turkish castle (the &quot;Castle of the Morea&quot;) at the cape, with a small settlement outside its walls.

== Government ==

The mayors of the municipality were:

* Vasileios Zervas (1998–2006)
* Christos Liakopoulos (2006–2010)

== Population ==

== Transport ==

=== Road ===
Highway 8 (Elefsina - Rio) passes through from Rio. It is also the terminus of National Road 8 (Old National Road Athens-Corinth-Patras). The town is served by urban transport buses with lines 6 and 9 and the Patras Suburban Railway, via the &quot;Rio&quot; stop &amp; the &quot; Kastellokampos - University/Hospital&quot; bus line .

=== Rail ===
Rio Railway Station, opened as a station in 1887 and since 2010 served by the local trains to Agios Andreas and Patras by Suburban Railway of Patras. Rio Station is currently under reconstruction as part of the construction of the new Athens-Patras railway line, which (when finished) will connect the area with Athens. In order to ensure these needs, a new temporary station has been operating since 26 March 2019, at the height of Zaimi &amp; Iroon Polytechneiou streets.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
*List of settlements in Achaea

== References ==
== External links ==
*Municipality of Rio </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1852722" start="0" end="3" title="Rio, Greece" label="Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="24" end="32" title="ancient Greek" label="formerly"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="54" end="59" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349648" start="128" end="140" title="Communities and Municipalities of Greece" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495811" start="144" end="150" title="Achaea" label="Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q170291" start="152" end="166" title="Western Greece" label="Western Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="168" end="174" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q133123" start="246" end="252" title="Patras" label="Patras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462246" start="406" end="426" title="University of Patras" label="University of Patras"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="530" end="541" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q934883" start="602" end="616" title="Gulf of Patras" label="Gulf of Patras"/>
<link wikidata="Q48353" start="703" end="722" title="Rio–Antirrio bridge" label="Rio–Antirrio bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q209682" start="762" end="777" title="Gulf of Corinth" label="Gulf of Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q655702" start="820" end="830" title="Panachaiko" label="Panachaiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374802" start="1041" end="1055" title="Kastellokampos" label="Kastellokampos"/>
<link wikidata="Q588198" start="1131" end="1139" title="Antirrio" label="Antirrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462246" start="1279" end="1299" title="University of Patras" label="University of Patras"/>
<link wikidata="Q478557" start="1350" end="1372" title="Greek National Road 8A" label="Greek National Road 8A"/>
<link wikidata="Q12181489" start="1573" end="1588" title="Agios Vasileios, Achaea" label="Agios Vasileios"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1590" end="1596" title="Aktaio" label="Aktaio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555880" start="1598" end="1611" title="Ano Kastritsi" label="Ano Kastritsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783594" start="1613" end="1625" title="Arachovitika" label="Arachovitika"/>
<link wikidata="Q16322651" start="1661" end="1667" title="Argyra, Greece" label="Argyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560280" start="1669" end="1676" title="Drepano, Achaea" label="Drepano"/>
<link wikidata="Q15234380" start="1678" end="1692" title="Kato Kastritsi" label="Kato Kastritsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q339129" start="1720" end="1727" title="Pititsa" label="Pititsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560179" start="1729" end="1736" title="Platani, Achaea" label="Platani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562998" start="1738" end="1750" title="Psathopyrgos" label="Psathopyrgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448593" start="1785" end="1790" title="Sella, Greece" label="Sella"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1888" end="1893" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q668366" start="2099" end="2114" title="Mycenaean Greek" label="Mycenaean Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q190102" start="2147" end="2155" title="Linear B" label="Linear B"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026037" start="2299" end="2318" title="Castle of the Morea" label="Castle of the Morea"/>
<link wikidata="Q147933" start="2554" end="2563" title="Highways in Greece" label="Highway 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q959405" start="2633" end="2648" title="Greek National Road 8" label="National Road 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q17838494" start="2902" end="2921" title="Rio railway station" label="Rio Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q133123" start="3014" end="3020" title="Patras" label="Patras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008811" start="3024" end="3050" title="Patras Suburban Railway" label="Suburban Railway of Patras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="3214" end="3220" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638187" start="3407" end="3436" title="List of settlements in Achaea" label="List of settlements in Achaea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544234" wikidata="Q1331154" url="?curid=544234" title="Gabelsberger shorthand">
<text>Gabelsberger shorthand, named for its creator, is a form of shorthand previously common in Germany and Austria. Created c. 1817 by Franz Xaver Gabelsberger, it was first fully described in the 1834 textbook &quot;Anleitung zur deutschen Redezeichenkunst oder Stenographie&quot; and became rapidly used.

Gabelsberger shorthand has a full alphabet with signs for both consonants and vowels. The consonant signs were made by simplifying the features of cursive Latin letters. The vowel signs are used mainly when a vowel stands at the beginning or the end of a word. Vowels in the middle of words are represented symbolically, mainly by varying the position and the impact of the following consonant signs. Contrary to the practice in many English shorthand systems (e.g. Pitman Shorthand), vowels are never entirely omitted.

Most German shorthand systems published after 1834 are ultimately based on Gabelsberger&#x27;s system. Modern German shorthand, Deutsche Einheitskurzschrift, retains most of the consonant signs of Gabelsberger&#x27;s alphabet but has a modified system of vowel representation.

Gabelsberger shorthand was adopted into many languages and was particularly successful in Scandinavia, the Slavic countries, and Italy. A host of shorthand systems has since appeared that build on the graphic principles laid down by Gabelsberger.

==External links==
*&quot;Anleitung zur deutschen Redezeichenkunst oder Stenographie&quot; at WorldCat.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1331154" start="0" end="22" title="Gabelsberger shorthand" label="Gabelsberger shorthand"/>
<link wikidata="Q181066" start="60" end="69" title="shorthand" label="shorthand"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="91" end="98" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="103" end="110" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q62137" start="131" end="155" title="Franz Xaver Gabelsberger" label="Franz Xaver Gabelsberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q38035" start="394" end="403" title="consonant" label="consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079418" start="451" end="458" title="cursive" label="cursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="459" end="464" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534236" start="770" end="786" title="Pitman Shorthand" label="Pitman Shorthand"/>
<link wikidata="Q353256" start="953" end="981" title="Deutsche Einheitskurzschrift" label="Deutsche Einheitskurzschrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q846596" start="1445" end="1453" title="WorldCat" label="WorldCat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544238" wikidata="Q4797393" url="?curid=544238" title="Artefaktur">
<text>Artefaktur Component Development Kit (ACDK) is a platform-independent library for generating distributed server-based components and applications. Services are provided by a C++ framework.

Artefaktur is free software, distributed under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License.

==See also==

*Java
*Reflection
*Serialization
*Dynamic Method Invocation
*Aspect-oriented programming

==External links==
*ACDK Homepage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4797393" start="0" end="36" title="Artefaktur" label="Artefaktur Component Development Kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="70" end="77" title="library (computing)" label="library"/>
<link wikidata="Q609588" start="118" end="127" title="software componentry" label="component"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="133" end="145" title="application software" label="applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220872" start="147" end="155" title="Service (systems architecture)" label="Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="174" end="177" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q271680" start="178" end="187" title="Software framework" label="framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="204" end="217" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q192897" start="254" end="287" title="GNU Lesser General Public License" label="GNU Lesser General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="305" end="309" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056451" start="311" end="321" title="Reflection (computer science)" label="Reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127410" start="323" end="336" title="Serialization" label="Serialization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="338" end="363" title="Dynamic Method Invocation" label="Dynamic Method Invocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30267" start="365" end="392" title="Aspect-oriented programming" label="Aspect-oriented programming"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544239" wikidata="Q6245377" url="?curid=544239" title="John Lovelady">
<text>John Lovelady is an American retired puppeteer who worked with the Muppets, including on the PBS series &quot;Sesame Street&quot;. Lovelady is originally from Oxford, Mississippi. He was one of the puppeteer troupe in the first season of &quot;The Muppet Show&quot; (1976–77).

He later joined the syndicated children&#x27;s series &quot;The Great Space Coaster&quot;, puppeteered for &quot;Mother Goose&#x27;s Treasury&quot;, and also performed in a serialisation of &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot;.

==Filmography==
* &quot;The Great Santa Claus Switch&quot; - Bong, Scoff, Additional Muppets
* &quot;The Frog Prince (Muppets)&quot; - Additional Muppets
* &quot;The Muppet Musicians of Bremen&quot; - Additional Muppets
* &quot;The Muppets Valentine Show&quot; - Crazy Donald, Additional Muppets
* &quot;The Muppet Show: Sex and Violence&quot; - Abraham Lincoln, Vanity, Additional Muppets
* &quot;The Muppet Show&quot; - Crazy Harry, Nigel, Svengali (episode 103), Iggy Wiggy, Additional Muppets
* &quot;Adventures in Wonderland&quot; (Disney): The Dormouse
* Dumbo&#x27;s Circus (Disney): Flap
* &quot;D.C. Follies&quot; (syndicated): Ronald Reagan
* &quot;Mr. Smith&quot; (NBC): Mr. Smith
* &quot;The Great Space Coaster&quot; (syndicated): Edison The Elephant, Knock Knock the Woodpecker (Seasons 1, 2, 3)

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6245377" start="0" end="13" title="John Lovelady" label="John Lovelady"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629392" start="37" end="46" title="puppeteer" label="puppeteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953422" start="67" end="74" title="The Muppets" label="Muppets"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="93" end="96" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q155629" start="110" end="123" title="Sesame Street" label="Sesame Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q983822" start="159" end="178" title="Oxford, Mississippi" label="Oxford, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120540" start="244" end="259" title="The Muppet Show" label="The Muppet Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737952" start="338" end="361" title="The Great Space Coaster" label="The Great Space Coaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686629" start="474" end="511" title="Adventures in Wonderland (1992 TV series)" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854875" start="544" end="572" title="The Great Santa Claus Switch" label="The Great Santa Claus Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735340" start="621" end="646" title="The Frog Prince (Muppets)" label="The Frog Prince (Muppets)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4488500" start="682" end="712" title="The Muppet Musicians of Bremen" label="The Muppet Musicians of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627471" start="748" end="774" title="The Muppets Valentine Show" label="The Muppets Valentine Show"/>
<link wikidata="" start="824" end="857" title="The Muppet Show: Sex and Violence" label="The Muppet Show: Sex and Violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120540" start="918" end="933" title="The Muppet Show" label="The Muppet Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686629" start="1025" end="1049" title="Adventures in Wonderland (1992 TV series)" label="Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041166" start="1081" end="1100" title="Dumbo&amp;#x27;s Circus" label="Dumbo&amp;#x27;s Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203371" start="1124" end="1136" title="D.C. Follies" label="D.C. Follies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929192" start="1179" end="1188" title="Mr. Smith (TV series)" label="Mr. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737952" start="1220" end="1243" title="The Great Space Coaster" label="The Great Space Coaster"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544245" wikidata="Q589390" url="?curid=544245" title="Carrick-on-Shannon">
<text>Carrick-on-Shannon () is the county town of County Leitrim in Ireland. It is the largest town in the county. A smaller part of the town located on the west bank of the River Shannon lies in County Roscommon and is home to the town&#x27;s main train station. As of the 2022 census, the population of the town was 4,743. It is situated on a strategic crossing point of the River Shannon. The main part of the town, the County Leitrim part, is in the civil parish of Kiltoghert, which is in the barony of Leitrim, while Cortober, which is the County Roscommon side of the town, is in the civil parish of Killukin, in the barony of Boyle.

==History==
Carrick-on-Shannon is situated on a fording point of the Shannon. In the vicinity of Drumsna, on the County Roscommon border, are the remains of an Iron Age fortification. Corryolus townland on the Shannon () remembers Eolais Mac Biobhsach, ancestor of the Muintir Eolais who were the most famous ancient Leitrim sub-septs in the Barony of Mohill and the Barony of Leitrim. Following the Norman invasion of Ireland, a famous Battle of Áth an Chip occurred near Carrick-on-Shannon.

On old maps, the town was also known as Carrick Drumrusk and Carrikdrumrusk, being an anglicised variant of the Irish name of the town. Carrick-on-Shannon was granted a royal charter and named a borough with its own seal in 1607. Throughout at least the 19th and 20th centuries, three annual fairs were held at Carrick on- 12 May, 11 August, and 21 November (or 22nd). Historic buildings are the &quot;Carrick Castle&quot;, the Workhouse and Famine Graveyard, Hatley Manor (a restored Georgian period home of the St. George Family), St George&#x27;s Church of Ireland and the Costello Chapel.

The present council buildings are the site of the Old Gaol, which was a prison that can date back as far as the 18th Century. There was a smaller jailhouse which still stands today, built in the 1700s. This was replaced by a much larger Prison in the 1800s. The Gaol was mostly Demolished in the 1960s.

Carrick is considered the gateway to the Shannon–Erne Waterway, Lough Key, Acres Lake and Lough Allen via the villages of Cootehall, Knockvicar, Jamestown, Leitrim Village, Drumshanbo and Keshcarrigan and is only a short distance away from the Glens of North Leitrim.

==Local media==
Carrick-on-Shannon is served by the &quot;Leitrim Observer&quot; which is published every Wednesday and the fortnightly free &quot;Northwest Express&quot; newspapers. The &quot;Leitrim Post&quot; is now defunct.

==Places of interest==

===Carrick Bridge and Quay===

Until the early 19th century, the head of the Shannon Navigation was Drumsna. In the 1840s the improvement of the navigation entailed extensive dredging of the river, the cutting of Jamestown Canal, the construction of locks at Drumsna and Knockvicar, and the building of a new bridge and Quays at Carrick-on-Shannon. The new bridge, built in 1846, took the place of a nine arch stone bridge, which in turn replaced a wooden structure.

For over a century, until the closing of the Grand Canal Company in 1960, Carrick was a major depot for river trade; timber, cement, hardware, and especially Guinness stout were all transported here from Dublin, Athlone, and Limerick.

===Churches===

St. Mary&#x27;s Catholic Church, on the Main Street, is built in the Neo-Gothic style. It was designed by W.H. Hague, a Dublin architect. It was dedicated on 19 October 1879. The church is on a plot of elevated ground. Fr. Thomas Fitzgerald, the priest responsible for its construction, is buried within the chancel in front of the Blessed Sacrament Altar. The town is in the parish of Kiltoghert in the Roman Catholic Diocese of Ardagh and Clonmacnoise
St. George&#x27;s Church, St. Mary&#x27;s Close, is the Church of Ireland parish Church. Prior to 1698, the parish church was situated at Kiltoghert. In that year it was transferred to its present site in Carrick. It was re-built in 1829 and the interior reconstructed in the years 1910–1914. Rev. W.A. Percy who was Rector from 1869 to 1886 was the grandfather of the famous songwriter Percy French.

The Priest&#x27;s Lane is a long-standing name for the road leading from Main Street to St. Patrick&#x27;s Park. This was where the Catholic clergy first lived after the relaxation of the Penal Laws. It is also reputed to have been the home of Turlough O&#x27;Carolan, the harpist and composer when he came to Carrick as a boy with his family from Nobber, County Meath in 1684.

The Carrick Baptist Church was founded in September 2012. The church holds its services on Park Lane.

The Costello Memorial Chapel, said to be the second smallest chapel in the world, has an area of .

===Arts===
&quot;The Dock&quot; is an arts centre housed in the renovated 19th century courthouse building. It was opened in 2005 and hosts a theatre, art galleries, artists&#x27; studios, workshop spaces, a coffee shop and bar as well as &quot;The Leitrim Design House&quot;. Since 2013, it has held the &quot;Phase One&quot; festival held at the beginning of April every year, dedicated to displaying artists and musicians associated with modern or electronic music. The &quot;Carrick Water Music Festival&quot;, a week long music and arts festival which began in 2005 is held every July.

==Climate==
Carrick on Shannon experiences a year-round mild, moist, temperate and changeable climate, due to the prevailing winds of the Gulf Stream. The town experiences a lack of temperature extremes, with temperatures below 0 °C (32 °F) and above 30 °C (86 °F) being rare. The town receives an average of 1,147 mm (45.2&quot;) of precipitation annually, which is evenly distributed throughout the year. Rain is the most common form of precipitation - hail, sleet and snow are rare in the town, though will sometimes be experienced during particularly cold winters. Carrick-on-Shannon is also consistently humid, with humidity normally ranging from 70% to 100%, and this can lead to heavy showers, and even thunderstorms breaking out when drier east winds, originating in the European continent, clash with this humidity particularly in the late summer.

The average January temperature in the town is 6.8 °C (40.6 °F) and the average July temperature is 16.0 °C (60.8 °F). This means that Carrick-on-Shannon is said to have a maritime temperate climate (&quot;Cfb&quot;) according to the Köppen climate classification system.

==Geography==
As its name implies, the town is located on the River Shannon, which is linked to the River Erne via the Shannon–Erne Waterway. The town is located on the N4 National Primary Route, linking Dublin in the east to Sligo in the west. The road is of motorway status for much of its length.

The town is served by the Dublin-Sligo railway line. Carrick-on-Shannon railway station opened on 3 December 1862. This line was originally part of the Midland Great Western Railway. The railway station is approximately 2 kilometres outside town on the Roscommon side of the Shannon. Bus Éireann bus services connect the town to Dublin and Sligo.

There is a regular Locallink Bus Service to Ballinamore via Mohill.

Carrick-on-Shannon, while the county town of Leitrim, straddles the river Shannon. That part of the town on the Roscommon side is the townland of Cortober.

The Leitrim part of the town is situated in the townland of Townparks which is part of the extensive civil parish of Kiltoghert, while the Roscommon part is in the parish of Killukin.

==Carrick Carnival==
&quot;Carrick Carnival&quot; is an annual festival based in the town which takes place around the June Bank Holiday weekend.

Lasting about 10 days, events include air shows, water sports, fireworks, and live music. During the latter half of the Carnival, larger events take place including Carnival Night, the Battle of the Musicals, Taste of Carrick, Vintage Car Displays and much more.

==Sport==

St Mary&#x27;s GAA club is based in the parish of Kiltoghert. The club, which was originally founded in 1889 and re-formed in 1944, has its grounds at Pairc Naoimh Mhuire. The Roscommon side of the town is served by Shannon Gaels GAA. The home ground of Leitrim GAA, Páirc Seán Mac Diarmada, is also in Carrick-on-Shannon.

In soccer, Carrick Town FC was founded in 1976. The home ground is located at the Showgrounds on the Boyle Road.
In rugby, Carrick-on-Shannon RFC was established in 1974.

Golf was first played in Carrick-on-Shannon in 1910. The townland of Ballinamoney was first the first site for a golf course. In 1936 Carrick-on-Shannon Golf Club moved to a site nearer the town in Lisnagot. In 1944 it moved to its present location in Woodbrook.

Carrick on Shannon Rowing Club was founded in 1836 and is the oldest rowing club in Ireland as well as one of the oldest in Europe.
The locality has hosted national and international angling competitions.

==Notable residents==
*Frances Cryan (b. 1958), Olympian Ladies Rowing at 1980 Moscow Olympics. 11 times Irish Ladies Single Sculls Champion from the years 1976-1986 inclusive.
*Carole Coleman (b. 1966), Raidió Teilifís Éireann broadcaster.
*William Lendrim (1830–1891), Victoria Cross recipient.
*Farrell McElgunn (b. 1932), former local politician and member of the Seanad and the European Parliament
* Paul Reid (born 1964) – senior civil servant

==Twinning==

Carrick-on-Shannon is twinned with Cesson-Sévigné in Brittany, France.

==See also==
* List of towns and villages in Ireland
* Market Houses in Ireland

==References==

===Primary sources===
===Secondary sources===

====Historical====
*
*
==External links==

* Tour of Old Carrick-on-Shannon
* Carrick on Shannon Chamber of Commerce</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q589390" start="0" end="18" title="Carrick-on-Shannon" label="Carrick-on-Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357964" start="29" end="40" title="county town" label="county town"/>
<link wikidata="Q107397" start="44" end="58" title="County Leitrim" label="County Leitrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="62" end="69" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192820" start="168" end="181" title="River Shannon" label="River Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179437" start="190" end="206" title="County Roscommon" label="County Roscommon"/>
<link wikidata="Q579503" start="243" end="256" title="Carrick-on-Shannon railway station" label="train station"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030587" start="268" end="279" title="2022 census of Ireland" label="2022 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q192820" start="371" end="384" title="River Shannon" label="River Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910694" start="448" end="460" title="Civil parishes in Ireland" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q853565" start="492" end="498" title="Barony (Ireland)" label="barony"/>
<link wikidata="Q13157486" start="502" end="509" title="Maigh Nissi" label="Leitrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117431" start="517" end="525" title="Cortober" label="Cortober"/>
<link wikidata="Q20622497" start="628" end="633" title="Boyle (barony)" label="Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085809" start="733" end="740" title="Drumsna" label="Drumsna"/>
<link wikidata="Q179437" start="749" end="765" title="County Roscommon" label="County Roscommon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="796" end="804" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q27825513" start="867" end="887" title="Eolais Mac Biobhsach" label="Eolais Mac Biobhsach"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048164" start="905" end="919" title="Muintir Eolais" label="Muintir Eolais"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351595" start="978" end="994" title="Mohill (barony)" label="Barony of Mohill"/>
<link wikidata="Q13157486" start="1003" end="1020" title="Leitrim (barony)" label="Barony of Leitrim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1036" end="1051" title="Muintir Eolais#Norman Invasion .281245-1247.29" label="Norman invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873051" start="1073" end="1094" title="Battle of Áth an Chip" label="Battle of Áth an Chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q288514" start="1422" end="1426" title="fair" label="fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="1680" end="1697" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54870162" start="1706" end="1721" title="Costello Chapel" label="Costello Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="1961" end="1967" title="Prison" label="Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q331483" start="2002" end="2012" title="Demolition" label="Demolished"/>
<link wikidata="Q844577" start="2069" end="2090" title="Shannon–Erne Waterway" label="Shannon–Erne Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746303" start="2092" end="2101" title="Lough Key" label="Lough Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366974" start="2118" end="2129" title="Lough Allen" label="Lough Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15211617" start="2150" end="2159" title="Cootehall" label="Cootehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980036" start="2161" end="2171" title="Knockvicar" label="Knockvicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117150" start="2173" end="2182" title="Jamestown, County Leitrim" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672378" start="2184" end="2199" title="Leitrim, County Leitrim" label="Leitrim Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903333" start="2201" end="2211" title="Drumshanbo" label="Drumshanbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085828" start="2216" end="2228" title="Keshcarrigan" label="Keshcarrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520437" start="2355" end="2371" title="Leitrim Observer" label="Leitrim Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520438" start="2490" end="2502" title="Leitrim Post" label="Leitrim Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085809" start="2809" end="2816" title="Drumsna" label="Drumsna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980036" start="2821" end="2831" title="Knockvicar" label="Knockvicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3286" end="3301" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q866900" start="3674" end="3723" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Ardagh and Clonmacnoise" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Ardagh and Clonmacnoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="3780" end="3797" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051854" start="4111" end="4123" title="Percy French" label="Percy French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738523" start="4314" end="4324" title="Penal Laws against Irish Catholics" label="Penal Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q335838" start="4370" end="4393" title="Turlough O&amp;#x27;Carolan" label="Turlough O&amp;#x27;Carolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54870162" start="4612" end="4636" title="Costello Chapel" label="Costello Memorial Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q85750769" start="4795" end="4805" title="Carrick-on-Shannon Courthouse" label="courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="5438" end="5449" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="5634" end="5647" title="Precipitation (meteorology)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37602" start="5755" end="5759" title="hail" label="hail"/>
<link wikidata="Q852799" start="5761" end="5766" title="Rain and snow mixed" label="sleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="5921" end="5929" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="6330" end="6356" title="maritime temperate climate" label="maritime temperate climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="6392" end="6421" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q122766" start="6531" end="6541" title="River Erne" label="River Erne"/>
<link wikidata="Q844577" start="6550" end="6571" title="Shannon–Erne Waterway" label="Shannon–Erne Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638177" start="6600" end="6602" title="N4 road (Ireland)" label="N4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2212112" start="6603" end="6625" title="National Primary Route" label="National Primary Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="6635" end="6641" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="6657" end="6662" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="6691" end="6699" title="motorway" label="motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743407" start="6758" end="6783" title="Dublin-Sligo railway line" label="Dublin-Sligo railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q579503" start="6785" end="6819" title="Carrick-on-Shannon railway station" label="Carrick-on-Shannon railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842345" start="6884" end="6913" title="Midland Great Western Railway" label="Midland Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017233" start="7016" end="7027" title="Bus Éireann" label="Bus Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151232" start="7283" end="7291" title="townland" label="townland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117431" start="7295" end="7303" title="Cortober" label="Cortober"/>
<link wikidata="Q85772514" start="7610" end="7627" title="June Bank Holiday" label="June Bank Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590345" start="7913" end="7936" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s GAA (Leitrim)" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s GAA club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778347" start="8167" end="8178" title="Leitrim GAA" label="Leitrim GAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926094" start="8180" end="8203" title="Páirc Seán Mac Diarmada" label="Páirc Seán Mac Diarmada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="8409" end="8413" title="Golf" label="Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728290" start="8902" end="8915" title="Frances Cryan" label="Frances Cryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8450" start="8958" end="8973" title="Moscow Olympics" label="Moscow Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044671" start="9057" end="9071" title="Carole Coleman" label="Carole Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q329494" start="9083" end="9106" title="Raidió Teilifís Éireann" label="Raidió Teilifís Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013469" start="9121" end="9136" title="William Lendrim" label="William Lendrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="9150" end="9164" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436268" start="9177" end="9193" title="Farrell McElgunn" label="Farrell McElgunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q96398638" start="9284" end="9293" title="Paul Reid (HSE)" label="Paul Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="9366" end="9373" title="Town twinning" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q227795" start="9379" end="9393" title="Cesson-Sévigné" label="Cesson-Sévigné"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="9397" end="9405" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113044" start="9431" end="9468" title="List of towns and villages in the Republic of Ireland" label="List of towns and villages in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257857" start="9471" end="9495" title="List of market houses in the Republic of Ireland" label="Market Houses in Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544246" wikidata="Q2474283" url="?curid=544246" title="Spelsbury">
<text>Spelsbury is a village and civil parish about north of Charlbury and about southeast of Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire. The village is on a narrow hill between the Coldron and Taston brooks overlooking the River Evenlode and the ancient Wychwood Forest to the south. Spelsbury parish includes the hamlets of Dean and Taston, and also includes Ditchley Park. The 2011 Census recorded the parish&#x27;s population as 305.

==History==
The toponym is derived from the Old English for either &quot;spying place&quot; or the place of a person called &quot;Speol&quot;. It was first recorded in the &quot;Cartularium Saxonicum&quot; in 1010 as &quot;Speoles byrig&quot;. In 1086 the Domesday Book recorded the village as &quot;Spelesberie&quot;. Spelsbury has a group of almshouses built in 1688 by John Carry. Coldron Mill, south-west of the village, is on a site where a mill has existed for at least a thousand years. Winterberry Park built in 1725 by Thomas Archer is on the parish borders. In the village a drinking fountain in the shape of a shell commemorates Henry Dillon, 13th Viscount Dillon, who died in 1853. The poet John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester and his wife Elizabeth Malet lived and are buried in Spelsbury. The actor Sir Ben Kingsley lives in the village.

The Church of England parish church of All Saints was originally Norman with a central tower. In about 1200 transepts were added, but during the 13th century the Early English Gothic nave was built on the site of the Norman chancel. The nave is flanked by north and south aisles. The present west doorway in the tower and several of the windows in the aisles are early 14th century. In 1706 the 1st Earl of Lichfield had the bell tower restored. In 1740 the 2nd Earl of Lichfield had the chancel rebuilt. In 1774 the 4th Earl of Lichfield had the nave and aisles remodelled. The chancel was rebuilt again in 1851. In 2001 the Church of England Benefice of Ascott-under-Wychwood, Chadlington and Spelsbury merged with that of Enstone and Heythrop to form the Chase Benefice. 

=== Parish ===
Spelsbury was an ancient parish, which became a civil parish in 1866. Until 1985 the parish also included the hamlet of Fulwell, but in that year Fulwell was transferred to the civil parish of Enstone. At the same time the eastern part of Ditchley Park was transferred from the civil parish of Kiddington with Asterleigh to the parish of Spelsbury.

==References==


==Sources and further reading==
*
*

==External links==

*Spelsbury Parish Council</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2474283" start="0" end="9" title="Spelsbury" label="Spelsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="27" end="39" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063300" start="55" end="64" title="Charlbury" label="Charlbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065474" start="88" end="116" title="Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire" label="Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687737" start="174" end="180" title="Taston" label="Taston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061424" start="204" end="218" title="River Evenlode" label="River Evenlode"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039567" start="235" end="250" title="Wychwood Forest" label="Wychwood Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245949" start="306" end="310" title="Dean, Oxfordshire" label="Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687737" start="315" end="321" title="Taston" label="Taston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4453742" start="341" end="354" title="Ditchley Park" label="Ditchley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="360" end="371" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="435" end="442" title="Toponymy" label="toponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="463" end="474" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q48971738" start="597" end="618" title="Cartularium Saxonicum" label="Cartularium Saxonicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="675" end="688" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q15548045" start="763" end="772" title="almshouse" label="almshouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q534286" start="947" end="960" title="Thomas Archer" label="Thomas Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720352" start="1059" end="1093" title="Henry Dillon, 13th Viscount Dillon" label="Henry Dillon, 13th Viscount Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q358912" start="1122" end="1156" title="John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester" label="John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363734" start="1170" end="1185" title="Elizabeth Malet" label="Elizabeth Malet"/>
<link wikidata="Q173158" start="1231" end="1247" title="Ben Kingsley" label="Sir Ben Kingsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116872" start="1275" end="1306" title="Church of England parish church" label="Church of England parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q587" start="1310" end="1320" title="Feast of All Saints" label="All Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q136693" start="1336" end="1342" title="Norman architecture" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q202949" start="1379" end="1387" title="transept" label="transept"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1433" end="1453" title="English Gothic architecture#Early English Gothic" label="Early English Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="1454" end="1458" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q103841669" start="1495" end="1502" title="chancel" label="chancel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1543" end="1548" title="Aisle#Architecture" label="aisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344088" start="1666" end="1687" title="Edward Lee, 1st Earl of Lichfield" label="1st Earl of Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q200334" start="1696" end="1706" title="bell tower" label="bell tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541620" start="1729" end="1750" title="George Lee, 2nd Earl of Lichfield" label="2nd Earl of Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346787" start="1788" end="1809" title="Robert Lee, 4th Earl of Lichfield" label="4th Earl of Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1897" end="1923" title="Benefice#Church of England" label="Church of England Benefice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4323896" start="1927" end="1948" title="Ascott-under-Wychwood" label="Ascott-under-Wychwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428852" start="1950" end="1961" title="Chadlington" label="Chadlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145119" start="1996" end="2003" title="Enstone" label="Enstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745717" start="2008" end="2016" title="Heythrop" label="Heythrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="2079" end="2093" title="ancient parish" label="ancient parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508515" start="2182" end="2189" title="Fulwell, Oxfordshire" label="Fulwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404709" start="2356" end="2382" title="Kiddington with Asterleigh" label="Kiddington with Asterleigh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544250" wikidata="Q2745898" url="?curid=544250" title="IDS Center">
<text>The IDS Center is an office skyscraper located at 80 South 8th Street in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Completed in 1973, it is the tallest building in Minneapolis, and the tallest building in the state at a height of . It originally stood , though a garage for window washing equipment was added between 1978 and 1979. The structure rises to when including communications spires on the roof, indisputably the highest points in the city. The IDS was constructed as the headquarters of Investors Diversified Services, Inc.—now Ameriprise Financial. It also housed the headquarters of Dayton Hudson Corporation (now Target Corporation) from 1972 until 2001.

The complex consists of five parts: the 57-story IDS Tower itself at 8th Street &amp; Nicollet Mall, an eight-story annex building along Marquette Avenue, the 19-story Marquette Hotel at 7th Street &amp; Marquette Avenue, and a two-story retail building that was originally dominated by Woolworth&#x27;s. These four buildings are joined by the seven-story Crystal Court.

The 57-story IDS became the tallest skyscraper in Minneapolis when it surpassed the height of the 32-story Foshay Tower in 1972, ending that building&#x27;s 43-year reign over the city skyline. Construction of the building was followed with great interest, and the topping-off ceremony was a major civic event in the city. In addition to being taller, IDS occupies a much larger footprint than the obelisk-like Foshay. It was the 16th tallest building in the world on completion, and the third tallest constructed that year.

==Design and environment==
A lobby and shopping area at the bottom of the tower is known as the Crystal Court and provides skyway connections between the tower and four adjacent blocks. The Concourse level is occupied by Globe College and University; originally this floor was an extension of the Crystal Court retail space and included a single-screen movie theater and shops. The building had a 51st floor observation deck until 1984; thousands of people came for one last visit on December 31, 1983. This floor is now office space. The 50th floor contained an east-facing &quot;Orion Room&quot; restaurant, a north-facing bar and cocktail lounge, a private south-facing dining club (&quot;Tower Club&quot;). The west-facing &quot;University of Minnesota Alumni Club&quot; closed to the public in 1994. Today, the entire 50th floor consists of four large ballrooms with a single central kitchen. The rooms are collectively known as &quot;Windows at Marquette,&quot; and they serve as banquet space for the Marquette Hotel.

Because of the IDS Center&#x27;s peculiar and unique stepback design, termed &quot;zogs&quot; by its architect, Philip Johnson, each floor has up to 32 corner offices. The area of Nicollet Mall in front of the IDS Center is familiar to television viewers: the character of Mary Richards on &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot; was seen on Nicollet Mall looking at an IDS shop in the opening montage of the show. Across South 7th Street from the IDS was Donaldson&#x27;s Department Store, in front of which she tossed her hat in the air at the end of the opening sequence. A statue commemorating that shot stands approximately at the camera location of the view, created and maintained by TVLand. She is also seen in the show opening dining with then-husband Grant Tinker at what is now the terrace of Jolliet House on the hotel&#x27;s third floor, overlooking the Crystal Court. Diners can still sit at the &quot;Mary Tyler Moore Table.&quot;

The IDS Tower has an eight-story annex extending along the Marquette Avenue side of the building. This building is a true annex; the fourth through eighth floors can only be reached through the IDS Tower elevators, and the third floor can only be reached through the Marquette Hotel elevators.

The building has not been without structural problems. Since soon after its construction, the Crystal Court had issues with water leaking through the roof after rain or snow due to effects of Minnesota&#x27;s extreme freeze-thaw cycle. There are also frequent problems in the winter when ice falls from the tower and onto the court&#x27;s glass roof panels, often breaking through. Occasionally the court will be roped off to prevent injury to the public. The Center and Crystal Court were devastated by a summer wind storm in June 1979 that led to much glass breakage. The entire Crystal Court was sealed off by plywood barriers while this was repaired.
==The battle for tallest status==
The owners of the Capella Tower (formerly First Bank Place) and the architects behind the design stated that it rose tall upon its completion in 1992. However, the height had been increased due to an engineering need, according to Tom O&#x27;Mara, one of the construction managers at the time of Capella Tower construction. There were some ventilation ducts near the roof that required about 14 more inches (36 cm) of height. The construction team added an extra to that, bringing the building to a total of .

In the years following completion, the actual height eventually became known as it was published in almanacs and other listings of building height. The owners of the Capella Tower were hesitant to claim that their building was taller than IDS, and usually deferred the honor to the more well-known structure. As area journalists reported on the sale of the IDS Center to the John Buck Company in 2004 and the death of designer Philip Johnson in 2005, they came face-to-face with the fact that the roof of the tower was one foot lower than its neighbor.

 restored the IDS Center to first-place status in the city in February 2005 by including the height of the window-washing garage, although that has not completely ended the dispute. A spokesperson for the Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat, which sometimes handles height disputes, stated that it would be unlikely for the garage to be included in the official height because many would not consider it to be an integral part of the building&#x27;s design.

It is unclear if the height of the Capella Tower reaches to the top of the &quot;halo&quot; surrounding the screen walls (walls designed to hide cooling towers on the roof), so the height of the flat roof might be somewhat shorter, or that building might similarly be able to add to its height by including the additional structure. Presently, the IDS is considered to be taller than the former First Bank Tower.

It is also important to note that height measurements are sometimes incorrectly reported due to conversion from U.S. customary units to the metric system and back again. The IDS was often reported as in height because of this problem, occasionally appearing to be two feet shorter than its competitor.
==Mechanical floors==
The building has two mechanical floors between the 8th and 9th floor and two mechanical floors between 51 and the roof level. They are known as 8A, 8B and 51A, 51B. They are not accessible from any of the building&#x27;s passenger elevators and contain HVAC equipment. As a result, the 9th floor is really the 11th floor and the 51st floor is really 53rd. This can be seen from the outside of the building or by walking down the stairwell from the 9th floor or higher. There is also a floor 2A which is inaccessible except from the freight elevators. There are also three floors beneath the IDS called P1, P2, and P3. These are storage levels for tenants and also are connected to the parking ramp below the IDS. Neither 2A, or P&#x27;s 1, 2, and 3 are counted as actual floors. Half of the space of the complex (floors 9 to 57 of the Tower) is located above the 8th floor and half (including the retail, hotel, and floors 1 to 8 of the Tower and annex building) is located below the 8th floor.

==Ownership==
The building was purchased by the John Buck Company in December 2004 for US$225 million. Just over a year later in January 2006, the company began looking for new buyers. In August 2006 it was sold to The Inland Real Estate Group of Companies, Inc., for approximately $277 million. Beacon Investment Properties of Hallandale Beach, FL purchased the building from Inland in April 2013 for approximately $253 million.

==Broadcasting==
Communication spires on top of the building tower to , the highest point in Minneapolis. A number of major FM radio stations which formerly broadcast from the site now use the IDS as a backup in case their primary location in Shoreview, Minnesota were to fail. One of the most notable broadcasters was 99.5 WLOL until the pop format signed off in late February 1991. In fact, one well-known reference was &quot;From the top-top-top of the IDS Center, 99 and 1/2 WLOL Minneapolis-Saint Paul!&quot; In 2009 the equipment was removed and digital towers were added for the national digital switch. Some television broadcasters using the towers include Univision affiliate WUMN-LD and KMBD-LD, which broadcasts HSN programming, while the area&#x27;s major television stations use them for their STL towers and microwave relays to Shoreview and their studios and live trucks.

===FM===
===Television===
==Tenants==
The tower is leased to smaller businesses. The IDS has 1.4 million square feet (120,000 m2) of office and retail space. Tenants include:

* Taft
* Gray Plant Mooty
* Dady &amp; Gardner, P.A.
* Hubert White
* Lindquist &amp; Vennum
* Merchant &amp; Gould
* U.S. Bancorp
*Hall Law

== Owners of IDS Center ==

* Investors Diversified Services (now Ameriprise Financial) 1972-1981 Construction cost US$13.5 million
* Oxford Development 1981–2004. Purchase price US$200 million
* John Buck Company 2004–2006. Purchase price US$225 million
* Inland American Real Estate Trust Inc 2006–2013. Purchase price US$277 million
* Beacon Investment Properties (Now Accesso Partners, LLC) 2013–Present. Purchase price $253 million. 
** Joint Venture with Harel Insurance Investments &amp; Financial Services Ltd &amp; Menora Mivtahim Insurance Ltd., both based in Tel Aviv.

==In popular culture==
* Mary Tyler Moore&#x27;s character was shown dining in the restaurant overlooking the Crystal Court in the introduction to &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot;.
* The Crystal Court is featured in the video of Hüsker Dü&#x27;s cover of the &quot;Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot; theme song.
* The building was briefly mentioned by Steve Buscemi in &quot;Fargo&quot; - &quot;IDS Building, the big glass one, tallest skyscraper in the Midwest after the Sears - uh, Chicago...John Hancock building whatever...&quot;
* The building appeared in Remy Zero&#x27;s music video, &quot;Save Me.&quot;
* The Hold Steady&#x27;s song &quot;Party Pit&quot; (off their album &quot;Boys and Girls in America&quot;) contains the lyrics, &quot;I saw her walking through the Crystal Court./She made a scene by the revolving doors.&quot;
* David Treuer&#x27;s novel &quot;The Hiawatha&quot; describes the role of American-Indian labor in building the tower.
* In the movie &quot;Purple Rain&quot;, Prince is seen looking in the window of a store on the Skyway Level of the Crystal Court.
* In the movie &quot;Monty Python&#x27;s The Meaning of Life&quot; and the short film &quot;The Crimson Permanent Assurance&quot;, the IDS Tower is among a group of buildings creating a large financial district.
* In an establishing shot from the movie Shazam!, the IDS Tower stands in for Doctor Sivana&#x27;s business headquarters.

== Deadly falls ==
There have been three deaths as a result of falls from the IDS Tower, one by accident and two by suicide. In 2007, Fidel Danilo Sanchez-Flores, a worker removing snow from the IDS Center&#x27;s Crystal Court roof, slipped and fell three stories through the glass canopied atrium to his death.

In 2001, a 30-year-old man jumped to his death from the 51st floor, crashed through the Crystal Court, and landed by the fountain near Basil&#x27;s restaurant. In 1996, a 32-year-old man knocked out a window in the 30th floor of the IDS Center and jumped to his death.

==See also==
* List of tallest buildings by U.S. state
* List of tallest buildings in Minnesota

==References==
* Katherine Glover (May 2004). Public Icon, Private Property. &quot;The Rake&quot;.
* Rick Bronson (February 17, 2005). Emporis.com.
* Business Wire (August 21, 2006).
==External links==
* 
* IDS Tower photos</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2745898" start="4" end="14" title="IDS Center" label="IDS Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="73" end="84" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="86" end="95" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808261" start="126" end="157" title="List of tallest buildings in Minneapolis" label="tallest building in Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642282" start="167" end="196" title="List of tallest buildings in Minnesota" label="tallest building in the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843129" start="520" end="540" title="Ameriprise Financial" label="Ameriprise Financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046951" start="608" end="626" title="Target Corporation" label="Target Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q642212" start="938" end="954" title="F. W. Woolworth Company" label="Woolworth&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748980" start="1130" end="1142" title="Foshay Tower" label="Foshay Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q31948" start="1578" end="1583" title="Lobby (room)" label="lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q830036" start="1588" end="1596" title="shopping" label="shopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361100" start="1672" end="1678" title="skyway" label="skyway"/>
<link wikidata="Q177305" start="1957" end="1973" title="observation deck" label="observation deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q183528" start="2687" end="2701" title="Philip Johnson" label="Philip Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030309" start="2755" end="2768" title="Nicollet Mall" label="Nicollet Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q615944" start="2871" end="2896" title="The Mary Tyler Moore Show" label="The Mary Tyler Moore Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295350" start="3029" end="3045" title="Donaldson&amp;#x27;s" label="Donaldson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q47693" start="4522" end="4535" title="Capella Tower" label="Capella Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="4572" end="4581" title="architect" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q584049" start="4844" end="4855" title="Ventilation (architecture)" label="ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453244" start="4856" end="4861" title="Duct (HVAC)" label="ducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q171341" start="5115" end="5122" title="almanac" label="almanac"/>
<link wikidata="Q47693" start="5181" end="5194" title="Capella Tower" label="Capella Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q183528" start="5442" end="5456" title="Philip Johnson" label="Philip Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q372245" start="5774" end="5817" title="Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat" label="Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116609" start="6562" end="6582" title="U.S. customary units" label="U.S. customary units"/>
<link wikidata="Q232405" start="6590" end="6603" title="metric system" label="metric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804522" start="6795" end="6811" title="mechanical floor" label="mechanical floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798773" start="7027" end="7031" title="HVAC" label="HVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="7857" end="7860" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288933" start="8325" end="8327" title="FM band" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q989471" start="8444" end="8464" title="Shoreview, Minnesota" label="Shoreview, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6337792" start="8520" end="8529" title="WLOL (defunct)" label="99.5 WLOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="8817" end="8827" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q731824" start="8866" end="8875" title="Univision" label="Univision"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956623" start="8886" end="8893" title="WUMN-LD" label="WUMN-LD"/>
<link wikidata="Q116687406" start="8898" end="8905" title="KMBD-LD" label="KMBD-LD"/>
<link wikidata="Q452340" start="8924" end="8927" title="Home Shopping Network" label="HSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628102" start="9008" end="9011" title="Studio/transmitter link" label="STL"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073581" start="9274" end="9290" title="Gray Plant Mooty" label="Gray Plant Mooty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9293" end="9317" title="Dady &amp;amp; Gardner, P.A." label="Dady &amp;amp; Gardner, P.A."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9320" end="9332" title="Hubert White (store)" label="Hubert White"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031827" start="9335" end="9357" title="Lindquist &amp;amp; Vennum" label="Lindquist &amp;amp; Vennum"/>
<link wikidata="Q739084" start="9383" end="9395" title="U.S. Bancorp" label="U.S. Bancorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q615944" start="10141" end="10166" title="The Mary Tyler Moore Show" label="The Mary Tyler Moore Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q862223" start="10222" end="10231" title="Hüsker Dü" label="Hüsker Dü"/>
<link wikidata="Q104061" start="10338" end="10351" title="Steve Buscemi" label="Steve Buscemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q222720" start="10361" end="10366" title="Fargo (1996 film)" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q29294" start="10458" end="10463" title="Sears Tower" label="Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="10470" end="10477" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q217727" start="10480" end="10501" title="John Hancock Center" label="John Hancock building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474918" start="10547" end="10556" title="Remy Zero" label="Remy Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535768" start="10604" end="10615" title="Hold Steady" label="Hold Steady"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952712" start="10673" end="10698" title="Boys and Girls in America" label="Boys and Girls in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754021" start="10966" end="10977" title="Purple Rain (film)" label="Purple Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="10985" end="10991" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685878" start="11328" end="11335" title="Shazam! (film)" label="Shazam!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543269" start="11365" end="11378" title="Doctor Sivana" label="Doctor Sivana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501893" start="12008" end="12047" title="List of tallest buildings by U.S. state" label="List of tallest buildings by U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642282" start="12050" end="12088" title="List of tallest buildings in Minnesota" label="List of tallest buildings in Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12173" end="12181" title="The Rake" label="The Rake"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544255" wikidata="Q84296" url="?curid=544255" title="Ludwig Boltzmann">
<text>Ludwig Eduard Boltzmann (, ; ; 20 February 1844 – 5 September 1906) was an Austrian theoretical physicist and philosopher. His greatest achievements were the development of statistical mechanics and the statistical explanation of the second law of thermodynamics. In 1877 he provided the current definition of entropy, formula_1, where Ω is the number of microstates whose energy equals the system&#x27;s energy, interpreted as a measure of the statistical disorder of a system. Max Planck named the constant the Boltzmann constant.

Statistical mechanics is one of the pillars of modern physics. It describes how macroscopic observations (such as temperature and pressure) are related to microscopic parameters that fluctuate around an average. It connects thermodynamic quantities (such as heat capacity) to microscopic behavior, whereas, in classical thermodynamics, the only available option would be to measure and tabulate such quantities for various materials.

== Biography ==
=== Childhood and education ===
Boltzmann was born in Erdberg, a suburb of Vienna into a Catholic family. His father, Ludwig Georg Boltzmann, was a revenue official. His grandfather, who had moved to Vienna from Berlin, was a clock manufacturer, and Boltzmann&#x27;s mother, Katharina Pauernfeind, was originally from Salzburg. Boltzmann was home-schooled until the age of ten, and then attended high school in Linz, Upper Austria. When Boltzmann was 15, his father died.

Starting in 1863, Boltzmann studied mathematics and physics at the University of Vienna. He received his doctorate in 1866 and his venia legendi in 1869. Boltzmann worked closely with Josef Stefan, director of the institute of physics. It was Stefan who introduced Boltzmann to Maxwell&#x27;s work.

=== Academic career ===
In 1869 at age 25, thanks to a letter of recommendation written by Josef Stefan, Boltzmann was appointed full Professor of Mathematical Physics at the University of Graz in the province of Styria. In 1869 he spent several months in Heidelberg working with Robert Bunsen and Leo Königsberger and in 1871 with Gustav Kirchhoff and Hermann von Helmholtz in Berlin. In 1873 Boltzmann joined the University of Vienna as Professor of Mathematics and there he stayed until 1876.
In 1872, long before women were admitted to Austrian universities, he met Henriette von Aigentler, an aspiring teacher of mathematics and physics in Graz. She was refused permission to audit lectures unofficially. Boltzmann supported her decision to appeal, which was successful. On 17 July 1876 Ludwig Boltzmann married Henriette; they had three daughters: Henriette (1880), Ida (1884) and Else (1891); and a son, Arthur Ludwig (1881). Boltzmann went back to Graz to take up the chair of Experimental Physics. Among his students in Graz were Svante Arrhenius and Walther Nernst. He spent 14 happy years in Graz and it was there that he developed his statistical concept of nature.

Boltzmann was appointed to the Chair of Theoretical Physics at the University of Munich in Bavaria, Germany in 1890.

In 1894, Boltzmann succeeded his teacher Joseph Stefan as Professor of Theoretical Physics at the University of Vienna.

=== Final years and death ===

Boltzmann spent a great deal of effort in his final years defending his theories. He did not get along with some of his colleagues in Vienna, particularly Ernst Mach, who became a professor of philosophy and history of sciences in 1895. That same year Georg Helm and Wilhelm Ostwald presented their position on energetics at a meeting in Lübeck. They saw energy, and not matter, as the chief component of the universe. Boltzmann&#x27;s position carried the day among other physicists who supported his atomic theories in the debate. In 1900, Boltzmann went to the University of Leipzig, on the invitation of Wilhelm Ostwald. Ostwald offered Boltzmann the professorial chair in physics, which became vacant when Gustav Heinrich Wiedemann died. After Mach retired due to bad health, Boltzmann returned to Vienna in 1902. In 1903, Boltzmann, together with Gustav von Escherich and Emil Müller, founded the Austrian Mathematical Society. His students included Karl Přibram, Paul Ehrenfest and Lise Meitner.

In Vienna, Boltzmann taught physics and also lectured on philosophy. Boltzmann&#x27;s lectures on natural philosophy were very popular and received considerable attention. His first lecture was an enormous success: people stood all the way down the staircase outside the largest available lecture hall, and the Emperor invited him to a reception.

In 1905, he gave an invited course of lectures in the summer session at the University of California in Berkeley, which he described in a popular essay &quot;A German professor&#x27;s trip to El Dorado&quot;.

In May 1906, Boltzmann&#x27;s deteriorating mental condition (described in a letter by the Dean as &quot;a serious form of neurasthenia&quot;) forced him to resign his position. His symptoms indicate he experienced what might today be diagnosed as bipolar disorder. Four months later he died by suicide on 5 September 1906, by hanging himself while on vacation with his wife and daughter in Duino, near Trieste (then Austria).
He is buried in the Viennese Zentralfriedhof. His tombstone bears the inscription of Boltzmann&#x27;s entropy formula: formula_2.

== Philosophy ==
Boltzmann&#x27;s kinetic theory of gases seemed to presuppose the reality of atoms and molecules, but almost all German philosophers and many scientists like Ernst Mach and the physical chemist Wilhelm Ostwald disbelieved their existence. Boltzmann had been exposed to molecular theory by James Clerk Maxwell’s paper, &quot;Illustrations of the Dynamical Theory of Gases,&quot; which described temperature as dependent on the speed of the molecules. This inspired Boltzmann to embrace atomism, introducing statistics into physics and extending the theory.

Boltzmann wrote treatises on philosophy such as &quot;On the question of the objective existence of processes in inanimate nature&quot; (1897). He was a realist. In his work &quot;On Thesis of Schopenhauer&#x27;s&quot;, Boltzmann refers to his philosophy as materialism and says further: &quot;Idealism asserts that only the ego exists, the various ideas, and seeks to explain matter from them. Materialism starts from the existence of matter and seeks to explain sensations from it.&quot;

== Physics ==
Boltzmann&#x27;s most important scientific contributions were in the kinetic theory of gases based upon the Second law of thermodynamics. This was important because Newtonian mechanics did not differentiate between past and future motion, but Rudolf Clausius’ invention of entropy to describe the second law was based on disgregation or dispersion at the molecular level so that the future was one-directional. Boltzmann was twenty-five years of age when he came upon James Clerk Maxwell&#x27;s work on the kinetic theory of gases which hypothesized that temperature was caused by collision of molecules. Maxwell used statistics to create a curve of molecular kinetic energy distribution from which Boltzmann clarified and developed the ideas of kinetic theory and entropy based upon statistical atomic theory creating the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution as a description of molecular speeds in a gas. It was Boltzmann who derived the first equation to model the dynamic evolution of the probability distribution Maxwell and he had created. Boltzmann&#x27;s key insight was that dispersion occurred due to the statistical probability of increased molecular &quot;states&quot;. Boltzmann went beyond Maxwell by applying his distribution equation to not solely gases, but also liquids and solids. Boltzmann also extended his theory in his 1877 paper beyond Carnot, Rudolf Clausius, James Clerk Maxwell and Lord Kelvin by demonstrating that entropy is contributed to by heat, spatial separation, and radiation. Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics and the Boltzmann distribution remain central in the foundations of classical statistical mechanics. They are also applicable to other phenomena that do not require quantum statistics and provide insight into the meaning of temperature.

He made multiple attempts to explain the second law of thermodynamics, with the attempts ranging over many areas. He tried Helmholtz&#x27;s monocycle model, a pure ensemble approach like Gibbs, a pure mechanical approach like ergodic theory, the combinatorial argument, the &quot;Stoßzahlansatz&quot;, etc.

Most chemists, since the discoveries of John Dalton in 1808, and James Clerk Maxwell in Scotland and Josiah Willard Gibbs in the United States, shared Boltzmann&#x27;s belief in atoms and molecules, but much of the physics establishment did not share this belief until decades later. Boltzmann had a long-running dispute with the editor of the preeminent German physics journal of his day, who refused to let Boltzmann refer to atoms and molecules as anything other than convenient theoretical constructs. Only a couple of years after Boltzmann&#x27;s death, Perrin&#x27;s studies of colloidal suspensions (1908–1909), based on Einstein&#x27;s theoretical studies of 1905, confirmed the values of the Avogadro constant and the Boltzmann constant, convincing the world that the tiny particles really exist.

To quote Planck, &quot;The logarithmic connection between entropy and probability was first stated by L. Boltzmann in his kinetic theory of gases&quot;. This famous formula for entropy &quot;S&quot; is 
formula_3
where is the Boltzmann constant, and ln is the natural logarithm. (for , a German word meaning &quot;probability&quot;) is the probability of occurrence of a macrostate or, more precisely, the number of possible microstates corresponding to the macroscopic state of a system – the number of (unobservable) &quot;ways&quot; in the (observable) thermodynamic state of a system that can be realized by assigning different positions and momenta to the various molecules. Boltzmann&#x27;s paradigm was an ideal gas of &quot;identical&quot; particles, of which are in the th microscopic condition (range) of position and momentum.  can be counted using the formula for permutations
formula_4
where ranges over all possible molecular conditions, and where formula_5 denotes factorial. The &quot;correction&quot; in the denominator account for indistinguishable particles in the same condition.

Boltzmann could also be considered one of the forerunners of quantum mechanics due to his suggestion in 1877 that the energy levels of a physical system could be discrete, although Boltzmann used this as a mathematical device with no physical meaning.

An alternative to Boltzmann&#x27;s formula for entropy, above, is the information entropy definition introduced in 1948 by Claude Shannon. Shannon&#x27;s definition was intended for use in communication theory but is applicable in all areas. It reduces to Boltzmann&#x27;s expression when all the probabilities are equal, but can, of course, be used when they are not. Its virtue is that it yields immediate results without resorting to factorials or Stirling&#x27;s approximation. Similar formulas are found, however, as far back as the work of Boltzmann, and explicitly in Gibbs (see reference).

== Boltzmann equation ==

The Boltzmann equation was developed to describe the dynamics of an ideal gas.
formula_6
where represents the distribution function of single-particle position and momentum at a given time (see the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution), is a force, is the mass of a particle, is the time and is an average velocity of particles.

This equation describes the temporal and spatial variation of the probability distribution for the position and momentum of a density distribution of a cloud of points in single-particle phase space. (See Hamiltonian mechanics.) The first term on the left-hand side represents the explicit time variation of the distribution function, while the second term gives the spatial variation, and the third term describes the effect of any force acting on the particles. The right-hand side of the equation represents the effect of collisions.

In principle, the above equation completely describes the dynamics of an ensemble of gas particles, given appropriate boundary conditions. This first-order differential equation has a deceptively simple appearance, since can represent an arbitrary single-particle distribution function. Also, the force acting on the particles depends directly on the velocity distribution function . The Boltzmann equation is notoriously difficult to integrate. David Hilbert spent years trying to solve it without any real success.

The form of the collision term assumed by Boltzmann was approximate. However, for an ideal gas the standard Chapman–Enskog solution of the Boltzmann equation is highly accurate. It is expected to lead to incorrect results for an ideal gas only under shock wave conditions.

Boltzmann tried for many years to &quot;prove&quot; the second law of thermodynamics using his gas-dynamical equation – his famous H-theorem. However the key assumption he made in formulating the collision term was &quot;molecular chaos&quot;, an assumption which breaks time-reversal symmetry as is necessary for &quot;anything&quot; which could imply the second law. It was from the probabilistic assumption alone that Boltzmann&#x27;s apparent success emanated, so his long dispute with Loschmidt and others over Loschmidt&#x27;s paradox ultimately ended in his failure.

Finally, in the 1970s E. G. D. Cohen and J. R. Dorfman proved that a systematic (power series) extension of the Boltzmann equation to high densities is mathematically impossible. Consequently, nonequilibrium statistical mechanics for dense gases and liquids focuses on the Green–Kubo relations, the fluctuation theorem, and other approaches instead.

== Second thermodynamics law as a law of disorder ==

The idea that the second law of thermodynamics or &quot;entropy law&quot; is a law of disorder (or that dynamically ordered states are &quot;infinitely improbable&quot;) is due to Boltzmann&#x27;s view of the second law of thermodynamics.

In particular, it was Boltzmann&#x27;s attempt to reduce it to a stochastic collision function, or law of probability following from the random collisions of mechanical particles. Following Maxwell, Boltzmann modeled gas molecules as colliding billiard balls in a box, noting that with each collision nonequilibrium velocity distributions (groups of molecules moving at the same speed and in the same direction) would become increasingly disordered leading to a final state of macroscopic uniformity and maximum microscopic disorder or the state of maximum entropy (where the macroscopic uniformity corresponds to the obliteration of all field potentials or gradients). The second law, he argued, was thus simply the result of the fact that in a world of mechanically colliding particles disordered states are the most probable. Because there are so many more possible disordered states than ordered ones, a system will almost always be found either in the state of maximum disorder – the macrostate with the greatest number of accessible microstates such as a gas in a box at equilibrium – or moving towards it. A dynamically ordered state, one with molecules moving &quot;at the same speed and in the same direction&quot;, Boltzmann concluded, is thus &quot;the most improbable case conceivable...an infinitely improbable configuration of energy.&quot;

Boltzmann accomplished the feat of showing that the second law of thermodynamics is only a statistical fact. The gradual disordering of energy is analogous to the disordering of an initially ordered pack of cards under repeated shuffling, and just as the cards will finally return to their original order if shuffled a gigantic number of times, so the entire universe must some-day regain, by pure chance, the state from which it first set out. (This optimistic coda to the idea of the dying universe becomes somewhat muted when one attempts to estimate the timeline which will probably elapse before it spontaneously occurs.) The tendency for entropy increase seems to cause difficulty to beginners in thermodynamics, but is easy to understand from the standpoint of the theory of probability. Consider two ordinary dice, with both sixes face up. After the dice are shaken, the chance of finding these two sixes face up is small (1 in 36); thus one can say that the random motion (the agitation) of the dice, like the chaotic collisions of molecules because of thermal energy, causes the less probable state to change to one that is more probable. With millions of dice, like the millions of atoms involved in thermodynamic calculations, the probability of their all being sixes becomes so vanishingly small that the system &quot;must&quot; move to one of the more probable states.

== Legacy and impact on modern science ==
Ludwig Boltzmann&#x27;s contributions to physics and philosophy have left a lasting impact on modern science. His pioneering work in statistical mechanics and thermodynamics laid the foundation for some of the most fundamental concepts in physics. For instance, Max Planck in quantizing resonators in his Black Body theory of radiation used the Boltzmann constant to describe the entropy of the system to arrive at his formula in 1900. However, Boltzmann&#x27;s work was not always readily accepted during his lifetime, and he faced opposition from some of his contemporaries, particularly in regard to the existence of atoms and molecules. Nevertheless, the validity and importance of his ideas were eventually recognized, and they have since become cornerstones of modern physics. Here, we delve into some aspects of Boltzmann&#x27;s legacy and his influence on various areas of science.

=== Atomic theory and the existence of atoms and molecules ===
Boltzmann&#x27;s kinetic theory of gases was one of the first attempts to explain macroscopic properties, such as pressure and temperature, in terms of the behaviour of individual atoms and molecules. Although many chemists were already accepting the existence of atoms and molecules, the broader physics community took some time to embrace this view. Boltzmann&#x27;s long-running dispute with the editor of a prominent German physics journal over the acceptance of atoms and molecules underscores the initial resistance to this idea.

It was only after experiments, such as Jean Perrin&#x27;s studies of colloidal suspensions, confirmed the values of the Avogadro constant and the Boltzmann constant that the existence of atoms and molecules gained wider acceptance. Boltzmann&#x27;s kinetic theory played a crucial role in demonstrating the reality of atoms and molecules and explaining various phenomena in gases, liquids, and solids.

=== Statistical mechanics and the Boltzmann constant ===
Statistical mechanics, which Boltzmann pioneered, connects macroscopic observations with microscopic behaviors. His statistical explanation of the second law of thermodynamics was a significant achievement, and he provided the current definition of entropy (formula_1), where is the Boltzmann constant and Ω is the number of microstates corresponding to a given macrostate.

Max Planck later named the constant as the Boltzmann constant in honor of Boltzmann&#x27;s contributions to statistical mechanics. The Boltzmann constant is now a fundamental constant in physics and across many scientific disciplines.

=== Boltzmann equation and modern uses ===
Because the Boltzmann equation is practical in solving problems in rarefied or dilute gases, it has been used in many diverse areas of technology. It is used to calculate Space Shuttle re-entry in the upper atmosphere. It is the basis for Neutron transport theory, and ion transport in Semiconductors.

== Influence on quantum mechanics ==

Boltzmann&#x27;s work in statistical mechanics laid the groundwork for understanding the statistical behavior of particles in systems with a large number of degrees of freedom. In his 1877 paper, he used discrete energy levels of physical systems as a mathematical device and went on to show that the same approach could be applied to continuous systems. This might be seen as a forerunner to the development of quantum mechanics. One biographer of Boltzmann says that Boltzmann’s approach “pav[ed] the way for Planck.”

Quantization of energy levels became a fundamental postulate in quantum mechanics, leading to groundbreaking theories like quantum electrodynamics and quantum field theory. Thus, Boltzmann&#x27;s early insights into the quantization of energy levels had a profound influence on the development of quantum physics.

== Works ==
* 
* 


== Awards and honours ==
In 1885 he became a member of the Imperial Austrian Academy of Sciences and in 1887 he became the President of the University of Graz. He was elected a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1888 and a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1899. Numerous things are named in his honour.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Roman Sexl &amp; John Blackmore (eds.), &quot;Ludwig Boltzmann – Ausgewahlte Abhandlungen&quot;, (Ludwig Boltzmann Gesamtausgabe, Band 8), Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1982.
* John Blackmore (ed.), &quot;Ludwig Boltzmann – His Later Life and Philosophy, 1900–1906, Book One: A Documentary History&quot;, Kluwer, 1995. 
* John Blackmore, &quot;Ludwig Boltzmann – His Later Life and Philosophy, 1900–1906, Book Two: The Philosopher&quot;, Kluwer, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1995. 
* John Blackmore (ed.), &quot;Ludwig Boltzmann – Troubled Genius as Philosopher&quot;, in Synthese, Volume 119, Nos. 1 &amp; 2, 1999, pp. 1–232.
* Boltzmann, &quot;Ludwig Boltzmann – Leben und Briefe&quot;, ed., Walter Hoeflechner, Akademische Druck- u. Verlagsanstalt. Graz, Oesterreich, 1994
* Brush, Stephen G. (ed. &amp; tr.), Boltzmann, &quot;Lectures on Gas Theory&quot;, Berkeley, California: U. of California Press, 1964
* Brush, Stephen G. (ed.), &quot;Kinetic Theory&quot;, New York: Pergamon Press, 1965
* 
* 
* Ehrenfest, P. &amp; Ehrenfest, T. (1911) &quot;Begriffliche Grundlagen der statistischen Auffassung in der Mechanik&quot;, in &quot;Encyklopädie der mathematischen Wissenschaften mit Einschluß ihrer Anwendungen&quot; Band IV, 2. Teil ( F. Klein and C. Müller (eds.). Leipzig: Teubner, pp. 3–90. Translated as &quot;The Conceptual Foundations of the Statistical Approach in Mechanics&quot;. New York: Cornell University Press, 1959. 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* English translation by Morton Masius of the 2nd ed. of &quot;Waermestrahlung&quot;. Reprinted by Dover (1959) &amp; (1991). 
* Sharp, Kim (2019). &quot;Entropy and the Tao of Counting: A Brief Introduction to Statistical Mechanics and the Second Law of Thermodynamics&quot; (SpringerBriefs in Physics). Springer Nature. 
* Reprinted: Dover (1979). 

== External links ==
*Ludwig Boltzmann - The genius of disorder (Youtube)
* Ruth Lewin Sime, &quot;Lise Meitner: A Life in Physics&quot; Chapter One: Girlhood in Vienna gives Lise Meitner&#x27;s account of Boltzmann&#x27;s teaching and career.
* Eftekhari, Ali, &quot;Ludwig Boltzmann (1844–1906).&quot; Discusses Boltzmann&#x27;s philosophical opinions, with numerous quotes.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q84296" start="0" end="23" title="Ludwig Boltzmann" label="Ludwig Eduard Boltzmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="84" end="105" title="theoretical physicist" label="theoretical physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="110" end="121" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="173" end="194" title="statistical mechanics" label="statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q177045" start="234" end="262" title="second law of thermodynamics" label="second law of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="310" end="317" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9021" start="479" end="489" title="Max Planck" label="Max Planck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962" start="513" end="531" title="Boltzmann constant" label="Boltzmann constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="588" end="595" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q674038" start="614" end="625" title="macroscopic" label="macroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="648" end="659" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="664" end="672" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q38456" start="689" end="700" title="microscopic" label="microscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179388" start="792" end="805" title="heat capacity" label="heat capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="844" end="868" title="classical thermodynamics" label="classical thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="1060" end="1066" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1074" end="1082" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="1303" end="1311" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q41329" start="1396" end="1400" title="Linz" label="Linz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41967" start="1402" end="1415" title="Upper Austria" label="Upper Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="1494" end="1505" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="1510" end="1517" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="1525" end="1545" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q308678" start="1589" end="1602" title="venia legendi" label="venia legendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16581" start="1642" end="1654" title="Josef Stefan" label="Josef Stefan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="1736" end="1750" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339210" start="1813" end="1837" title="letter of recommendation" label="letter of recommendation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16581" start="1849" end="1861" title="Josef Stefan" label="Josef Stefan"/>
<link wikidata="Q156495" start="1905" end="1925" title="Mathematical Physics" label="Mathematical Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q622683" start="1933" end="1951" title="University of Graz" label="University of Graz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41358" start="1971" end="1977" title="Styria" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="2014" end="2024" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q71031" start="2038" end="2051" title="Robert Bunsen" label="Robert Bunsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q68531" start="2056" end="2072" title="Leo Königsberger" label="Leo Königsberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q60052" start="2090" end="2106" title="Gustav Kirchhoff" label="Gustav Kirchhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q60024" start="2111" end="2132" title="Hermann von Helmholtz" label="Hermann von Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q13298" start="2714" end="2718" title="Graz" label="Graz"/>
<link wikidata="Q80956" start="2797" end="2813" title="Svante Arrhenius" label="Svante Arrhenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q57125" start="2818" end="2832" title="Walther Nernst" label="Walther Nernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q55044" start="3004" end="3024" title="University of Munich" label="University of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="3028" end="3035" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16581" start="3096" end="3109" title="Joseph Stefan" label="Joseph Stefan"/>
<link wikidata="Q93996" start="3362" end="3372" title="Ernst Mach" label="Ernst Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q91035" start="3459" end="3469" title="Georg Helm" label="Georg Helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12658" start="3474" end="3489" title="Wilhelm Ostwald" label="Wilhelm Ostwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376837" start="3518" end="3528" title="energeticism" label="energetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843" start="3545" end="3551" title="Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="3771" end="3792" title="University of Leipzig" label="University of Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q12658" start="3815" end="3830" title="Wilhelm Ostwald" label="Wilhelm Ostwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q62108" start="3918" end="3943" title="Gustav Heinrich Wiedemann" label="Gustav Heinrich Wiedemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q84774" start="4060" end="4080" title="Gustav von Escherich" label="Gustav von Escherich"/>
<link wikidata="Q86082" start="4085" end="4096" title="Emil Müller (mathematician)" label="Emil Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q303786" start="4110" end="4139" title="Austrian Mathematical Society" label="Austrian Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q89275" start="4163" end="4175" title="Karl Přibram" label="Karl Přibram"/>
<link wikidata="Q84227" start="4177" end="4191" title="Paul Ehrenfest" label="Paul Ehrenfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q56189" start="4196" end="4208" title="Lise Meitner" label="Lise Meitner"/>
<link wikidata="Q269323" start="4309" end="4327" title="natural philosophy" label="natural philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="4635" end="4671" title="University of California in Berkeley" label="University of California in Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q510236" start="4892" end="4904" title="neurasthenia" label="neurasthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="5017" end="5033" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q175111" start="5096" end="5103" title="hanging" label="hanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477512" start="5160" end="5165" title="Duino" label="Duino"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="5172" end="5179" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q240744" start="5225" end="5240" title="Zentralfriedhof" label="Zentralfriedhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q375553" start="5281" end="5313" title="Boltzmann&amp;#x27;s entropy formula" label="Boltzmann&amp;#x27;s entropy formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q200286" start="5361" end="5384" title="kinetic theory of gases" label="kinetic theory of gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="5421" end="5425" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="5431" end="5439" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203683" start="5457" end="5476" title="German philosophy" label="German philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q93996" start="5502" end="5512" title="Ernst Mach" label="Ernst Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="5521" end="5537" title="physical chemistry" label="physical chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12658" start="5538" end="5553" title="Wilhelm Ostwald" label="Wilhelm Ostwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="5633" end="5652" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q735590" start="6054" end="6062" title="Philosophical realism" label="realist."/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="6159" end="6170" title="materialism" label="materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q200286" start="6475" end="6498" title="kinetic theory of gases" label="kinetic theory of gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q177045" start="6514" end="6542" title="Second law of thermodynamics" label="Second law of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="6637" end="6643" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion" label="motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693" start="6649" end="6664" title="Rudolf Clausius" label="Rudolf Clausius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282180" start="6727" end="6739" title="disgregation" label="disgregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="6874" end="6893" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="6961" end="6972" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q634965" start="7229" end="7259" title="Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution" label="Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693" start="7768" end="7783" title="Rudolf Clausius" label="Rudolf Clausius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="7785" end="7804" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q122701" start="7809" end="7820" title="Lord Kelvin" label="Lord Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206235" start="7913" end="7941" title="Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics" label="Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q834200" start="7950" end="7972" title="Boltzmann distribution" label="Boltzmann distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="8010" end="8019" title="classical mechanics" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q483247" start="8077" end="8086" title="phenomenon" label="phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8107" end="8125" title="Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics#Applicability" label="quantum statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q264647" start="8166" end="8177" title="thermodynamic temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q60024" start="8303" end="8312" title="Hermann von Helmholtz" label="Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993522" start="8460" end="8474" title="Molecular chaos" label="Stoßzahlansatz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8488" end="8500" title="History of chemistry#19th century" label="Most chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41284" start="8528" end="8539" title="John Dalton" label="John Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="8553" end="8572" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q153243" start="8589" end="8609" title="Josiah Willard Gibbs" label="Josiah Willard Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="8666" end="8670" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="8676" end="8684" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="8703" end="8710" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8970" end="8981" title="Theory#Science" label="theoretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q134085" start="9047" end="9060" title="Jean Baptiste Perrin" label="Perrin&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q181780" start="9072" end="9079" title="colloid" label="colloid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9116" end="9151" title="Albert Einstein#Thermodynamic fluctuations and statistical physics" label="Einstein&amp;#x27;s theoretical studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6203" start="9189" end="9206" title="Avogadro constant" label="Avogadro constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962" start="9215" end="9233" title="Boltzmann constant" label="Boltzmann constant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9280" end="9292" title="Atomic theory#History" label="really exist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9021" start="9304" end="9310" title="Max Planck" label="Planck"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="9322" end="9331" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="9353" end="9360" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="9365" end="9376" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q200286" start="9417" end="9440" title="kinetic theory of gases" label="kinetic theory of gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="9472" end="9479" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962" start="9521" end="9539" title="Boltzmann constant" label="Boltzmann constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q204037" start="9555" end="9572" title="natural logarithm" label="natural logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="9609" end="9620" title="probability theory" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q611952" start="9666" end="9676" title="macrostate" label="macrostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q611952" start="9720" end="9731" title="microstate (statistical mechanics)" label="microstates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="9851" end="9864" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210" start="9927" end="9936" title="coordinate system" label="positions"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="9941" end="9948" title="momentum" label="momenta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9992" end="10000" title="Paradigm#Paradigm shifts" label="paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q172280" start="10008" end="10017" title="ideal gas" label="ideal gas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10171" end="10183" title="Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics#Derivations" label="permutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="10275" end="10284" title="factorial" label="factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q898351" start="10344" end="10361" title="Identical particles" label="indistinguishable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10719" end="10738" title="Information entropy#Formal definitions" label="information entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="10772" end="10786" title="Claude Elwood Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="11086" end="11095" title="factorial" label="factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q470877" start="11100" end="11129" title="Stirling&amp;#x27;s approximation" label="Stirling&amp;#x27;s approximation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11224" end="11229" title="H-theorem#Quantum mechanical H-theorem" label="Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q634965" start="11472" end="11502" title="Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution" label="Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="11626" end="11634" title="time" label="temporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107" start="11639" end="11646" title="space" label="spatial"/>
<link wikidata="Q62542" start="11785" end="11796" title="phase space" label="phase space"/>
<link wikidata="Q477921" start="11803" end="11824" title="Hamiltonian mechanics" label="Hamiltonian mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332643" start="12254" end="12273" title="boundary conditions" label="boundary conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="12292" end="12313" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472662" start="12400" end="12421" title="Distribution function (physics)" label="distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="12433" end="12438" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="12571" end="12580" title="Integral" label="integrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="12582" end="12595" title="David Hilbert" label="David Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133108" start="12762" end="12776" title="Chapman–Enskog theory" label="Chapman–Enskog"/>
<link wikidata="Q190688" start="12904" end="12914" title="shock wave" label="shock wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q177045" start="12984" end="13012" title="second law of thermodynamics" label="second law of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q899853" start="13059" end="13068" title="H-theorem" label="H-theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993522" start="13149" end="13164" title="molecular chaos" label="molecular chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q260060" start="13199" end="13221" title="CPT symmetry" label="time-reversal symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q93496" start="13418" end="13427" title="Johann Josef Loschmidt" label="Loschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895095" start="13444" end="13468" title="Loschmidt&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Loschmidt&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093797" start="13525" end="13539" title="E. G. D. Cohen" label="E. G. D. Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="13696" end="13732" title="non-equilibrium statistical mechanics" label="nonequilibrium statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390265" start="13776" end="13796" title="Green–Kubo relations" label="Green–Kubo relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q900831" start="13802" end="13821" title="fluctuation theorem" label="fluctuation theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q177045" start="13926" end="13954" title="second law of thermodynamics" label="second law of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071239" start="14213" end="14223" title="stochastic" label="stochastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47883" start="15703" end="15716" title="pack of cards" label="pack of cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q45089" start="16321" end="16325" title="dice" label="dice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9021" start="17192" end="17202" title="Max Planck" label="Max Planck"/>
<link wikidata="Q161424" start="17235" end="17245" title="Black Body" label="Black Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962" start="17275" end="17293" title="Boltzmann constant" label="Boltzmann constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q891653" start="19547" end="19565" title="Boltzmann equation" label="Boltzmann equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="19706" end="19719" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338735" start="19774" end="19791" title="Neutron transport" label="Neutron transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="19821" end="19835" title="Semiconductors" label="Semiconductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q234881" start="20520" end="20543" title="quantum electrodynamics" label="quantum electrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="20548" end="20568" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q299015" start="20800" end="20828" title="Austrian Academy of Sciences" label="Austrian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q622683" start="20872" end="20890" title="University of Graz" label="University of Graz"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="20923" end="20956" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711580" start="20971" end="21025" title="List of Fellows of the Royal Society elected in 1899" label="Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979516" start="21027" end="21042" title="List of things named after Ludwig Boltzmann" label="Numerous things"/>
<link wikidata="Q84227" start="22102" end="22115" title="Paul Ehrenfest" label="Ehrenfest, P."/>
<link wikidata="Q463530" start="22122" end="22135" title="Tatyana Afanasyeva" label="Ehrenfest, T."/>
<link wikidata="Q1346193" start="22228" end="22318" title="Klein&amp;#x27;s encyclopedia" label="&amp;quot;Encyklopädie der mathematischen Wissenschaften mit Einschluß ihrer Anwendungen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19299524" start="22975" end="22990" title="Ruth Lewin Sime" label="Ruth Lewin Sime"/>
<link wikidata="Q56189" start="23074" end="23086" title="Lise Meitner" label="Lise Meitner"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544257" wikidata="Q581943" url="?curid=544257" title="Predrag Marković">
<text>Predrag Marković (; born 7 December 1955) is a Serbian politician, author, and publisher who served as the President of the National Assembly of Serbia from 2004 to 2007 and as Minister of Culture, Media and Information Society from 2011 to 2012. A former member of G17 Plus, he also briefly served as acting President of Serbia until the election of Boris Tadić in 2004.

==Political career==
Marković was President of the National Assembly of Serbia from 2004 to 2007 and the acting President of Serbia within Serbia and Montenegro between 4 March and 11 July 2004. In addition, he has been the president of the G17 Plus Management Board, the President of the G17 Plus Political Council and member of their Executive Board. In 2003, he was chosen as an honorary president of the G17 Plus Party.

During Marković&#x27;s tenure as President of the National Assembly, the National Assembly unanimously returned the coat of arms, flag and anthem of Serbia on 17 August 2004 and on 5 June 2006 announced Serbia&#x27;s sovereignty. Marković also organized the writing, declaring and signing of the Constitution of Serbia in 2006.

Marković was the Movement for the Restoration of the Kingdom of Serbia candidate for Mayor of Belgrade during the 2018 Belgrade City Assembly election. He finished with 4,291 votes.

==Literary career==
Marković is a member of PEN, the &quot;Srpsko književno društvo&quot; (Serbian Literary Society) and is the former president of the Association of Publishers of Serbia and Montenegro. From 1993 to 2013, he was the owner of the &quot;Stubovi kulture&quot; (Pillars of Culture) publishing house. He has written six books and speaks Serbian, Russian, and Spanish.

==Personal life==
Marković is known for keeping details from his personal life private. On 26 December 2015, Marković married Vesna (née Vujatović; born 1991). He has a son from a previous marriage.

==Published books==
* &quot;L‘imun. Isceđen&quot; (1982)
* &quot;Morali bi doći nasmejani lavovi&quot; (1983)
* &quot;Otmenost duše&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Zavodnik ništavila&quot; (2017)
* &quot;Kovčeg komedijant&quot; (2018)
* &quot;David protiv Otužnog Zloduha&quot; (2020)

==References==
==External links==
* Predrag Marković at the National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q581943" start="0" end="16" title="Predrag Marković" label="Predrag Marković"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241347" start="107" end="151" title="President of the National Assembly of Serbia" label="President of the National Assembly of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16664624" start="177" end="227" title="Ministry of Culture (Serbia)" label="Minister of Culture, Media and Information Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q913179" start="266" end="274" title="G17 Plus" label="G17 Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q889830" start="309" end="328" title="President of Serbia" label="President of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q483290" start="351" end="362" title="Boris Tadić" label="Boris Tadić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627160" start="366" end="370" title="2004 Serbian presidential election" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241347" start="407" end="451" title="President of the National Assembly of Serbia" label="President of the National Assembly of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q889830" start="485" end="504" title="President of Serbia" label="President of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="512" end="533" title="Serbia and Montenegro" label="Serbia and Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q913179" start="614" end="622" title="G17 Plus" label="G17 Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q199860" start="914" end="926" title="Coat of arms of Serbia" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q163832" start="928" end="932" title="Flag of Serbia" label="flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q185190" start="937" end="943" title="Bože pravde" label="anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287641" start="1094" end="1116" title="Constitution of Serbia" label="Constitution of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837949" start="1144" end="1197" title="Movement for the Restoration of the Kingdom of Serbia" label="Movement for the Restoration of the Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264923" start="1212" end="1229" title="Mayor of Belgrade" label="Mayor of Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q48799008" start="1241" end="1277" title="2018 Belgrade City Assembly election" label="2018 Belgrade City Assembly election"/>
<link wikidata="Q206811" start="1354" end="1357" title="PEN International" label="PEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="1660" end="1667" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="1669" end="1676" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="1682" end="1689" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q920222" start="2227" end="2270" title="National Assembly (Serbia)" label="National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544258" wikidata="Q5692070" url="?curid=544258" title="Heart Protection Study">
<text>The Heart Protection Study was a randomized controlled trial run by the Clinical Trial Service Unit, and funded by the Medical Research Council (MRC) and the British Heart Foundation (BHF) in the United Kingdom. It studied the use of the cholesterol lowering drug, simvastatin 40 mg and vitamin supplementation (vitamin E, vitamin C and beta carotene) in people who were at risk of cardiovascular disease. It was led by Jane Armitage, an epidemiologist at the Clinical Trial Service Unit.

==Results==
An outline of the study protocol was published in 1999. Initial results were published in 2002, which indicated that vitamins made little difference in modifying cardiovascular risk, but that simvastatin could significantly reduce the risk of cardiovascular events. Further publications, from 2003 and 2004, were concerned with the efficacy of simvastatin in diabetes patients and preventing stroke. A 2005 paper analyses the cost-effectiveness of a prescribing strategy similar to the one employed in the study.

==Interpretation==
The HPS is to date the largest study to investigate the use of statins in the prevention of cardiovascular disease. While there have been concerns about side-effects associated with statins (myopathy and rhabdomyolysis), these were rare in this study.

The number needed to treat in the study was 57 to postpone one death and 19 to prevent one cardiovascular &quot;event&quot; (in those taking the drug simvastatin for 5 years). There was no mortality benefit in women with a statistical &quot;p-value&quot; that did not reach significance (0.08) while the Kaplan-Meier mortality curves, for men and women separately, have not been published as of 2016. Cancer risk was not significantly lower in the treatment group; in fact, there was no difference except for non-melanoma skin cancers, wherein the placebo group had a barely-significant lower risk of diagnosis. No worsening of lung disease was found, an initial concern with statin drugs, and simvastatin did not decrease osteoporosis.

==Pharmaceutical funding==
£5.5M plus drug supply was received from Merck and £5.5M plus drug supply from Roche.
==See also==
* HDL-Atherosclerosis Treatment Study
* West of Scotland Coronary Prevention Study
* Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study

==References==
== Further reading ==
* Study homepage at the Clinical Trial Service Unit
* Bandolier condensation of the HPS results</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5692070" start="4" end="26" title="Heart Protection Study" label="Heart Protection Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436668" start="33" end="60" title="randomized controlled trial" label="randomized controlled trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133801" start="72" end="99" title="Clinical Trial Service Unit" label="Clinical Trial Service Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q746879" start="119" end="143" title="Medical Research Council (UK)" label="Medical Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970039" start="158" end="182" title="British Heart Foundation" label="British Heart Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="196" end="210" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q954845" start="238" end="263" title="statin" label="cholesterol lowering drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q670131" start="265" end="276" title="simvastatin" label="simvastatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="287" end="294" title="vitamin" label="vitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q141180" start="312" end="321" title="vitamin E" label="vitamin E"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="323" end="332" title="vitamin C" label="vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q190156" start="337" end="350" title="carotene" label="beta carotene"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="382" end="404" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q64711983" start="420" end="433" title="Jane Armitage" label="Jane Armitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133801" start="460" end="487" title="Clinical Trial Service Unit" label="Clinical Trial Service Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q954845" start="1098" end="1104" title="statin" label="statin"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="1127" end="1149" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q692536" start="1226" end="1234" title="myopathy" label="myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q917069" start="1239" end="1253" title="rhabdomyolysis" label="rhabdomyolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q614132" start="1292" end="1314" title="number needed to treat" label="number needed to treat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="1689" end="1695" title="Cancer" label="Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286546" start="1916" end="1928" title="lung disease" label="lung disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q165328" start="2011" end="2023" title="osteoporosis" label="osteoporosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q64790705" start="2154" end="2189" title="HDL-Atherosclerosis Treatment Study" label="HDL-Atherosclerosis Treatment Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q96414502" start="2192" end="2234" title="West of Scotland Coronary Prevention Study" label="West of Scotland Coronary Prevention Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429973" start="2237" end="2276" title="Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study" label="Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133801" start="2339" end="2366" title="Clinical Trial Service Unit" label="Clinical Trial Service Unit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544259" wikidata="Q1063300" url="?curid=544259" title="Charlbury">
<text>Charlbury () is a town and civil parish in the Evenlode valley, about north of Witney in the West Oxfordshire district of Oxfordshire, England. It is on the edge of Wychwood Forest and the Cotswolds. The 2011 Census recorded the parish&#x27;s population as 2,830.

==Place name==
Toponymic evidence suggests that Charlbury was an Anglo-Saxon settlement from an early date, and may be associated with &#x27;Faerpinga in Middelenglum&#x27; listed in the Tribal Hidage of the 7th to 9th centuries. The name is a compound of two Old English elements. &quot;Burh&quot; is a fortified place. &quot;Ceorl&quot; (probably pronounced ) is a &quot;freeman of the lowest class&quot;, but other sources suggest it was also a personal name. For this reason some hold the latter two pronunciations more valid than the former, and the current spelling not phonetic, preferring &quot;Chorlbury&quot;. The similarity between &quot;Ceorl&quot; and the personal name &quot;Charles&quot; is no accident: &quot;Charles&quot;, &quot;ceorl&quot; and &quot;churl&quot;, along with the modern German name &quot;Karl&quot; derive from the same Proto-Germanic word *karlaz.

==Notable buildings==
&quot;Lee Place&quot; (Grade II* listed), the former dower house of Ditchley is the home of Rosita Spencer-Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough. 
About one mile to the southwest, lies Cornbury Park (Grade I listed), owned by Lord Rotherwick, is a 17th-century country house designed partly by the architect Hugh May.

==Parish church==
The Church of England parish church of St Mary the Virgin is by tradition associated with Saint Diuma, the 7th-century first Bishop of Mercia. By 1197 or 1198 the church belonged to Eynsham Abbey, which held the advowson of the parish until the Dissolution of the Monasteries in the 16th century. The arcade between the nave and north aisle is Norman. In the 13th century the building was greatly enlarged: the chancel was extended eastwards and the south aisle, west tower and north and south chapels were added. In the 14th century the present Decorated Gothic east windows of the chancel and south chapel were added. During or before the 15th century the north aisle was widened. In the 15th century Perpendicular Gothic additions were made to the building: the tower was extended higher and a west door was inserted in its base, a clerestory was added to the nave and new windows were inserted in both aisles.

In the 16th century the Perpendicular Gothic south porch was added. Two wooden galleries were added, possibly in the 18th century. In the 18th or early in the 19th century most of the windows lost their tracery. The church includes memorials to Elizabeth Norborne, Dowager Viscountess Hereford (d.1742). In 1856 the Gothic Revival architect G.E. Street had the galleries removed and the church refitted with new pews, and in 1874 the chancel was rebuilt to the designs of another Gothic Revival architect, Charles Buckeridge. Early in the 1990s an extensive reordering saw the pews removed and the main altar moved to the west end. The organ is a two-manual Wyvern digital instrument, installed in 2010 to replace a Makin digital in place since 1990. The bell tower has a ring of six bells, all cast in 1716 by Abraham I Rudhall of Gloucester plus a Sanctus bell cast by an unknown founder in about 1599.

==Religious Society of Friends==

Quakerism reached Charlbury in the Commonwealth that followed the English Civil War. Anne Downer, the daughter of a former Vicar of Charlbury, joined the Religious Society of Friends in 1654. In 1655 she became the first Quaker woman preacher and the following year she preached in Chadlington. She preached at Charlbury, where Quaker meetings were held in the homes of two converts, William Cole and Alexander Harris. Many Quakers in Charlbury were distrained for refusing to pay the Church Rate. In 1660 a Chadlington Quaker who attended the Charlbury meetings was jailed for refusing to swear the Oath of Allegiance and in 1663 Henry Shad, a Quaker schoolmaster, was barred from teaching.

In 1669 about 30 members were meeting in Harris&#x27; house. In 1680 a meeting at Cole&#x27;s house to hear Thomas Taylor, a preacher from the north of England, was so crowded that the local Quakers decided to build a meeting house. Quakers including Thomas Gilkes of Sibford Gower gave land on which a meeting house was built in 1681. By 1689 the meeting house had a burial ground, but early in the next century membership declined and for a time meetings were discontinued. In 1779 a new meeting house was built on the same site and the burial ground was enlarged. It is a square Georgian building with a hipped roof and arched windows. The number of members attending Quaker meetings was 35 in 1826 and 39 in 1851. After the First World War attendance declined rapidly and in the 1920s the meeting house was closed and turned into a preparatory school.

The Thomas Gilkes who helped to provide the land for the meeting house had a son of the same name who became a clockmaker in Sibford Gower. He trained his son – a third Thomas Gilkes (1704–57) – in the same trade. This Gilkes established his own clockmaking business in Charlbury, and was reputed also to be an eminent Quaker minister. He was succeeded by his son, a fourth Thomas Gilkes (1740–75). A number of longcase clocks made by the two men still exist. William Harrison was a later Quaker clockmaker at Charlbury. A longcase clock that he made in about 1770 is known to survive. Another longcase clock by Harrison is in the Charlbury Society Museum. In 1792 Harrison installed the turret clock at University College, Oxford. Quakers had to be apprenticed to fellow Quakers, and those at Charlbury were part of a network of Quaker clockmakers in north Oxfordshire who were all linked by either family, former apprenticeship or both. As well as Sibford and Charlbury, Adderbury and Deddington were also centres of Quaker clockmaking.

==Transport==

Charlbury railway station is on the Cotswold Line. It is served by Great Western Railway trains between London Paddington, Oxford, Great Malvern, Worcester and Hereford. Bus services include a branch of Stagecoach in Oxfordshire route S3 between Charlbury and Oxford via Woodstock. Services on the Charlbury branch of route S3 run hourly, Monday – Saturday. Route S3 Sunday services do not serve Charlbury. Pulhams route X9 between Chipping Norton and Witney runs hourly via Charlbury, Monday – Saturday. There are other local bus services to and from Charlbury that run less than hourly.

==Media==
Local news and television programmes are provided by BBC South and ITV Meridian. Television signals are received from the Oxford TV transmitter and the local relay transmitter. Local radio stations are BBC Radio Oxford on 95.2 FM, Heart South on 102.6 FM, Greatest Hits Radio South (formerly Jack FM) on 106.4 FM and Witney Radio, a community based station which broadcast to the town on 107.4 FM. The town is served by the local newspapers,&#x27;Oxfordshire Guardian&quot; and &quot;The Charlbury Chronicle&quot; which is distributed free to every household in the town. 

==Amenities==

Charlbury Town Football Club play in Witney and District Football League Premier Division. Charlbury Town Walking Football play in the Oxfordshire Walking Football League. Charlbury Cricket Club play in Oxfordshire Cricket Association League Division 1. Charlbury Bowls Club play in Oxfordshire Bowls League Division Two and the West Oxfordshire division of the Oxfordshire Short Mat Bowling Association. Charlbury has a Women&#x27;s Institute. Charlbury Museum, opened in 1962, is a local museum run by the Charlbury Society. Charlbury hosts a number of public events each year: the Riverside Music Festival in July which is free to enter, the Wilderness Festival in August, the Charlbury Street Fair in September, which dates back to 1955, and the Charlbury Beer Festival in late June or July, which hosts the Aunt Sally Singles World Championship.

==Walcot==
Walcot is a hamlet consisting of one farm in the civil parish of Charlbury. It is near the town of Charlbury, and in the Church of England parish of Charlbury with Shorthampton. The settlement comprises Walcot Farmhouse, a Grade II Listed manor house dating from the sixteenth-seventeenth centuries with latter additions. The &quot;Charlbury and Walcot (Oxon) estate survey&quot; of 1761, is held by the Bodleian Library Special Collections department. Walcot is close to Charlbury station, and is on a bridleway. It is near the River Evenlode, and is served by small turning off the B4437.

==See also==
* Charlbury Road, Oxford

==References==
==Sources==
*
*

==External links==

*Charlbury.info
*Open Directory Project page for Charlbury
*Town on 1947 Ordnance Survey Map
* 2023 Boundary Changes </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1063300" start="0" end="9" title="Charlbury" label="Charlbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="27" end="39" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061424" start="47" end="55" title="River Evenlode" label="Evenlode"/>
<link wikidata="Q990166" start="79" end="85" title="Witney" label="Witney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776955" start="93" end="109" title="West Oxfordshire" label="West Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="122" end="133" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039567" start="165" end="180" title="Wychwood" label="Wychwood Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q301833" start="189" end="198" title="Cotswolds" label="Cotswolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="204" end="215" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="280" end="289" title="Toponymy" label="Toponymic"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="330" end="341" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q785017" start="452" end="465" title="Tribal Hidage" label="Tribal Hidage"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="525" end="536" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q88034" start="553" end="557" title="Burh" label="Burh"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="1118" end="1132" title="Proto-Germanic" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302681" start="1223" end="1234" title="dower house" label="dower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q4453742" start="1238" end="1246" title="Ditchley" label="Ditchley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368993" start="1262" end="1310" title="Rosita Spencer-Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough" label="Rosita Spencer-Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171096" start="1351" end="1364" title="Cornbury Park" label="Cornbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q808663" start="1392" end="1407" title="Baron Rotherwick" label="Lord Rotherwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="1427" end="1440" title="English country house" label="country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634427" start="1474" end="1482" title="Hugh May" label="Hugh May"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116872" start="1507" end="1538" title="Church of England parish church" label="Church of England parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="1542" end="1560" title="Mary (mother of Jesus)" label="St Mary the Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q363776" start="1599" end="1604" title="Diuma" label="Diuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q105092" start="1638" end="1644" title="Mercia" label="Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820517" start="1685" end="1698" title="Eynsham Abbey" label="Eynsham Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146818" start="1715" end="1723" title="advowson" label="advowson"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="1748" end="1778" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="Dissolution of the Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q186637" start="1804" end="1810" title="Arcade (architecture)" label="arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="1823" end="1827" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1838" end="1843" title="Aisle#Architecture" label="aisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q136693" start="1847" end="1853" title="Norman architecture" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q103841669" start="1914" end="1921" title="chancel" label="chancel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2049" end="2065" title="English Gothic architecture#Decorated Gothic" label="Decorated Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2206" end="2226" title="English Gothic architecture#Perpendicular Gothic" label="Perpendicular Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q580731" start="2338" end="2348" title="clerestory" label="clerestory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987058" start="2497" end="2506" title="West gallery music" label="galleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q847108" start="2621" end="2628" title="tracery" label="tracery"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="2734" end="2758" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538851" start="2759" end="2770" title="George Edmund Street" label="G.E. Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q848162" start="2830" end="2833" title="pew" label="pew"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075858" start="2924" end="2942" title="Charles Buckeridge" label="Charles Buckeridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q200334" start="3173" end="3183" title="bell tower" label="bell tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q461406" start="3190" end="3194" title="Change ringing" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376914" start="3239" end="3260" title="Rudhall of Gloucester" label="Rudhall of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3268" end="3280" title="Church bell#Types" label="Sanctus bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="3393" end="3405" title="Commonwealth of England" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="3424" end="3441" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q18761903" start="3443" end="3454" title="Anne Whitehead" label="Anne Downer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="3512" end="3540" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Religious Society of Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428852" start="3640" end="3651" title="Chadlington" label="Chadlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q186302" start="3808" end="3818" title="Distraint" label="distrained"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118087" start="3843" end="3854" title="Church Rate" label="Church Rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664818" start="4319" end="4332" title="Sibford Gower" label="Sibford Gower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="4633" end="4641" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q162034" start="4658" end="4669" title="Hip roof" label="hipped roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4779" end="4794" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4367464" start="4887" end="4905" title="Preparatory school (United Kingdom)" label="preparatory school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700922" start="5019" end="5029" title="clockmaker" label="clockmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q10781974" start="5319" end="5333" title="longcase clock" label="longcase clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q188298" start="5596" end="5608" title="turret clock" label="turret clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q81087" start="5612" end="5638" title="University College, Oxford" label="University College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5881" end="5890" title="Adderbury#Clockmakers" label="Adderbury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5895" end="5905" title="Deddington#Clockmakers" label="Deddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779541" start="5963" end="5988" title="Charlbury railway station" label="Charlbury railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175485" start="5999" end="6012" title="Cotswold Line" label="Cotswold Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419438" start="6030" end="6051" title="Great Western Railway (train operating company)" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q214788" start="6067" end="6084" title="Paddington railway station" label="London Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880536" start="6086" end="6092" title="Oxford railway station" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959698" start="6094" end="6107" title="Great Malvern railway station" label="Great Malvern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873465" start="6109" end="6118" title="Worcester Foregate Street railway station" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397348" start="6123" end="6131" title="Hereford railway station" label="Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496369" start="6166" end="6191" title="Stagecoach in Oxfordshire" label="Stagecoach in Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060810" start="6192" end="6200" title="Stagecoach Gold bus route S3" label="route S3"/>
<link wikidata="Q752111" start="6234" end="6243" title="Woodstock, Oxfordshire" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065474" start="6395" end="6410" title="Chipping Norton" label="Chipping Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q990166" start="6415" end="6421" title="Witney" label="Witney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834969" start="6616" end="6625" title="BBC South" label="BBC South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975073" start="6630" end="6642" title="ITV Meridian" label="ITV Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115579" start="6685" end="6691" title="Oxford transmitting station" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834927" start="6765" end="6781" title="BBC Radio Oxford" label="BBC Radio Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066884" start="6794" end="6805" title="Heart South" label="Heart South"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853293" start="6819" end="6844" title="Greatest Hits Radio South" label="Greatest Hits Radio South"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546660" start="6855" end="6862" title="Jack FM (United Kingdom)" label="Jack FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115593" start="7010" end="7030" title="Oxfordshire Guardian" label="Oxfordshire Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925762" start="7573" end="7595" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Institute" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074603" start="7597" end="7613" title="Charlbury Museum" label="Charlbury Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074604" start="7736" end="7760" title="Charlbury Riverside Festival" label="Riverside Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135428" start="7964" end="8001" title="Aunt Sally Singles World Championship" label="Aunt Sally Singles World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="8064" end="8076" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="8136" end="8153" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="8238" end="8253" title="Grade II Listed" label="Grade II Listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="8254" end="8265" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q82133" start="8419" end="8435" title="Bodleian Library" label="Bodleian Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779541" start="8487" end="8504" title="Charlbury station" label="Charlbury station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061424" start="8544" end="8558" title="River Evenlode" label="River Evenlode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074606" start="8622" end="8636" title="Charlbury Road" label="Charlbury Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="8638" end="8644" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q548721" start="8771" end="8786" title="Ordnance Survey" label="Ordnance Survey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8798" end="8814" title="Boundary Changes" label="Boundary Changes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544268" wikidata="Q7618462" url="?curid=544268" title="Stoke Heath, Worcestershire">
<text>Stoke Heath is an area in the south of Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, England.

Originally a small village near Bromsgrove, it has been absorbed into Bromsgrove by new housing developments since the 1980s. These developments hold many of the commuters that have made Bromsgrove into a dormitory town; it is within commuting distance of both Birmingham and Worcester.

Stoke Heath features Avoncroft Museum of Historic Buildings.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1190876" start="39" end="49" title="Bromsgrove" label="Bromsgrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q23135" start="51" end="65" title="Worcestershire" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q48442" start="239" end="248" title="commuting" label="commuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q828359" start="282" end="296" title="dormitory town" label="dormitory town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="338" end="348" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646181" start="353" end="362" title="Worcester, England" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829273" start="386" end="424" title="Avoncroft Museum of Historic Buildings" label="Avoncroft Museum of Historic Buildings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="544273" wikidata="Q7575210" url="?curid=544273" title="Spectral space">
<text>In mathematics, a spectral space is a topological space that is homeomorphic to the spectrum of a commutative ring. It is sometimes also called a coherent space because of the connection to coherent topoi.

==Definition==

Let &quot;X&quot; be a topological space and let &quot;K&quot;formula_1(&quot;X&quot;) be the set of all 
compact open subsets of &quot;X&quot;. Then &quot;X&quot; is said to be &quot;spectral&quot; if it satisfies all of the following conditions:
*&quot;X&quot; is compact and T0.
* &quot;K&quot;formula_1(&quot;X&quot;) is a basis of open subsets of &quot;X&quot;.
* &quot;K&quot;formula_1(&quot;X&quot;) is closed under finite intersections.
* &quot;X&quot; is sober, i.e., every nonempty irreducible closed subset of &quot;X&quot; has a (necessarily unique) generic point.

==Equivalent descriptions==

Let &quot;X&quot; be a topological space. Each of the following properties are equivalent 
to the property of &quot;X&quot; being spectral:

#&quot;X&quot; is homeomorphic to a projective limit of finite T0-spaces.
#&quot;X&quot; is homeomorphic to the spectrum of a bounded distributive lattice &quot;L&quot;. In this case, &quot;L&quot; is isomorphic (as a bounded lattice) to the lattice &quot;K&quot;formula_1(&quot;X&quot;) (this is called Stone representation of distributive lattices).
#&quot;X&quot; is homeomorphic to the spectrum of a commutative ring.
#&quot;X&quot; is the topological space determined by a Priestley space.
#&quot;X&quot; is a T0 space whose locale of open sets is coherent (and every coherent locale comes from a unique spectral space in this way).

==Properties==

Let &quot;X&quot; be a spectral space and let &quot;K&quot;formula_1(&quot;X&quot;) be as before. Then:
*&quot;K&quot;formula_1(&quot;X&quot;) is a bounded sublattice of subsets of &quot;X&quot;.
*Every closed subspace of &quot;X&quot; is spectral.
*An arbitrary intersection of compact and open subsets of &quot;X&quot; (hence of elements from &quot;K&quot;formula_1(&quot;X&quot;)) is again spectral.
*&quot;X&quot; is T0 by definition, but in general not T1. In fact a spectral space is T1 if and only if it is Hausdorff (or T2) if and only if it is a boolean space if and only if &quot;K&quot;formula_1(&quot;X&quot;) is a boolean algebra.
*&quot;X&quot; can be seen as a pairwise Stone space.

==Spectral maps==
A spectral map &quot;f: X → Y&quot; between spectral spaces &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot; is a continuous map such that the preimage of every open and compact subset of &quot;Y&quot; under &quot;f&quot; is again compact.

The category of spectral spaces, which has spectral maps as morphisms, is dually equivalent to the category of bounded distributive lattices (together with homomorphisms of such lattices). In this anti-equivalence, a spectral space &quot;X&quot; corresponds to the lattice &quot;K&quot;formula_1(&quot;X&quot;).

==Citations==
==References==

*M. Hochster (1969). Prime ideal structure in commutative rings. &quot;Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.&quot;, 142 43—60
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575210" start="18" end="32" title="Spectral space" label="spectral space"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="38" end="55" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="64" end="76" title="homeomorphic" label="homeomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154351" start="84" end="114" title="Spectrum of a ring" label="spectrum of a commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575210" start="146" end="160" title="Spectral space" label="coherent space"/>
<link wikidata="Q97354613" start="190" end="204" title="coherent topos" label="coherent topoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="329" end="336" title="Compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="337" end="349" title="Open set" label="open subsets"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="489" end="496" title="compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148924" start="501" end="503" title="Kolmogorov space" label="T0"/>
<link wikidata="Q810214" start="550" end="555" title="basis (topology)" label="basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720939" start="633" end="645" title="Closure (mathematics)" label="closed under"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778429" start="687" end="692" title="Sober space" label="sober"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673182" start="715" end="726" title="Hyperconnected space" label="irreducible"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="727" end="740" title="Closed set" label="closed subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q449470" start="785" end="798" title="generic point" label="generic point"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="989" end="1001" title="homeomorphic" label="homeomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634828" start="1007" end="1023" title="projective limit" label="projective limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148924" start="1034" end="1042" title="Kolmogorov space" label="T0-space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310267" start="1083" end="1091" title="duality theory for distributive lattices" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363730" start="1097" end="1125" title="distributive lattice" label="bounded distributive lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310267" start="1275" end="1320" title="duality theory for distributive lattices" label="Stone representation of distributive lattices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154351" start="1361" end="1391" title="Spectrum of a ring" label="spectrum of a commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242916" start="1449" end="1464" title="Priestley space" label="Priestley space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156470" start="1501" end="1507" title="Frames and locales" label="locale"/>
<link wikidata="Q595364" start="1774" end="1792" title="Lattice (order)" label="bounded sublattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q660730" start="1836" end="1844" title="Subspace topology" label="subspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148924" start="2047" end="2049" title="Kolmogorov space" label="T0"/>
<link wikidata="Q284347" start="2084" end="2086" title="T1 space" label="T1"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="2140" end="2149" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166774" start="2181" end="2194" title="boolean space" label="boolean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="2253" end="2268" title="boolean algebra" label="boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q13394032" start="2302" end="2322" title="pairwise Stone space" label="pairwise Stone space"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="2469" end="2477" title="preimage" label="preimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q719395" start="2571" end="2579" title="category (mathematics)" label="category"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082992" start="2641" end="2658" title="Equivalence of categories" label="dually equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q215111" start="2723" end="2735" title="homomorphism" label="homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q263909" start="2911" end="2922" title="Mel Hochster" label="M. Hochster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379946" start="2981" end="3004" title="Trans. Amer. Math. Soc." label="Trans. Amer. Math. Soc."/>
</links>
</doc>
