<doc id="41940" wikidata="Q119380" url="?curid=41940" title="Gentrification">
<text>Gentrification is the process whereby the character of a neighborhood changes through the influx of more affluent residents (the &quot;gentry&quot;) and investment. There is no agreed-upon definition of gentrification. In public discourse, it has been used to describe a wide array of phenomena, sometimes in a pejorative connotation.

Gentrification is a common and controversial topic in urban politics and planning. Gentrification often increases the economic value of a neighborhood, but can be controversial due to changing demographic composition and potential displacement of incumbent residents. Gentrification is more likely when there is an undersupply of housing and rising home values in a metropolitan area.

The gentrification process is typically the result of increasing attraction to an area by people with higher incomes spilling over from neighboring cities, towns, or neighborhoods. Further steps are increased investments in a community and the related infrastructure by real estate development businesses, local government, or community activists and resulting economic development, increased attraction of business, and lower crime rates.

==Origin and etymology==
Historians say that gentrification took place in ancient Rome and in Roman Britain, where large villas were replacing small shops by the 3rd century, AD. The word &quot;gentrification&quot; derives from &quot;gentry&quot;—which comes from the Old French word &quot;genterise&quot;, &quot;of gentle birth&quot; (14th century) and &quot;people of gentle birth&quot; (16th century). In England, &quot;landed gentry&quot; denoted the social class, consisting of gentlemen (and gentlewomen, as they were at that time known).

A more direct derivational base of &quot;gentrification&quot; is the 19th-century neologism &#x27;gentrify,&#x27; a verb coined by Samuel Laing (1780–1868). This term reflected shifting societal attitudes—specifically, the idea that one could attain upper-class status through conduct rather than birth—while also introducing undertones of conspicuous consumption and pretentiousness.

British sociologist Ruth Glass was first to use &quot;gentrification&quot; in its current sense. She used it in 1964 to describe the influx of middle-class people displacing lower-class worker residents in urban neighborhoods; her example was London, and its working-class districts such as Islington:

==Definitions==

In the US, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report &quot;Health Effects of Gentrification&quot; defines the real estate concept of &quot;gentrification&quot; as &quot;the transformation of neighborhoods from low value to high value.&quot; A real estate encyclopedia defines gentrification as &quot;the process by which central urban neighborhoods that have undergone disinvestments and economic decline experience a reversal, reinvestment, and the in-migration of a well-off middle- and upper-middle-class population.&quot;

Scholars and pundits have applied a variety of definitions to gentrification since 1964, some oriented around gentrifiers, others oriented around the displaced, and some a combination of both. The first category include the definition &quot;the production of space for progressively more affluent users&quot;. The second category include Kasman&#x27;s definition &quot;the reduction of residential and retail space affordable to low-income residents&quot;. The final category includes Rose, who describes gentrification as a process &quot;in which members of the &#x27;new middle class&#x27; move into and physically and culturally reshape working-class inner city neighbourhoods&quot;.

 say in their Brookings Institution report that &quot;the term &#x27;gentrification&#x27; is both imprecise and quite politically charged&quot;, suggesting its redefinition as &quot;the process by which higher income households displace lower income residents of a neighborhood, changing the essential character and flavour of that neighborhood&quot;, so distinguishing it from the different socio-economic process of &quot;neighborhood (or urban) revitalization&quot;, although the terms are sometimes used interchangeably. argues that Glass&#x27;s original use of the word employs a war metaphor to emphasize the &#x27;displacement of lower-income residents&#x27; as central—a class-struggle meaning that risks being sidelined in its continued use to denote processes of &#x27;urban change&#x27; or &#x27;improvement.&#x27;

Gentrification has been described as a natural cycle: the well-to-do prefer to live in the newest housing stock. Each decade of a city&#x27;s growth, a new ring of housing is built. When the housing at the center has reached the end of its useful life and becomes cheap, the well-to-do gentrify the neighborhood. The push outward from the city center continues as the housing in each ring reaches the end of its economic life. They observe that &quot;gentrification&quot; has three interpretations: (a) &quot;great, the value of my house is going up, (b) coffee is more expensive, now that we have a Starbucks, and (c) my neighbors and I can no longer afford to live here (&quot;community displacement&quot;)&quot;.

==Causes==
 compiled five explanations for gentrification since the 1970s:

# demographic-ecological: dual white-collar wage-earner households with fewer children wanted to live closer to work and thus moved to the inner city;
# sociocultural: middle- and upper-middle-class families developed more pro-urban views, opting to live in urban areas;
# political-economical: the decreasing availability of suburban land prompted more high-income individuals to live in urban areas;
# community networks: technological advances in transportation and communication prompts more people to live in large-scale communities;
# social movements: when high status elites and institutions sought to revive the inner cities, more high-income individuals moved into the cities.
Other explanations propose that as people tire of the automobile-dependent urban sprawl style of life, they move to urban areas, in particular to homes near public transit stations. The increase in professional jobs in the central business district has increased demand for living in urban areas according to . Critical geographers have argued that capital flows and developers have been instrumental in causing gentrification.

The de-industrialization of cities in developed nations may have caused displacement by reducing the number of blue-collar jobs available to the urban working class and middle-class.

Some have argued that the counterculture movement in the 1960s created disdain for the &quot;standardization of look-alike suburbs&quot;, prompting people to live in urban areas. Others argue that a desire to live near cultural attractions prompts gentrification.

==Effects==
===Crime===
According to a 2020 systematic review of existing research, gentrification in the United States has led to a short-term reduction in crime in gentrifying neighborhoods. However, it noted that there is little evidence for more long-term impacts and that gentrification in some cases widens crime-related disparities.

===Displacement===


Displacement is often seen as a key effect of gentrification, although evidence is mixed as to whether gentrification leads to displacement (or even reduces displacement) and under which circumstances. In 2005, &quot;USA Today&quot; claimed that gentrification is a &quot;boost for everyone&quot; based on the impact of some recent studies and that displacement that arises is minimal, or caused by other factors. Some scholars have disputed these assertions, arguing that such studies distort facts and used limited datasets. In 2002, economist Jacob Vigdor wrote, &quot;Overall, existing literature has failed to convincingly demonstrate that rates of involuntary displacement are higher in gentrifying neighborhoods.&quot;

A 2018 study found evidence that gentrification displaces renters, but not homeowners. The displacement of low-income rental residents is commonly referenced as a negative aspect of gentrification by its opponents. A 2022 study found evidence that gentrification leads to greater residential mobility.

In the United States, a 2023 study by Princeton University sociologists found that &quot;eviction rates decreased more in gentrifying neighborhoods than in comparable low-income neighborhoods.&quot; A 2016 study found &quot;that vulnerable residents, those with low credit scores and without mortgages, are generally no more likely to move from gentrifying neighborhoods compared with their counterparts in nongentrifying neighborhoods.&quot; A 2017 study by sociology professor Matthew Desmond, who runs Princeton University&#x27;s Eviction Lab, &quot;found no evidence that renters residing in gentrifying or in racially- and economically-integrated neighborhoods had a higher likelihood of eviction.&quot; A 2020 study which followed children from low-income families in New York found no evidence that gentrification was associated with changes in mobility rates. The study also found &quot;that children who start out in a gentrifying area experience larger improvements in some aspects of their residential environment than their counterparts who start out in persistently low-socioeconomic status areas.&quot;

A 2023 study by economists at the W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research and Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia found that the construction of new large apartment buildings in low-income neighborhoods lead to an influx of high-income households but also decrease rents in nearby units by increasing housing supply.

===Social changes===

Many of the social effects of gentrification have been based on extensive theories about how socioeconomic status of an individual&#x27;s neighborhood will shape one&#x27;s behavior and future. These studies have prompted &quot;social mix policies&quot; to be widely adopted by governments to promote the process and its positive effects, such as lessening the strain on public resources that are associated with de-concentrating poverty. However, more specific research has shown that gentrification does not necessarily correlate with &quot;social mixing&quot;, and that the effects of the new composition of a gentrified neighborhood can both weaken as well as strengthen community cohesion.

Housing confers social status, and the changing norms that accompany gentrification translate to a changing social hierarchy. The process of gentrification mixes people of different socioeconomic strata, thereby congregating a variety of expectations and social norms. The change gentrification brings in class distinction also has been shown to contribute to residential polarization by income, education, household composition, and race. It conveys a social rise that brings new standards in consumption, particularly in the form of excess and superfluity, to the area that were not held by the pre-existing residents. These differing norms can lead to conflict, which potentially serves to divide changing communities. Often this comes at a larger social cost to the original residents of the gentrified area whose displacement is met with little concern from the gentry or the government. Clashes that result in increased police surveillance, for example, would more adversely affect young minorities who are also more likely to be the original residents of the area.

There is also evidence to support that gentrification can strengthen and stabilize when there is a consensus about a community&#x27;s objectives. Gentrifiers with an organized presence in deteriorated neighborhoods can demand and receive better resources. A characteristic example is a combined community effort to win historic district designation for the neighborhood, a phenomenon that is often linked to gentrification activity. Gentry can exert a peer influence on neighbors to take action against crime, which can lead to even more price increases in changing neighborhoods when crime rates drop and optimism for the area&#x27;s future climbs.

Some argue that gentrification is associated with the decline of distinctive local businesses and the rise of chains and franchises.

Rehabilitation movements have been largely successful at restoring the plentiful supply of old and deteriorated housing that is readily available in inner cities. This rehabilitation can be seen as a superior alternative to expansion, for the location of the central city offers an intact infrastructure that should be taken advantage of: streets, public transportation, and other urban facilities. Furthermore, the changed perception of the central city that is encouraged by gentrification can be healthy for resource-deprived communities who have previously been largely ignored. Gentrifiers provide the political effectiveness needed to draw more government funding towards physical and social area improvements, while improving the overall quality of life by providing a larger tax base.

Communities have strong ties to the history and culture of their neighborhood, and causing its dispersal can have detrimental costs.

===Economic shifts===

The economic changes that occur as a community goes through gentrification are often favorable for local governments. Affluent gentrifiers expand the local tax base as well as support local shops and businesses, a large part of why the process is frequently alluded to in urban policies. The decrease in vacancy rates and increase in property value that accompany the process can work to stabilize a previously struggling community, restoring interest in inner-city life as a residential option alongside the suburbs. These changes can create positive feedback as well, encouraging other forms of development of the area that promote general economic growth.

Home ownership is a significant variable when it comes to economic impacts of gentrification. People who own their homes are much more able to gain financial benefits of gentrification than those who rent their houses and can be displaced without much compensation.

Economic pressure and market price changes relate to the speed of gentrification. English-speaking countries have a higher number of property owners and a higher mobility. German speaking countries provide a higher share of rented property and have a much stronger role of municipalities, cooperatives, guilds and unions offering low-price-housing. The effect is a lower speed of gentrification and a broader social mix. Gerhard Hard sees gentrification as a typical 1970s term with more visibility in public discourse than actual migration.

A 2017 study found that gentrification leads to job gains overall, with job losses in proximate locations but job gains further away. A 2014 study found that gentrification led to job gains in the gentrifying neighborhood.

A 2016 study found that residents who stay in gentrifying neighborhoods go on to obtain higher credit scores whereas residents who leave gentrifying neighborhoods obtain lower credit scores.

===Education===
&quot;School gentrification&quot; is characterized by: (i) increased numbers of middle-class families; (ii) material and physical upgrades (e.g. new programs, educational resources, and infrastructural improvements); (iii) forms of exclusion and/or the marginalization of low-income students and families (e.g. in both enrollment and social relations); and (iv) changes in school culture and climate (e.g. traditions, expectations, and social dynamics).

A 2024 study found that adding high-density mixed-income developments to low-income neighborhoods in London, United Kingdom, led to improved educational outcomes for the children who were already living in the neighborhood. The plausible mechanism for this effect is that incumbent students were exposed to more high-ability students.

In Chicago, among neighborhood public schools located in areas that did undergo gentrification, one study found that schools experience no aggregate academic benefit from the socioeconomic changes occurring around them, despite improvements in other public services such street repair, sanitation, policing, and firefighting. The lack of gentrification-related benefits to schools may be related to the finding that white gentrifiers often do not enroll their children in local neighborhood public schools.

Programs and policies designed to attract gentrifying families to historically disinvested schools may have unintended negative consequences, including an unbalanced landscape of influence wherein the voices and priorities of more affluent parents are privileged over those of lower-income families. In addition, rising enrollment of higher-income families in neighborhood schools can result in the political and cultural displacement of long-term residents in school decision-making processes and the loss of Title I funding. Notably, the expansion of school choice (e.g., charter schools, magnet schools, open enrollment policies) have been found to significantly increase the likelihood that college-educated white households gentrify low-income communities of color.

=== Health ===
A culmination of recent research suggests that gentrification has both detrimental and beneficial effects on health.

A 2020 review found that studies tended to show adverse health impacts for Black residents and elderly residents in areas undergoing gentrification.

A 2019 study in New York, found that gentrification has no impact on rates of asthma or obesity among low-income children. Growing up in gentrifying neighborhoods was associated with moderate increases in being diagnosed with anxiety or depression between ages 9–11 relative to similar children raised in non-gentrifying areas. The effects of gentrification on mental health were most prominent for children living in market-rate (rather than subsidized) housing, which lead the authors of the study to suggest financial stress as a possible mechanism.

Preventing or mitigating gentrification is thought to be a method to promote health equity.

==Measurement==
Whether gentrification has occurred in a census tract in an urban area in the United States during a particular 10-year period between censuses can be determined by a method used in a study by &quot;Governing&quot;: If the census tract in a central city had 500 or more residents and at the time of the baseline census had median household income and median home value in the bottom 40th percentile and at the time of the next 10-year census the tract&#x27;s educational attainment (percentage of residents over age 25 with a bachelor&#x27;s degree) was in the top 33rd percentile; the median home value, adjusted for inflation, had increased; and the percentage of increase in home values in the tract was in the top 33rd percentile when compared to the increase in other census tracts in the urban area then it was considered to have been gentrified. The method measures the rate of gentrification, not the degree of gentrification; thus, San Francisco, which has a history of gentrification dating to the 1970s, show a decreasing rate between 1990 and 2010.

Scholars have also identified census indicators that can be used to reveal that gentrification is taking place in a given area, including a drop in the number of children per household, increased education among residents, the number of non-traditional types of households, and a general upwards shift in income.

==Gentrifier types==
Just as critical to the gentrification process as creating a favorable environment is the availability of the &#x27;gentry,&#x27; or those who will be first-stage gentrifiers. The typical gentrifiers are affluent and have professional-level, service industry jobs, many of which involve self-employment. Therefore, they are willing and able to take the investment risk in the housing market. Often they are single people or young couples without children who lack demand for good schools. Gentrifiers are likely searching for inexpensive housing close to the workplace and often already reside in the inner city, sometimes for educational reasons, and do not want to make the move to suburbia. For this demographic, gentrification is not so much the result of a return to the inner city but is more of a positive action to remain there.

The stereotypical gentrifiers also have shared consumer preferences and favor a largely consumerist culture. This fuels the rapid expansion of trendy restaurant, shopping, and entertainment spheres that often accompany the gentrification process. Holcomb and Beauregard described these groups as those who are &quot;attracted by low prices and toleration of an unconventional lifestyle&quot;.

An interesting find from research on those who participate and initiate the gentrification process, the &quot;marginal gentrifiers&quot; as referred to by Tim Butler, is that they become marginalized by the expansion of the process.

=== The upper-class ===
Research shows how one reason wealthy, upper-class individuals and families hold some responsibility in the causation of gentrification is due to their social mobility. Wealthier families were more likely to have more financial freedom to move into urban areas, oftentimes choosing to do so for their work. At the same time, in these urban areas the lower-income population is decreasing due to an increase in the elderly population as well as demographic change.

Jackelyn Hwang and Jeffrey Lin have supported in their research that another reason for the influx of upper-class individuals to urban areas is due to the &quot;increase in demand for college-educated workers&quot;. It is because of this demand that wealthier individuals with college degrees needed to move into urban cities for work, increasing prices in housing as the demand has grown. Additionally, Darren P. Smith finds through his research that college-educated workers moving into the urban areas causes them to settle there and raise children, which eventually contributes to the cost of education in regards to the migration between urban and suburban places.

===Women===
Women increasingly obtaining higher education as well as higher paying jobs has increased their participation in the labor force, translating to an expansion of women who have greater opportunities to invest. Smith suggests this group &quot;represents a reservoir of potential gentrifiers.&quot; The increasing number of highly educated women play into this theory, given that residence in the inner city can give women access to the well-paying jobs and networking, something that is becoming increasingly common.

There are also theories that suggest the inner-city lifestyle is important for women with children where the father does not care equally for the child, because of the proximity to professional childcare. This attracts single parents, specifically single mothers, to the inner-city as opposed to suburban areas where resources are more geographically spread out. This is often deemed as &quot;marginal gentrification&quot;, for the city can offer an easier solution to combining paid and unpaid labor. Inner city concentration increases the efficiency of commodities parents need by minimizing time constraints among multiple jobs, childcare, and markets.

===Artists===

Phillip Clay&#x27;s two-stage model of gentrification places artists as prototypical stage one or &quot;marginal&quot; gentrifiers. The National Endowment for the Arts did a study that linked the proportion of employed artists to the rate of inner city gentrification across a number of U.S. cities. Artists will typically accept the risks of rehabilitating deteriorated property, as well as having the time, skill, and ability to carry out these extensive renovations. David Ley states that the artist&#x27;s critique of everyday life and search for meaning and renewal are what make them early recruits for gentrification.

The identity that residence in the inner city provides is important for the gentrifier, and this is particularly so in the artists&#x27; case. Their cultural emancipation from the bourgeois makes the central city an appealing alternative that distances them from the conformity and mundanity attributed to suburban life. They are quintessential city people, and the city is often a functional choice as well, for city life has advantages that include connections to customers and a closer proximity to a downtown art scene, all of which are more likely to be limited in a suburban setting. Ley&#x27;s research cites a quote from a Vancouver printmaker talking about the importance of inner city life to an artist, that it has, &quot;energy, intensity, hard to specify but hard to do without&quot;.

Ironically, these attributes that make artists characteristic marginal gentrifiers form the same foundations for their isolation as the gentrification process matures. The later stages of the process generate an influx of more affluent, &quot;yuppie&quot; residents. As the bohemian character of the community grows, it appeals &quot;not only to committed participants, but also to sporadic consumers,&quot; and the rising property values that accompany this migration often lead to the eventual pushing out of the artists that began the movement in the first place. Sharon Zukin&#x27;s study of SoHo in Manhattan, NYC was one of the most famous cases of this phenomenon. Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, Manhattan lofts in SoHo were converted &quot;en masse&quot; into housing for artists and hippies, and then their sub-culture&#x27;s followers.

===LGBT community===
Manuel Castells has researched the role of gay communities, especially in San Francisco, as early gentrifiers. The film &quot;Quinceañera&quot; depicts a similar situation in Los Angeles. &quot;Flag Wars&quot; (Linda Goode Bryant) shows tensions as of 2003 between bourgeois White LGBT-newcomers and a Black middle-class neighborhood in Columbus, Ohio. In Washington, D.C. Black and other ethnic minority mixed-income community residents accused both the affluent majority-White LGBTQ+ community and the closely linked hipster subculture of cultural displacement (or destruction of cultural heritage) under the guise of progressive inclusion and tolerance.

Evidence from Buenos Aires, shows that predominantly LGBTQ+ areas were only able to exist when the government allowed that area to be gentrified.

Today, practically all historic gayborhoods have become less LGBTQ+ centric mainly due to the modern effects of gentrification. Gay neighborhoods may reveal elements of classism and racism perpetuated by affluent white gay men who settle in spaces that drive out people of color—through rent being raised in the area. The rising cost to live in gayborhoods and government use of eminent domain have displaced many LGBTQ+ people and closed many LGBTQ+ centric businesses.

==Control==
To counter the gentrification of their mixed-populace communities, there are cases where residents formally organized themselves to develop the necessary socio-political strategies required to retain local affordable housing. The gentrification of a mixed-income community raises housing affordability to the fore of the community&#x27;s politics. There are cities, municipalities, and counties which have countered gentrification with inclusionary zoning (inclusionary housing) ordinances requiring the apportionment of some new housing for the community&#x27;s original low- and moderate-income residents. Inclusionary zoning is a new social concept in English speaking countries; there are few reports qualifying its effective or ineffective limitation of gentrification in the English literature. The basis of inclusionary zoning is partial replacement as opposed to displacement of the embedded communities.

German (speaking) municipalities have a strong legal role in zoning and on the real estate market in general and a long tradition of integrating social aspects in planning schemes and building regulations. The German approach uses en (milieu conservation municipal law), e.g. in Munich&#x27;s Lehel district in use since the 1960s. The concepts of socially aware renovation and zoning of Bologna&#x27;s old city in 1974 was used as role model in the Charta of Bologna, and recognized by the Council of Europe.

Most economists do not think anti-gentrification measures by the government make cities better off.

===Other methods===

====Direct action and sabotage====

When wealthy people move into low-income working-class neighborhoods, the resulting class conflict sometimes involves vandalism and arson targeting the property of the gentrifiers. During the dot-com boom of the late 1990s, the gentrification of San Francisco&#x27;s predominantly working class Mission District led some long-term neighborhood residents to create what they called the &quot;Mission Yuppie Eradication Project&quot;. This group allegedly destroyed property and called for property destruction as part of a strategy to oppose gentrification. Their activities drew hostile responses from the San Francisco Police Department, real estate interests, and &quot;work-within-the-system&quot; housing activists.

Meibion Glyndŵr (), also known as the Valley Commandos, was a Welsh nationalist movement violently opposed to the loss of Welsh culture and language. They were formed in response to the housing crisis precipitated by large numbers of second homes being bought by the English which had increased house prices beyond the means of many locals. The group were responsible for setting fire to English-owned holiday homes in Wales from 1979 to the mid-1990s. In the first wave of attacks, eight holiday homes were destroyed in a month, and in 1980, Welsh Police carried out a series of raids in Operation Tân. Within the next ten years, some 220 properties were damaged by the campaign. Since the mid-1990s the group has been inactive and Welsh nationalist violence has ceased. In 1989 there was a movement that protested an influx of Swabians to Berlin who were deemed as gentrification drivers. Berlin saw the Schwabenhass and 2013 Spätzlerstreit controversies, which identified gentrification with newcomers from the German south.

====Zoning ordinances====
Zoning ordinances and other urban planning tools can be used to recognize and support local business and industries. This can include requiring developers to continue with a current commercial tenant or offering development incentives for keeping existing businesses, as well as creating and maintaining industrial zones. Designing zoning to allow new housing near to a commercial corridor but not on top of it increases foot traffic to local businesses without redeveloping them. Businesses can become more stable by securing long-term commercial leases.

Although developers may recognize value in responding to living patterns, extensive zoning policies often prevent affordable homes from being constructed within urban development. Due to urban density restrictions, rezoning for residential development within urban living areas is difficult, which forces the builder and the market into urban sprawl and propagates the energy inefficiencies that come with distance from urban centers. In a recent example of restrictive urban zoning requirements, Arcadia Development Co. was prevented from rezoning a parcel for residential development in an urban setting within the city of Morgan Hill, California. With limitations established in the interest of public welfare, a density restriction was applied solely to Arcadia Development Co.&#x27;s parcel of development, excluding any planned residential expansion.

====Community land trusts====
Because land speculation tends to cause volatility in property values, removing real estate (houses, buildings, land) from the open market freezes property values, and thereby prevents the economic eviction of the community&#x27;s poorer residents. The most common, formal legal mechanism for such stability in English speaking countries is the community land trust; moreover, many inclusionary zoning ordinances formally place the &quot;inclusionary&quot; housing units in a land trust. German municipalities and other cooperative actors have and maintain strong roles on the real estate markets in their realm.

====Rent control====
In jurisdictions where local or national government has these powers, there may be rent control regulations. Rent control restricts the rent that can be charged, so that incumbent tenants are not forced out by rising rents. If applicable to private landlords, it is a disincentive to speculating with property values, reduces the incidence of dwellings left empty, and limits availability of housing for new residents. If the law does not restrict the rent charged for dwellings that come onto the rental market (formerly owner-occupied or new build), rents in an area can still increase. Neighborhoods in southwestern Santa Monica and eastern West Hollywood in California, United States gentrified despite—or perhaps, because of—rent control.

Occasionally, a housing black market develops, wherein landlords withdraw houses and apartments from the market, making them available only upon payment of additional key money, fees, or bribes—thus undermining the rent control law. Many such laws allow &quot;vacancy decontrol&quot;, releasing a dwelling from rent control upon the tenant&#x27;s leaving—resulting in steady losses of rent-controlled housing, ultimately rendering rent control laws ineffective in communities with a high rate of resident turnover. In other cases social housing owned by local authorities may be sold to tenants and then sold on. Vacancy decontrol encourages landlords to find ways of shortening their residents&#x27; tenure, most aggressively through landlord harassment. To strengthen the rent control laws of New York, housing advocates active in rent control in New York are attempting to repeal the vacancy decontrol clauses of rent control laws. The state of Massachusetts abolished rent control in 1994; afterwards, rents rose, accelerating the pace of Boston&#x27;s gentrification; however, the laws protected few apartments, and confounding factors, such as a strong economy, had already been raising housing and rental prices.

==Examples==
===Inner London===


Gentrification is not a new phenomenon in Britain; in ancient Rome the shop-free forum was developed during the Roman Republican period, and in 2nd- and 3rd-century cities in Roman Britain there is evidence of small shops being replaced by large villas.

King&#x27;s College London academic Loretta Lees reported that much of Inner London was undergoing &quot;super-gentrification&quot;, where &quot;a new group of super-wealthy professionals, working in the City of London [i.e. the financial industry], is slowly imposing its mark on this Inner London housing market, in a way that differentiates it, and them, from traditional gentrifiers, and from the traditional urban upper classes ... Super-gentrification is quite different from the classical version of gentrification. It&#x27;s of a higher economic order; you need a much higher salary and bonuses to live in Barnsbury&quot; (some two miles north of central London). Rising housing prices due to gentrification within London have led to a doubling of evictions done by private landlords and to a long-term decline in home ownership from the years 2003–2020.

Barnsbury was built around 1820, as a middle-class neighbourhood, but after the Second World War (1939–1945), many people moved to the suburbs. The upper and middle classes were fleeing from the working class residents of London, made possible by the modern railway. At the war&#x27;s end, the great housing demand rendered Barnsbury a place of cheap housing, where most people shared accommodation. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, people moving into the area had to finance house renovations with their money, because banks rarely financed loans for Barnsbury. Moreover, the rehabilitating spark was &quot;The 1959 Housing Purchase and Housing Act&quot;, investing £100 million to rehabilitating old properties and infrastructure. As a result, the principal population influx occurred between 1961 and 1975; the UK Census reports that &quot;between the years of 1961 and 1981, owner-occupation increased from 7 to 19 per cent, furnished rentals declined from 14 to 7 per cent, and unfurnished rentals declined from 61 to 6 per cent&quot;; another example of urban gentrification is the super-gentrification, in the 1990s, of the neighboring working-class London Borough of Islington, where Prime Minister Tony Blair lived until his election in 1997. The conversion of older houses into flats emerged in the 1980s as developers saw the profits to be made. By the end of the 1980s, conversions were the single largest source of new dwellings in London.

===Mexico City===

Mexico City has been an iconic example of an extensive metropolitan area since the 14th century when it became the largest city in the American continent. Its continuous population growth and concentration of economic and political power boomed in the 1930s when the country&#x27;s involvement with global markets benefited the national financial industry. Currently the fifth largest city in the world, with a population of 21 million inhabitants (17.47% of national population) living in 16 districts and 59 municipalities, the urban area continues to expand receiving 1,100 new residents daily. The division of the city is derived from a strong socially and economically segregated population connected by its interdependence, that manifests into spatial arrangements where luxury areas coexist alongside slums. Its development around a core called &quot;El Zocalo&quot; derives from the historic, cultural and political relevance of a central plaza, as well as its contemporary concentration of economic power, currently housing 80% of all national firms.

In recent years, there has been a large uptick in new development in Mexico City, funded by state and private investments. These urban developments have been catered to elite communities mainly because this group economically supports the country (38% of the total national income is produced by the top 10%) and because the government, predominantly led by PRI (Partido Revolucionario Institucional), has maintained a profit-oriented policy perspective. Thus, these developments have not only led to an increase of population, traffic and pollution due to inefficient urban planning, but have also pushed great amounts of low-income families to the edges of the city and have challenged the safety of the 11.5 million people that economically depend on the underground sector. This issue adds to the already critical condition of 40% of the population living in informal settlements, often without access to sewage network and clean water. The geology of the city, located in a mountain valley, further contributes to unhealthy living conditions, concentrating high levels of air pollution.

The reality currently faced by the city is that of a historic rapid urban growth that has been unable to be adequately controlled and planned for, because of a corrupted and economically driven government, as well as a complex society that is strongly segregated. The negative effects of gentrification in Mexico City have been overlooked by the authorities, regarded as an inevitable process and argued to be in some cases nonexistent. In recent years, however, an array of proposals have been developed as a way to continue the gentrification of the city in a way that integrates and respects the rights of all citizens.

===Canada===

By the 1970s, investors in Toronto started buying up city houses—turning them into temporary rooming houses to make rental income until the desired price in the housing market for selling off the properties was reached (so that the rooming houses could be replaced with high income-oriented new housing)—a gentrification process called &quot;blockbusting&quot;.

, gentrification in Canada has proceeded quickly in older and denser cities such as Montreal, Toronto, Ottawa, Hamilton and Vancouver, but has barely begun in places such as Calgary, Edmonton, or Winnipeg, where suburban expansion is still the primary type of growth.

Canada&#x27;s unique history and official multiculturalism policy has resulted in a different strain of gentrification than that of the United States. Some gentrification in Toronto has been sparked by the efforts of business improvement associations to market the ethnic communities in which they operate, such as in Corso Italia and Greektown.

In Quebec City, the Saint Roch neighbourhood in the city&#x27;s lower town was previously predominantly working class and had gone through a period of decline. However, since the early to mid 2000s, the area has seen the transformation of the derelict buildings into condos and the opening of bars, restaurants and cafes, attracting young professionals into the area, but kicking out the residents from many generations back. Several software developers and gaming companies, such as Ubisoft and Beenox, have also opened offices there.

===France===

In Paris, most poor neighborhoods in the east have seen rising prices and the arrival of many wealthy residents. However, the process is mitigated by social housing and most cities tend to favor a &quot;social mix&quot;; that is, having both low and high-income residents in the same neighborhoods. But in practice, social housing does not cater to the poorest segment of the population; most residents of social dwellings are from the low-end of the middle class. As a result, a lot of poor people have been forced to go first to the close suburbs (1970 to 2000) and then more and more to remote &quot;periurban areas&quot; where public transport is almost nonexistent. The close suburbs (Saint-Ouen, Saint Denis, Aubervilliers, ...) are now in the early stages of gentrification although still poor. A lot of high-profile companies offering well-paid jobs have moved near Saint-Denis and new real-estate programs are underway to provide living areas close to the new jobs.

On the other side, the eviction of the poorest people to periurban areas since 2000 has been analyzed as the main cause for the rising political far-right National Front. When the poor lived in the close suburbs, their problems were very visible to the wealthy population. But the periurban population and its problem is mainly &quot;invisible&quot; from recent presidential campaign promises. These people have labelled themselves &quot;les invisibles&quot;. Many of them fled both rising costs in Paris and nearby suburbs with an insecure and ugly environment to live in small houses in the countryside but close to the city. But they did not factor in the huge financial and human cost of having up to four hours of transportation every day. Since then, a lot has been invested in the close suburbs (with new public transports set to open and urban renewal programs) they fled, but almost nobody cares of these &quot;invisible&quot; plots of land. Since the close suburbs are now mostly inhabited by immigrants, these people have a strong resentment against immigration: They feel everything is done for new immigrants but nothing for the native French population.

This has been first documented in the book &quot;Plaidoyer pour une gauche populaire&quot; by think-tank Terra-Nova which had a major influence on all contestants in the presidential election (and at least, Sarkozy, François Hollande, and Marine Le Pen). This electorate voted overwhelmingly in favor of Marine Le Pen and Sarkozy while the city centers and close suburbs voted overwhelmingly for François Hollande.

Most major metropolises in France follow the same pattern with a belt of periurban development about 30 to 80 kilometers of the center where a lot of poor people moved in and are now trapped by rising fuel costs. These communities have been disrupted by the arrival of new people and already suffered of high unemployment due to the dwindling numbers of industrial jobs.

In smaller cities, the suburbs are still the principal place where people live and the center is more and more akin to a commercial estate where a lot of commercial activities take place but where few people live.

=== Honduras ===
Generally in Honduras the phenomenon of gentrification had not been so widespread because it had been a nation with a less developed economy than other countries in the Latin American region, however this phenomenon has begun to grow exponentially in the last decade. The main areas where the increase has been seen are the urban centers of its two most important cities, Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula. In the last years Honduras has become an emerging destination for digital nomads, these travelers are often attracted by the tropical climate, natural beauty, low cost of living compared to their home countries, and the ability to work remotely from attractive locations.

Some of the places that have suffered this phenomenon are the Bay islands, Valle de Angeles, Santa Lucia, and Copan Ruinas. The main reasons for this phenomenon in Honduras are real estate companies, foreign investors, real estate agencies, expatriates, and retirees. The case of the Bay Islands has been special due to the purchase of land mainly by high-income residents, hotel companies, and foreigners. Making the cost of housing for islanders more expensive and the cost of living has increased extensively, several fishing communities have denounced the increase in the cost of living in historically inhabited communities inhabited by them for generations. This phenomenon has even been seen in how more foreign currencies are used in the area, such as the dollar, which is the most used on the islands.

As for the urban centers of the country, Teguciglapa has seen the rehabilitation of old wealthy buildings in the historic center for the so-called Digital Nomads. The construction of nerw condominiums has also accelerated this phenomenon in the city as they are centers with an expensive level of rental. As for San Pedro Sula, this phenomenon is seen more in the Los Andes neighborhood has been accommodated for this kind of travelers.

===South Africa===
Gentrification in South Africa has been categorized into two waves for two different periods of time. Visser and Kotze find that the first wave occurred in the 1980s to the Post-Apartheid period, the second wave occurred during and after the 2000s. Both of these trends of gentrification has been analyzed and reviewed by scholars in different lenses. One view which Atkinson uses is that gentrification is purely the reflection of middle-class values on to a working-class neighborhood. The second view is the wider view is suggested by Visser and Kotze which views gentrification with inclusions of rural locations, infill housing, and luxury residency development. While Kotze and Visser find that gentrification has been under a provocative lens by media all over the world, South Africa&#x27;s gentrification process was harder to identify because of the need to differentiate between gentrification and the change of conditions from the Apartheid.

Furthermore, the authors note that the pre-conditions for gentrification where events like tertiary decentralization (suburbanization of the service industry) and capital flight (disinvestment) were occurring, which caused scholars to ignore the subject of gentrification due to the normality of the process. Additionally, Kotze and Visser found that as state-run programs and private redevelopment programs began to focus on the pursuit of &quot;global competitiveness&quot; and well-rounded prosperity, it hid the underlying foundations of gentrification under the guise of redevelopment. As a result, the effect is similar to what Teppo and Millstein coins as the pursuit to moralize the narrative to legitimize the benefit to all people. This concurrently created an effect where Visser and Kotze conclude that the perceived gentrification was only the fact that the target market was people commonly associated with gentrification. As Visser and Kotze states, &quot;It appears as if apartheid red-lining on racial grounds has been replaced by a financially exclusive property market that entrenches prosperity and privilege.&quot;

Generally, Atkinson observes that when looking at scholarly discourse for the gentrification and rapid urbanization of South Africa, the main focus is not on the smaller towns of South Africa. This is a large issue because small towns are magnets for poorer people and repellants for skilled people. In one study, Atkinson dives into research in a small town, Aberdeen in the East Cape. Also as previously mentioned, Atkinson finds that this area has shown signs of gentrification. This is due to redevelopment which indicates clearly the reflection of middle-class values. In this urbanization of the area, Atkinson finds that there is clear dependence on state-programs which leads to further development and growth of the area, this multiplier of the economy would present a benefit of gentrification. The author then attributes the positive growth with the benefits in gentrification by examining the increase in housing opportunities.

Then, by surveying the recent newcomers to the area, Atkinson&#x27;s research found that there is confidence for local economic growth which further indicated shifts to middle-class values, therefore, gentrification. This research also demonstrated growth in &quot;modernizers&quot; which demonstrate the general belief of gentrification where there is value for architectural heritage as well as urban development. Lastly, Atkinson&#x27;s study found that the gentrification effects of growth can be accredited to the increase in unique or scarce skills to the municipality which revived interest in the growth of the local area. This gentrification of the area would then negative impact the poorer demographics where the increase in housing would displace and exclude them from receiving benefits. In conclusion, after studying the small town of Aberdeen, Atkinson finds that &quot;Paradoxically, it is possible that gentrification could promote economic growth and employment while simultaneously increasing class inequality.&quot;

Historically, Garside notes that due to the Apartheid, the inner cities of Cape Town was cleared of non-white communities. But because of the Group Areas Act, some certain locations were controlled for such communities. Specifically, Woodstock has been a racially mixed community with a compilation of European settlers (such as the Afrikaners and the 1820 Settlers), Eastern European Jews, immigrants from Angola and Mozambique, and the coloured Capetonians. For generations, these groups lived in this area characterizing it be a working-class neighborhood. But as the times changed and restrictions were relaxed, Teppo and Millstein observes that the community became more and more &quot;gray&quot; as in a combination between white and mixed communities.

Then this progression continues to which Garside finds that an exaggeration as more middle-income groups moved into the area. This emigration resulted in a distinct split between Upper Woodstock and Lower Woodstock. Coupled with the emergence of a strong middle-class in South Africa, Woodstock became a destination for convenience and growth. While Upper Woodstock was a predominantly white area, Lower Woodstock then received the attention of the mixed middle-income community. This increase in demand for housing gave landlords incentives to raise prices to profit off of the growing wealth in the area. The 400-500% surge in the housing market for Woodstock thus displaced and excluded the working-class and retired who previously resided in the community. Furthermore, Garside states that the progression of gentrification was accentuated by the fact that most of the previous residents would only be renting their living space. Both Teppo and Millstein would find that this displacement of large swaths of communities would increase demand in other areas of Woodstock or inner city slums.

The &quot;Bo-Kaap&quot; pocket of Cape Town nestles against the slopes of Signal Hill. It has traditionally been occupied by members of South Africa&#x27;s minority, mainly Muslim, Cape Malay community. These descendants of artisans and political captives, brought to the Cape as early as the 18th century as slaves and indentured workers, were housed in small barrack-like abodes on what used to be the outskirts of town. As the city limits increased, property in the Bo-Kaap became very sought after, not only for its location but also for its picturesque cobble-streets and narrow avenues. Increasingly, this close-knit community is &quot;facing a slow dissolution of its distinctive character as wealthy outsiders move into the suburb to snap up homes in the City Bowl at cut-rate prices&quot;. Inter-community conflict has also arisen as some residents object to the sale of buildings and the resultant eviction of long-term residents.

In another specific case, Millstein and Teppo discovered that working-class residents would become embattled with their landlords. On Gympie Street, which has been labeled as the most dangerous street in Cape Town, it was home to many of the working-class. But as gentrification occurred, landlords brought along tactics to evict low-paying tenants through non-payment clauses. One landlord who bought a building cheaply from an auction, immediately raised the rental price which would then proceed to court for evictions. But, the tenants were able to group together to make a strong case to win. Regardless of the outcome, the landlord resorted to turning off both power and water in the building. The tenants then were exhausted out of motivation to fight. One tenant described it as similar to living in a shack which would be the future living space one displaced. Closing, the Teppo and Millstein&#x27;s research established that gentrification&#x27;s progress for urban development would coincide with a large displacement of the poorer communities which also excluded them from any benefits to gentrification. The authors state, &quot;The end results are the same in both cases: in the aftermath of the South African negotiated revolution, the elite colonize the urban areas from those who are less privileged, claiming the city for themselves.&quot;

===Italy===
In Italy, similarly to other countries around the world, the phenomenon of gentrification is proceeding in the largest cities, such as Milan, Turin, Genoa and Rome.

In Milan, gentrification is changing the look of some semi-central neighborhoods, just outside the inner ring road (called &quot;Cerchia dei Bastioni&quot;), particularly of former working class and industrial areas.
One of the most well known cases is the neighborhood of Isola. Despite its position, this area has been for a long time considered as a suburb since it has been an isolated part of the city, due to the physical barriers such as the railways and the Naviglio Martesana. In the 1950s, a new business district was built not far from this area, but Isola remained a distant and low-class area. In the 2000s vigorous efforts to make Isola as a symbolic place of the Milan of the future were carried out and, with this aim, the Porta Garibaldi-Isola districts became attractors for stylists and artists. Moreover, in the second half of the same decade, a massive urban rebranding project, known as Progetto Porta Nuova, started and the neighbourhood of Isola, despite the compliances residents have had, has been one of the regenerated areas, with the Bosco Verticale and the new Giardini di Porta Nuova.

Another semi-central district that has undergone this phenomenon in Milan is Zona Tortona. Former industrial area situated behind Porta Genova station, Zona Tortona is nowadays the Mecca of Italian design and annually hosts some of the most important events of the Milan Design Week during which more than 150 expositors, such as Superstudio, take part. In Zona Tortona, some of important landmarks, related to culture, design and arts, are located such as Fondazione Pomodoro, the Armani/Silos, Spazio A and MUDEC.

Going towards the outskirts of the city, other gentrified areas of Milan are Lambrate-Ventura (where others events of the Milan Design Week are hosted), Bicocca and Bovisa (in which universities have contributed to the gentrification of the areas), Sesto San Giovanni, Via Sammartini, and the so-called NoLo district (which means &quot;Nord di Loreto&quot;).

===Poland===
In Poland, gentrification is proceeding mostly in the big cities like Warsaw, Łódź, Kraków, Metropolis GZM, Poznań, and Wrocław. The reason of this is both de-industrialisation and poor condition of some residential areas.

The biggest European ongoing gentrification process has been occurring in Łódź from the beginning of the 2010s. Huge unemployment (24% in the 1990s) caused by the downfall of the garment industry created both economic and social problems. Moreover, vast majority of industrial and housing facilities had been constructed in the late 19th century and the renovation was neglected after World War II. Łódź authorities rebuilt the industrial district into the New City Center. This included re-purposing buildings including the former electrical power and heating station into the Łódź Fabryczna railway station and the EC1 Science Museum.

There are other significant gentrifications in Poland, such as:

*Kraków – the Jewish district Kazimierz, gentrification financed mostly by private investors.
*Poznań – build up Law Department of Adam Mickiewicz University in the post military facility.
*Wrocław – Nadodrze and Nowe Żerniki districts; residential area drown upon the modernism concepts.
*Wałbrzych, Julia coal mine – adaptation post-industrial buildings to art and cultural facilities.
*Warsaw, Praga-Północ district.

Nowadays the Polish government has started National Revitalization Plan which ensures financial support to municipal gentrification programs.

===Russia===
Central Moscow rapidly gentrified following the change from the communist central-planning policies of the Soviet era to the market economy of the post-Soviet Russian government.

===United States===

From a market standpoint, there are two main requirements that are met by the U.S. cities that undergo substantial effects of gentrification. These are: an excess supply of deteriorated housing in central areas, as well as a considerable growth in the availability of professional jobs located in central business districts. These conditions have been met in the U.S. largely as a result of suburbanization and other postindustrial phenomena. There have been three chronological waves of gentrification in the U.S. starting from the 1960s.

The first wave came in the 1960s and early 1970s, led by governments trying to reduce the disinvestment that was taking place in inner-city urban areas. Additionally, starting in the 1960s and 1970s, U.S. industry has created a surplus of housing units as construction of new homes has far surpassed the rate of national household growth. However, the market forces that are dictated by an excess supply cannot fully explain the geographical specificity of gentrification in the U.S., for there are many large cities that meet this requirement and have not exhibited gentrification.

The missing link is another factor that can be explained by particular, necessary demand forces. In U.S. cities in the time period from 1970 to 1978, growth of the central business district at around 20% did not dictate conditions for gentrification, while growth at or above 33% yielded appreciably larger gentrification activity. Central business district growth will activate gentrification in the presence of a surplus in the inner city housing market. The 1970s brought the more &quot;widespread&quot; second wave of gentrification, and was sometimes linked to the development of artist communities like SoHo in New York.

In the U.S., the conditions for gentrification were generated by the economic transition from manufacturing to post-industrial service economies. The post-World War II economy experienced a service revolution, which created white-collar jobs and larger opportunities for women in the work force, as well as an expansion in the importance of centralized administrative and cooperate activities. This increased the demand for inner city residences, which were readily available cheaply after much of the movement towards central city abandonment of the 1950s. The coupling of these movements is what became the trigger for the expansive gentrification of U.S. cities, including Atlanta, Baltimore, Boston, Philadelphia, St. Louis, and Washington, D.C.

The third wave of gentrification occurred in most major cities in the late 1990s and was driven by large-scale developments, public-private partnerships, and government policies. Measurement of the rate of gentrification during the period from 1990 to 2010 in 50 U.S. cities showed an increase in the rate of gentrification from 9% in the decade of the 1990s to 20% in the decade from 2000 to 2010 with 8% of the urban neighborhoods in the 50 cities being affected.

Cities with a rate of gentrification of ≈40% or more in the decade from 2000 to 2010 included:
* Portland, Oregon 58.1%
* Washington, D.C. 51.9%
* Minneapolis 50.6%
* Seattle 50%
* Atlanta 46.2%
* Virginia Beach 46.2%
* Denver 42.1%
* Austin 39.7%

Cities with a rate of less than 10% in the decade from 2000 to 2010 included:
* Memphis 8.8%
* Tucson 8.3%
* Tulsa 7%
* Cleveland 6.7%
* Detroit 2.8%
* Las Vegas 2%
* El Paso 0%
* Arlington, Texas 0%

==Anti-gentrification protests==

=== Benezet Court, Inc. (Philadelphia, PA) ===
Society Hill, one of the oldest neighborhoods in Philadelphia, PA, was designated for urban renewal in the late 1950s. This urban renewal called for renovations of buildings that were home to families of color. While it was initially promised that the families would not have to leave by the OHA (Octavia Hill Association), they were later evicted and it was determined that it would not be possible to renovate these buildings while keeping the price of rent low. An African American woman named Dorothy Miller (née Stroud) became the face of the Octavia Hill Seven, a moniker given to the seven households who resisted the relocation. Philip Price Jr. was a lawyer who joined Miller in the fight for affordable housing. With his leadership, several residents formed an SHCA committee and subsequently a nonprofit organization to consider options for rehabilitation or new construction for Miller and her neighbors. They named their organization Benezet Court, Inc., after an early abolitionist in Philadelphia. Eventually, the organization was able to achieve affordable housing options in the neighborhood.

=== Movement for Justice in El Barrio ===
The Movement for Justice in El Barrio is an immigrant-led, organized group of tenants who resist against gentrification in East Harlem, New York. This movement has 954 members and 95 building communities. On 8 April 2006, the MJB gathered people to protest in the New York City Hall against an investment bank in the United Kingdom that purchased 47 buildings and 1,137 homes in East Harlem. News of these protests reached England, Scotland, France and Spain. MJB made a call to action that everyone, internationally, should fight against gentrification. This movement gained international traction and also became known as the International Campaign Against Gentrification in El Barrio.

===Cereal Killer Cafe protest===
On 26 September 2015, a cereal cafe in East London called Cereal Killer Cafe was attacked by a large group of anti-gentrification protestors. These protestors carried with them a pig&#x27;s head and torches, stating that they were tired of unaffordable luxury flats going into their neighborhoods. These protestors were alleged to be primarily &quot;middle-class academics&quot;, who were upset by the lack of community and culture that they once saw in East London. People targeted Cereal Killer Cafe during their protest because of an alleged article in which one of the brothers with ownership of the cafe had said marking up prices was necessary as a business in the area. After the attack on the cafe, users on Twitter were upset that protestors had targeted a small business as the focus of their demonstration, as opposed to a larger one.

===San Francisco tech bus protests===
The San Francisco tech bus protests occurred in late 2013 in the San Francisco Bay Area in the United States, protesting against tech shuttle buses that take employees to and from their homes in the Bay Area to workplaces in Silicon Valley. Protestors said the buses were symbolic of the gentrification occurring in the city, rising rent prices, and the displacement of small businesses. This protest gained global attention and also inspired anti-gentrification movements in East London.

===ink! Coffee Protest (Denver, Colorado)===
On 22 November 2017, ink! Coffee, a small coffee shop, placed a manufactured metal Sandwich board sign on the sidewalk outside one of their Denver locations in the historic Five Points, Denver neighborhood. The sign said &quot;Happily gentrifying the neighborhood since 2014&quot; on one side and &quot;Nothing says gentrification like being able to order a cortado&quot; on the other side.

Ink&#x27;s ad ignited outrage and garnered national attention when a picture of the sign was shared on social media by a prominent Denver writer, Ru Johnson. The picture of the sign quickly went viral accumulating critical comments and negative reviews. Ink! responded to the social media outrage with a public apology followed by a lengthier apology from its founder, Keith Herbert. Ink&#x27;s public apology deemed the sign a bad joke causing even more outrage on social media. The ad design was created by a Five Points, Denver firm named Cultivator Advertising &amp; Design. The advertising firm responded to the public&#x27;s dismay by issuing an ill-received social media apology, &quot;An Open Letter to Our Neighbors&quot;.

The night following the debut of ink&#x27;s controversial ad campaign their Five Points, Denver location was vandalized. A window was broken and the words &quot;WHITE COFFEE&quot; among others were spray-painted onto the front of the building. Protest organizers gathered at the coffee shop daily following the controversy. The coffee shop was closed for business the entire holiday weekend following the scandal.

At least 200 people attended a protest and boycott event on 25 November 2017 outside of ink!&#x27;s Five Points location. News of the controversy was covered by media outlets worldwide.

=== Hamilton Locke Street Vandalism ===
On 3 March 2018, an anarchist group vandalized coffee shops, luxury automobiles, and restaurants on Locke Street in Hamilton, Ontario. The attack was linked to an anarchist group in the city known as The Tower, that aimed to highlight issues of gentrification in Hamilton through vandalizing new businesses. On 7 March, The Tower&#x27;s free community library was vandalized by what the group referred to as &quot;far-right goons&quot;. Investigation followed, with arrests related to the Locke Street vandalism being made by Hamilton police in April and June 2018.

== Litigation against gentrification ==
Hwang discovers factors that can cause neighborhood changes: Households might be more attracted to a neighborhood because of (1) increases in access value, (2) increases in amenity value, or (3) decline in housing prices relative to other neighborhoods. These factors attract investors and eventually leads to gentrification.

Gentrification can promote neighborhood revitalization and desegregation. Because of this, a gentrification-as-integration model has been supported to stop population loss, and to rebuild low-income neighborhoods.

Gentrification has been called the savior of cities from urban crisis because it has led to urban revitalization, which promotes the economy of struggling cities.

The Fair Housing Act can be used as litigation against gentrification because the urban development process of higher-income individuals into lower-income neighborhoods leads to displacement.

==See also==
==References==
===Notes===
===Bibliography===
*
*
*
*
*
**
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
*
==Further reading==


*—Sociological study of newcomers&#x27; attitudes toward preserving community character based on fieldwork in the Chicago neighborhoods of Andersonville and Argyle; as well as in Dresden, Maine, and Provincetown, Massachusetts.
*
*
*
*
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="0" end="14" title="Gentrification" label="Gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q123705" start="57" end="69" title="neighborhood" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q200535" start="105" end="113" title="Wealth" label="affluent"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="135" end="141" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="409" end="417" title="urban planning" label="planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q868257" start="454" end="468" title="Value (economics)" label="economic value"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="529" end="540" title="Demography" label="demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371297" start="931" end="941" title="Socially responsible investing" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q695829" start="992" end="1015" title="real estate development" label="real estate development"/>
<link wikidata="Q203764" start="1049" end="1067" title="community activist" label="community activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="1083" end="1103" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="1149" end="1154" title="crime" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1237" end="1249" title="ancient Rome" label="ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="1257" end="1270" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3950" start="1284" end="1289" title="villa" label="villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="1397" end="1403" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q56304279" start="1586" end="1599" title="landed gentry" label="landed gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q749212" start="1646" end="1655" title="gentlemen" label="gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="1791" end="1800" title="neologism" label="neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582459" start="1840" end="1852" title="Samuel Laing (travel writer)" label="Samuel Laing"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="2103" end="2114" title="sociologist" label="sociologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q97232" start="2115" end="2125" title="Ruth Glass" label="Ruth Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="2238" end="2250" title="middle-class" label="middle-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="2269" end="2280" title="Working class" label="lower-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2338" end="2344" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="2386" end="2395" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="2430" end="2472" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="2537" end="2548" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="3656" end="3677" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q37158" start="5069" end="5078" title="Starbucks" label="Starbucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q762702" start="5686" end="5708" title="Technological advancement" label="technological advances"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="6024" end="6036" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909102" start="6382" end="6402" title="de-industrialization" label="de-industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191714" start="6489" end="6500" title="blue-collar" label="blue-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="6871" end="6888" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="7406" end="7415" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096471" start="8698" end="8713" title="Matthew Desmond" label="Matthew Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515895" start="9778" end="9798" title="socioeconomic status" label="socioeconomic status"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367036" start="10753" end="10765" title="Social polarization" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="12528" end="12542" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588646" start="18308" end="18317" title="Governing (magazine)" label="Governing"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="19050" end="19063" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005490" start="19793" end="19808" title="self-employment" label="self-employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q32090" start="22712" end="22721" title="lifestyle (sociology)" label="lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967116" start="23464" end="23499" title="The National Endowment for the Arts" label="The National Endowment for the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236575" start="23802" end="23811" title="David Ley" label="David Ley"/>
<link wikidata="Q72879" start="25000" end="25006" title="yuppie" label="yuppie"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="25031" end="25039" title="bohemianism" label="bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="25361" end="25370" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q620861" start="25461" end="25475" title="Manhattan loft" label="Manhattan loft"/>
<link wikidata="Q461572" start="25480" end="25484" title="SoHo" label="SoHo"/>
<link wikidata="Q310161" start="25626" end="25641" title="Manuel Castells" label="Manuel Castells"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="25700" end="25713" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047018" start="25752" end="25763" title="Quinceañera (film)" label="Quinceañera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456638" start="25820" end="25829" title="Flag Wars" label="Flag Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="25907" end="25911" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883847" start="26031" end="26053" title="Mixed-income housing" label="mixed-income community"/>
<link wikidata="Q51393" start="26105" end="26121" title="LGBT community" label="LGBTQ+ community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040465" start="26145" end="26163" title="Hipster (contemporary subculture)" label="hipster subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5768685" start="26227" end="26281" title="Hipster racism" label="under the guise of progressive inclusion and tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q748198" start="26463" end="26474" title="gayborhoods" label="gayborhoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q166332" start="26810" end="26824" title="eminent domain" label="eminent domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q25866" start="27023" end="27032" title="community organizing" label="organized"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689034" start="27195" end="27216" title="Affordable housing" label="housing affordability"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014890" start="27351" end="27370" title="inclusionary zoning" label="inclusionary zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q843713" start="27394" end="27404" title="Local ordinance" label="ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014890" start="27523" end="27542" title="Inclusionary zoning" label="Inclusionary zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="27552" end="27558" title="sociology" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="28217" end="28224" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="28320" end="28337" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="28582" end="28596" title="class conflict" label="class conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160" start="28616" end="28625" title="vandalism" label="vandalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="28690" end="28702" title="dot-com boom" label="dot-com boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7469" start="28793" end="28809" title="Mission District" label="Mission District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320247" start="29104" end="29135" title="San Francisco Police Department" label="San Francisco Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977822" start="29219" end="29234" title="Meibion Glyndŵr" label="Meibion Glyndŵr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670915" start="29281" end="29298" title="Welsh nationalist" label="Welsh nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075956" start="29341" end="29354" title="Welsh culture" label="Welsh culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="29359" end="29367" title="Welsh language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="29607" end="29614" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371789" start="29621" end="29633" title="holiday home" label="holiday home"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="29638" end="29643" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097670" start="29808" end="29821" title="Operation Tân" label="Operation Tân"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846785" start="30125" end="30137" title="Schwabenhass" label="Schwabenhass"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="30302" end="30316" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069949" start="31018" end="31031" title="urban density" label="urban density"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="31732" end="31743" title="speculation" label="speculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="31992" end="31997" title="law" label="legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278937" start="32064" end="32084" title="community land trust" label="community land trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014890" start="32101" end="32120" title="inclusionary zoning" label="inclusionary zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484284" start="32195" end="32205" title="land trust" label="land trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078081" start="32437" end="32449" title="rent control" label="rent control"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="32973" end="32985" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica"/>
<link wikidata="Q846421" start="32998" end="33012" title="West Hollywood, California" label="West Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="33016" end="33026" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="33123" end="33135" title="black market" label="black market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777431" start="33266" end="33275" title="key money" label="key money"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532502" start="33629" end="33643" title="social housing" label="social housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333655" start="33678" end="33693" title="Right to buy scheme" label="sold to tenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q8187647" start="33834" end="33853" title="landlord harassment" label="landlord harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="33894" end="33902" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313515" start="33932" end="33956" title="rent control in New York" label="rent control in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="34047" end="34060" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="34142" end="34148" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="34408" end="34420" title="ancient Rome" label="ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="34466" end="34480" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="34529" end="34542" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q918230" start="34600" end="34606" title="Roman villa" label="villas"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="34609" end="34635" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q30934179" start="34645" end="34657" title="Loretta Lees" label="Loretta Lees"/>
<link wikidata="Q859427" start="34680" end="34692" title="Inner London" label="Inner London"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="34813" end="34827" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q122776" start="35223" end="35232" title="Barnsbury" label="Barnsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="35264" end="35278" title="central London" label="central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="35553" end="35569" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="36192" end="36206" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q205817" start="36632" end="36659" title="London Borough of Islington" label="London Borough of Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="36682" end="36692" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738849" start="39833" end="39846" title="rooming house" label="rooming house"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="40187" end="40195" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="40197" end="40204" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="40206" end="40212" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="40214" end="40222" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="40227" end="40236" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="40722" end="40733" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463286" start="40739" end="40749" title="Saint-Roch, Quebec City" label="Saint Roch"/>
<link wikidata="Q205150" start="42401" end="42415" title="National Rally" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q157" start="43631" end="43648" title="François Hollande" label="François Hollande"/>
<link wikidata="Q12927" start="43654" end="43667" title="Marine Le Pen" label="Marine Le Pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238" start="44807" end="44818" title="Tegucigalpa" label="Tegucigalpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q274584" start="44823" end="44837" title="San Pedro Sula" label="San Pedro Sula"/>
<link wikidata="Q751725" start="45174" end="45185" title="Bay Islands Department" label="Bay islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393072" start="45187" end="45203" title="Valle de Ángeles" label="Valle de Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191693" start="45222" end="45234" title="Copán Ruinas" label="Copan Ruinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q476713" start="45353" end="45363" title="expatriate" label="expatriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14083" start="45876" end="45882" title="dollar" label="dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q161851" start="46112" end="46123" title="condominium" label="condominium"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="46399" end="46411" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136857" start="46554" end="46568" title="Post-apartheid" label="Post-Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="46813" end="46825" title="Middle class" label="middle-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="46841" end="46854" title="Working class" label="working-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="47324" end="47333" title="Apartheid" label="Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656849" start="47499" end="47513" title="capital flight" label="capital flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282250" start="47515" end="47528" title="disinvestment" label="disinvestment"/>
<link wikidata="Q319416" start="48833" end="48841" title="Aberdeen, Eastern Cape" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="49055" end="49067" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739536" start="50510" end="50522" title="Inner city" label="inner cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="50526" end="50535" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547724" start="50593" end="50608" title="Group Areas Act" label="Group Areas Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q15976093" start="50685" end="50694" title="Woodstock, Cape Town" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="50784" end="50794" title="Afrikaners" label="Afrikaners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800505" start="50803" end="50816" title="1820 Settlers" label="1820 Settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16129257" start="50819" end="50840" title="Eastern European Jews" label="Eastern European Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="50858" end="50864" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="50869" end="50879" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130204" start="50889" end="50897" title="Coloureds" label="coloured"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="50898" end="50908" title="Capetonian" label="Capetonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359520" start="51844" end="51858" title="Real estate business" label="housing market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418250" start="52317" end="52324" title="Bo-Kaap" label="Bo-Kaap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="52341" end="52350" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276753" start="52488" end="52498" title="Cape Malay" label="Cape Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630687" start="53590" end="53597" title="tenants" label="tenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893186" start="53761" end="53769" title="eviction" label="eviction"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="54624" end="54629" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="54756" end="54761" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="54763" end="54768" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="54770" end="54775" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="54780" end="54784" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54916" end="54936" title="Walls of Milan#Spanish walls" label="Cerchia dei Bastioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024698" start="55060" end="55065" title="Isola (district of Milan)" label="Isola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416575" start="55253" end="55271" title="Naviglio Martesana" label="Naviglio Martesana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664701" start="55293" end="55310" title="Centro Direzionale di Milano" label="business district"/>
<link wikidata="Q730701" start="55696" end="55716" title="Porta Nuova (Milan)" label="Progetto Porta Nuova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501413" start="55850" end="55865" title="Bosco Verticale" label="Bosco Verticale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55981" end="55993" title="Zona Tortona" label="Zona Tortona"/>
<link wikidata="Q766538" start="56034" end="56054" title="Milano Porta Genova railway station" label="Porta Genova station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009164" start="56169" end="56186" title="Milan Design Week" label="Milan Design Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q617456" start="56234" end="56245" title="Superstudio" label="Superstudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q594368" start="56372" end="56380" title="Arnaldo Pomodoro" label="Pomodoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q20008149" start="56386" end="56398" title="Armani/Silos" label="Armani/Silos"/>
<link wikidata="Q609904" start="56498" end="56514" title="Lambrate" label="Lambrate-Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639729" start="56574" end="56581" title="Bicocca (district of Milan)" label="Bicocca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643237" start="56586" end="56592" title="Bovisa" label="Bovisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43005" start="56670" end="56688" title="Sesto San Giovanni" label="Sesto San Giovanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q525297" start="56724" end="56728" title="Piazzale Loreto" label="NoLo"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="56864" end="56870" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="56872" end="56876" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="56878" end="56884" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q48845691" start="56886" end="56900" title="Metropolis GZM" label="Metropolis GZM"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="56902" end="56908" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="56914" end="56921" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="57092" end="57096" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="57403" end="57415" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="57417" end="57421" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q801687" start="57596" end="57610" title="Łódź Fabryczna" label="Łódź Fabryczna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57635" end="57653" title="EC1 Science Museum" label="EC1 Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="57722" end="57728" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q93706" start="57751" end="57760" title="Kazimierz" label="Kazimierz"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="57816" end="57822" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q348402" start="57852" end="57878" title="Adam Mickiewicz University" label="Adam Mickiewicz University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="57911" end="57918" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q11788895" start="57921" end="57929" title="Nadodrze" label="Nadodrze"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="57990" end="57999" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q110732" start="58011" end="58020" title="Wałbrzych" label="Wałbrzych"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="58110" end="58116" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107497" start="58118" end="58130" title="Praga-Północ" label="Praga-Północ"/>
<link wikidata="Q497757" start="58372" end="58388" title="Gosplan" label="central-planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q824362" start="60363" end="60378" title="Post-industrial society" label="post-industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q112730899" start="60379" end="60396" title="service economy" label="service economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="60407" end="60419" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="60928" end="60935" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="60937" end="60946" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="60948" end="60954" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="60956" end="60968" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="60970" end="60979" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="60985" end="61001" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="61567" end="61583" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="61592" end="61608" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="61617" end="61628" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="61637" end="61644" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="61651" end="61658" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q49259" start="61667" end="61681" title="Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="Virginia Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="61690" end="61696" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="61705" end="61711" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="61799" end="61806" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="61814" end="61820" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="61828" end="61833" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="61839" end="61848" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="61856" end="61863" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="61871" end="61880" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="61886" end="61893" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q17943" start="61899" end="61915" title="Arlington, Texas" label="Arlington, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18648895" start="63934" end="63952" title="Cereal Killer Cafe" label="Cereal Killer Cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927657" start="64765" end="64796" title="San Francisco tech bus protests" label="San Francisco tech bus protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q690700" start="65379" end="65393" title="Sandwich board" label="Sandwich board"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="65436" end="65442" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456069" start="65469" end="65488" title="Five Points, Denver" label="Five Points, Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456069" start="66497" end="66516" title="Five Points, Denver" label="Five Points, Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875269" start="67163" end="67175" title="Locke Street (Hamilton, Ontario)" label="Locke Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="67179" end="67196" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="67226" end="67235" title="Anarchism" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645110" start="67589" end="67604" title="Hamilton Police Service" label="Hamilton police"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41951" wikidata="Q30327019" url="?curid=41951" title="Post and lintel">
<text>Post and lintel (also called prop and lintel, a trabeated system, or a trilithic system) is a building system where strong horizontal elements are held up by strong vertical elements with large spaces between them. This is usually used to hold up a roof, creating a largely open space beneath, for whatever use the building is designed. The horizontal elements are called by a variety of names including lintel, header, architrave or beam, and the supporting vertical elements may be called , columns, or . The use of wider elements at the top of the post, called capitals, to help spread the load, is common to many architectural traditions.

==Lintels==

In architecture, a post-and-lintel or trabeated system refers to the use of horizontal stone beams or lintels which are borne by columns or posts. The name is from the Latin &quot;trabs&quot;, &quot;beam&quot;; influenced by &quot;trabeatus&quot;, clothed in the &quot;trabea&quot;, a ritual garment.

Post-and-lintel construction is one of four ancient structural methods of building, the others being the corbel, arch-and-vault, and truss.

A noteworthy example of a trabeated system is in Volubilis, from the Roman era, where one side of the Decumanus Maximus is lined with trabeated elements, while the opposite side of the roadway is designed in arched style.

==History of lintel systems==
The trabeated system is a fundamental principle of Neolithic architecture, ancient Indian architecture, ancient Greek architecture and ancient Egyptian architecture. Other trabeated styles are the Persian, Lycian, Japanese, traditional Chinese, and ancient Chinese architecture, especially in northern China, and nearly all the Indian styles. The traditions are represented in North and Central America by Mayan architecture, and in South America by Inca architecture. In all or most of these traditions, certainly in Greece and India, the earliest versions developed using wood, which were later translated into stone for larger and grander buildings. Timber framing, also using trusses, remains common for smaller buildings such as houses to the modern day.

==Span limitations==
There are two main forces acting upon the post and lintel system: weight carrying compression at the joint between lintel and post, and tension induced by deformation of self-weight and the load above between the posts. The two posts are under compression from the weight of the lintel (or beam) above. The lintel will deform by sagging in the middle because the underside is under tension and the upper is under compression.

The biggest disadvantage to lintel construction is the limited weight that can be held up, and the resulting small distances required between the posts. Ancient Roman architecture&#x27;s development of the arch allowed for much larger structures to be constructed. The arcuated system spreads larger loads more effectively, and replaced the post-and-lintel system in most larger buildings and structures, until the introduction of steel girder beams and steel-reinforced concrete in the industrial era. 

As with the Roman temple portico front and its descendants in later classical architecture, trabeated features were often retained in parts of buildings as an aesthetic choice. The classical orders of Greek origin were in particular retained in buildings designed to impress, even though they usually had little or no structural role.

===Lintel reinforcement===
The flexural strength of a stone lintel can be dramatically increased with the use of Post-tensioned stone.

==See also==

* Architrave – &quot;structural lintel or beam resting on columns-pillars&quot;
* Atalburu – &quot;Basque decorative lintel&quot;
* Dolmen – &quot;Neolithic megalithic tombs with structural stone lintels&quot;
* Dougong – &quot;traditional Chinese structural element&quot;
* I-beam – &quot;steel lintels and beams&quot;
* Marriage stone – &quot;decorative lintel&quot;
* Opus caementicium
* Structural design
* Timber framing – &quot;post and beam systems&quot;
* Stonehenge

==Notes==
==References==
* Summerson, John, &quot;The Classical Language of Architecture&quot;, 1980 edition, Thames and Hudson &quot;World of Art&quot; series, </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30327019" start="0" end="15" title="Post and lintel" label="Post and lintel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30327019" start="29" end="44" title="Post and lintel" label="prop and lintel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30327019" start="48" end="64" title="Post and lintel" label="trabeated system"/>
<link wikidata="Q30327019" start="71" end="87" title="Post and lintel" label="trilithic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370517" start="404" end="410" title="lintel" label="lintel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183448" start="420" end="430" title="architrave" label="architrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705329" start="434" end="438" title="Beam (structure)" label="beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817" start="493" end="499" title="column" label="column"/>
<link wikidata="Q193893" start="564" end="572" title="Capital (architecture)" label="capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="617" end="630" title="architecture" label="architectural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370517" start="759" end="765" title="lintel" label="lintel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817" start="786" end="792" title="column" label="column"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="825" end="830" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705329" start="856" end="860" title="Beam (structure)" label="beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12537" start="1064" end="1070" title="corbel" label="corbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189771" start="1072" end="1086" title="Arch and Vault" label="arch-and-vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328068" start="1092" end="1097" title="truss" label="truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q391215" start="1149" end="1158" title="Volubilis" label="Volubilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1169" end="1174" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q959042" start="1202" end="1219" title="Decumanus Maximus" label="Decumanus Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295485" start="1404" end="1426" title="Neolithic architecture" label="Neolithic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q61050" start="1428" end="1455" title="Indian architecture" label="ancient Indian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q331273" start="1457" end="1483" title="ancient Greek architecture" label="ancient Greek architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q842352" start="1488" end="1517" title="ancient Egyptian architecture" label="ancient Egyptian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501585" start="1550" end="1557" title="Persian architecture" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422874" start="1567" end="1575" title="Japanese architecture" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q957904" start="1589" end="1596" title="Chinese architecture" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752814" start="1602" end="1617" title="Ancient Chinese wooden architecture" label="ancient Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q61050" start="1681" end="1687" title="Indian architecture" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005167" start="1759" end="1777" title="Mayan architecture" label="Mayan architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004258" start="1803" end="1820" title="Inca architecture" label="Inca architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q629000" start="2006" end="2020" title="Timber framing" label="Timber framing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328068" start="2033" end="2040" title="trusses" label="trusses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712821" start="2217" end="2228" title="compression (physical)" label="compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q908584" start="2271" end="2278" title="tension (mechanics)" label="tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="2715" end="2741" title="Ancient Roman architecture" label="Ancient Roman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="2768" end="2772" title="arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="2831" end="2846" title="arcuated system" label="arcuated system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371480" start="2999" end="3005" title="girder" label="girder"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="3016" end="3041" title="steel-reinforced concrete" label="steel-reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q867143" start="3079" end="3091" title="Roman temple" label="Roman temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q185600" start="3092" end="3099" title="portico" label="portico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198718" start="3135" end="3157" title="classical architecture" label="classical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q217175" start="3248" end="3263" title="classical order" label="classical order"/>
<link wikidata="Q118906127" start="3516" end="3536" title="Post-tensioned stone" label="Post-tensioned stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q183448" start="3555" end="3565" title="Architrave" label="Architrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812710" start="3635" end="3643" title="Atalburu" label="Atalburu"/>
<link wikidata="Q101659" start="3685" end="3691" title="Dolmen" label="Dolmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235327" start="3765" end="3772" title="Dougong" label="Dougong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780087" start="3828" end="3834" title="I-beam" label="I-beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622564" start="3875" end="3889" title="Marriage stone" label="Marriage stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q610076" start="3924" end="3941" title="Opus caementicium" label="Opus caementicium"/>
<link wikidata="Q633538" start="3944" end="3961" title="Structural design" label="Structural design"/>
<link wikidata="Q629000" start="3964" end="3978" title="Timber framing" label="Timber framing"/>
<link wikidata="Q39671" start="4017" end="4027" title="Stonehenge" label="Stonehenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q552784" start="4056" end="4071" title="John Summerson" label="Summerson, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723310" start="4079" end="4117" title="The Classical Language of Architecture" label="The Classical Language of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733669" start="4139" end="4156" title="Thames and Hudson" label="Thames and Hudson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41953" wikidata="Q187745" url="?curid=41953" title="Bohemian Rhapsody">
<text>&quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; is a song by the British rock band Queen, released as the lead single from their fourth studio album, &quot;A Night at the Opera&quot; (1975). Written by lead singer Freddie Mercury, the song is a six-minute suite, notable for its lack of a refraining chorus and consisting of several sections: an intro, a ballad segment, an operatic passage, a hard rock part and a reflective coda. It is one of the few progressive rock songs of the 1970s to have proved accessible to a mainstream audience.

Mercury referred to &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; as a &quot;mock opera&quot; that resulted from the combination of three songs he had written. It was recorded by Queen and co-producer Roy Thomas Baker at five studios between August and September 1975. Due to recording logistics of the era, the band had to bounce the tracks across eight generations of 24-track tape, meaning that they required nearly 200 tracks for overdubs. The song parodies elements of opera with bombastic choruses, sarcastic recitative, and distorted Italian operatic phrases. Lyrical references include Scaramouche, the fandango, Galileo Galilei, Figaro, and Beelzebub, with cries of &quot;&quot;Bismillah&quot;!&quot;

Although critical reaction was initially mixed, retrospective reviews have acclaimed &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; one of the greatest songs of all time, and it is often regarded as the band&#x27;s signature song. The promotional video is credited with furthering the development of the music video medium. It has appeared in numerous polls of the greatest songs in popular music, including a ranking at number 17 on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s 2021 list of the “500 Greatest Songs of All Time”. A &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; readers&#x27; poll ranked Mercury&#x27;s vocal performance as the greatest in rock history.

&quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; topped the UK Singles Chart for nine weeks (plus another five weeks following Mercury&#x27;s death in 1991) and is the UK&#x27;s third best-selling single of all time. It also topped the charts in countries including Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Ireland, and the Netherlands, and has sold over six million copies worldwide. In the United States, the song peaked at number nine in 1976, but reached a new peak of number two after appearing in the 1992 film &quot;Wayne&#x27;s World&quot;. In 2004, the song was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame. Following the release of the 2018 biopic &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot;, it became the most streamed song from the 20th century. In 2021, it was certified diamond in the US for combined digital sales/streams equal to 10 million units, and is one of the best selling songs of all time. In 2022, it was inducted into National Recording Registry by the Library of Congress being &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot;.

==History and recording==

According to Mercury&#x27;s friend Chris Smith (a keyboard player in Smile), Mercury first started developing &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; in the late 1960s; Mercury used to play parts of songs he was writing at the time on the piano, and one of his pieces, known simply as &quot;The Cowboy Song&quot;, contained lyrics that ended up in the completed version produced years later, in 1975, specifically, &quot;Mama ... just killed a man.&quot; Producer Roy Thomas Baker, who began working with Queen in 1972, related how Mercury once played the opening ballad section on the piano for him in Mercury&#x27;s flat:

He played the beginning on the piano, then stopped and said, &quot;And this is where the opera section comes in!&quot; Then we went out to eat dinner.

Guitarist Brian May said the band thought that Mercury&#x27;s blueprint for the song was &quot;intriguing and original, and worthy of work&quot;. According to May, much of Queen&#x27;s material was written in the studio, but this song &quot;was all in Freddie&#x27;s mind&quot; before they started.
Queen spent a month rehearsing at Ridge Farm Studio in Surrey in mid-1975, and drummer Roger Taylor recalled that &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; was one of the songs the band worked on while they were there. Recording began on 24 August 1975 at Rockfield Studio 1 near Monmouth, South Wales, after a three-week rehearsal at Penrhos Court, near Kington, Herefordshire. During the making of the track, four additional studios – Roundhouse, Sarm Studios, Scorpio Sound, and Wessex Sound Studios – were used. According to some band members, Mercury mentally prepared the song beforehand and directed the band throughout.

Mercury used a C. Bechstein concert grand piano, which he played in the promotional video and the UK tour. Due to the elaborate nature of the song, it was recorded in various sections. The piano was allegedly the same one Paul McCartney had used to record the Beatles&#x27; song &quot;Hey Jude&quot;, as well as the same one Rick Wakeman used on David Bowie&#x27;s 1971 album &quot;Hunky Dory&quot;.

Baker recalled in 1999:

May, Mercury, and Taylor reportedly sang their vocal parts continually for 10 to 12 hours a day. The entire piece took three weeks to record, and in some sections featured 180 overdubs. In multiple interviews, May recalled how Mercury&#x27;s vocal overdubs were so exquisitely precise that he would create a natural phasing effect.

Since the studios of the time only offered 24-track analogue tape, it was necessary for the three to overdub themselves many times and &quot;bounce&quot; these down to successive sub-mixes. In the end, eighth-generation tapes were used. The various sections of tape containing the desired sub-mixes had to be spliced (cut and assembled in the correct sequence). May recalled placing a tape in front of the light and being able to see through it, as the tape had been used so many times.

A similar story was told in 1977 by Taylor regarding the elaborate overdubs and sub-mixes for &quot;The March of The Black Queen&quot; for the album &quot;Queen II&quot;. At that time, the band was using 16-track equipment.

Producer Baker recalls that May&#x27;s solo was done on only one track rather than recording multiple tracks. May stated that he wanted to compose &quot;a little tune that would be a counterpart to the main melody; I didn&#x27;t just want to play the melody&quot;. The guitarist said that his better material stems from this way of working, in which he thought of the tune before playing it: &quot;The fingers tend to be predictable unless being led by the brain.&quot; According to Baker,

... the end of the song was much heavier because it was one of the first mixes to be done with automation ... If you really listen to it, the ballad starts off clean, and as the opera section gets louder and louder, the vocals get more and more distorted. You can still hear this on the CD. They are clearly distorted.

In May 2023, an early handwritten draft unearthed from an auction of items that belonged to Mercury, courtesy of his friend Mary Austin, revealed that Mercury originally considered the song to be titled &quot;Mongolian Rhapsody&quot;. It was explained that he wrote the title along with the lyrics in 1974 on a page of stationery from defunct airline British Midland Airways, but crossed out the word &quot;Mongolian&quot; in place of &quot;Bohemian&quot;.

==Composition and analysis==
&quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; has been affiliated to the genres of progressive rock (sometimes called symphonic rock), hard rock,&lt;ref name=&quot;Prown/Newquist&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; art rock, and progressive pop. The song is highly unusual for a popular single in featuring no chorus, combining disparate musical styles, and containing lyrics which eschew conventional love-based narratives, and instead make allusions to murder and nihilism.

Music scholar Sheila Whiteley suggests that &quot;the title draws strongly on contemporary rock ideology, the individualism of the &quot;bohemian&quot; artists&#x27; world, with &quot;rhapsody&quot; affirming the romantic ideals of art rock&quot;. Commenting on bohemianism, Judith Peraino said,

Mercury intended ... [this song] to be a &#x27;mock opera&#x27;, something outside the norm of rock songs, and it does follow a certain operatic logic: Choruses of multi-tracked voices alternate with aria-like solos, the emotions are excessive, the plot confusing.

&quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; begins with an introduction, then goes into a piano ballad, before a guitar solo leads to an operatic interlude. A hard rock part follows this and it concludes with a coda. The song is in the keys of B major, E major, A major and F major, and is predominantly in meter. This musical format of writing a song as a suite with changes in style, tone, and tempo throughout was uncommon in most mainstream pop and rock music, but common in progressive rock, a genre which had reached its artistic and commercial zenith between 1970 and 1975 in the music of British bands such as Jethro Tull, Yes, Genesis, Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer, Gentle Giant, Van der Graaf Generator, and Curved Air. The music of progressive rock was characterised by dramatic contrasts, frequent shifts in tempo and in rhythmic character from one section of a composition to the next. Bands from the genre blended rock with classical music, including its structural features, compositional practices, and instrumentation. Queen had embraced progressive rock as one of their many diverse influences.

&quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; parodies many different elements of opera by using bombastic choruses, sarcastic recitative, and distorted Italian operatic phrases. An embryonic version of this style had already been used in Mercury&#x27;s earlier compositions for the band&#x27;s &quot;My Fairy King&quot; (1973) and &quot;The March of the Black Queen&quot; (1974).

===Intro (0:00–0:49)===
The song begins with a close five-part harmony a cappella introduction in B major—as evidenced by the presence of a V–I cadence (F7–B) multi-track recordings of Mercury although the video has all four members lip-syncing this part. The lyrics question whether life is &quot;real&quot; or &quot;just fantasy caught in a landslide&quot; before concluding that there can be &quot;no escape from reality&quot;. The section is nearly entirely in 4/4 time, with the exception of measures 3 (&quot;Caught in a landslide, no es—&quot;) and 9 (&quot;I need no sympathy, because I&#x27;m&quot;) switching to 5/4 time, then returning to 4/4 after.

After 20 seconds, the grand piano enters, the song modulates briefly to E major via another perfect cadence (B7–E) and Mercury&#x27;s voice alternates with the other vocal parts. The narrator introduces himself as &quot;just a poor boy&quot; but declares that he &quot;needs no sympathy&quot; because he is &quot;easy come, easy go&quot; and then &quot;little high, little low&quot; (when heard in stereo, the words &quot;little high&quot; come from the left speaker and &quot;little low&quot; comes from the right, the other respective speaker plays the piano at the same time); chromatic side-slipping on &quot;easy come, easy go&quot; highlights the dream-like atmosphere. The end of this section is marked by the bass entrance and the cross-handed piano vamp in B.

===Ballad (0:49–2:37)===

The piano begins in B major along with the entrance of John Deacon&#x27;s bass guitar, marking the onset of this section. After it plays twice, Mercury&#x27;s vocals enter. Throughout the section, the vocals evolve from a softly sung harmony to an impassioned solo performance by Mercury. The narrator explains to his mother that he has &quot;just killed a man&quot;, with &quot;a gun against [the man&#x27;s] head&quot; and in doing so, has thrown his life away. This &quot;confessional&quot; section, Whiteley comments, is &quot;affirmative of the nurturant and life-giving force of the feminine and the need for absolution&quot;. In the middle of the verse (1:19), Taylor&#x27;s drums enter, and a descending chromatic run leads to a temporary modulation to E major (up one fourth). The narrator makes the second of several invocations to his &quot;mama&quot; in the new key, continuing the original theme. The narrator explains his regret over &quot;mak[ing] you cry&quot; and urging &quot;mama&quot; to &quot;carry on as if nothing really matters&quot;. A brief, descending variation of the piano phrase connects to the second verse.

Then the piano intro plays, marking the start of the second verse. As the ballad proceeds into its second verse, the speaker confesses how ashamed he is by his act of murder (as May enters on guitar and mimics the upper range of the piano at 1:50). May imitates a bell tree during the line &quot;sends shivers down my spine&quot;, by playing the strings of his guitar on the other side of the bridge. The narrator bids the world goodbye announcing he has &quot;got to go&quot; and prepares to &quot;face the truth&quot; admitting &quot;I don&#x27;t want to die / I sometimes wish I&#x27;d never been born at all&quot;. This is where the guitar solo enters.

===Guitar solo (2:37–3:05)===
Towards the end of the ballad section, the band builds in intensity, incorporating a guitar solo (in E major) played and composed by Brian May. The intensity continues to build, but once the bass line completes its descent establishing modulation to the new key (A major), the entire band cuts out abruptly at 3:03 except for quiet, staccato A major quaver (eighth-note) chords on the piano, marking the start of the &quot;Opera&quot; section.

===Opera (3:05–4:07)===

A rapid series of rhythmic and harmonic changes introduces a pseudo-operatic midsection, which contains the bulk of the elaborate vocal multi-tracking, depicting the narrator&#x27;s descent into hell. While the underlying pulse of the song is maintained, the dynamics vary greatly from bar to bar, from only Mercury&#x27;s voice accompanied by a piano to a multi-voice choir supported by drums, bass, piano, and timpani. The choir effect was created by having May, Mercury, and Taylor repeatedly sing their vocal parts, resulting in 180 separate overdubs. These overdubs were then combined into successive submixes. According to Roger Taylor, the voices of May, Mercury, and himself combined created a wide vocal range: &quot;Brian could get down quite low, Freddie had a powerful voice through the middle, and I was good at the high stuff.&quot; The band wanted to create &quot;a wall of sound, that starts down and goes all the way up&quot;. The band used the bell effect for lyrics &quot;Magnifico&quot; and &quot;let me go&quot;. Also, on &quot;let him go&quot;, Taylor singing the top section carries his note on further after the rest of the &quot;choir&quot; have stopped singing.

Lyrical references in this passage include Scaramouche, the fandango, Galileo Galilei, Figaro, and Beelzebub, with cries of &quot;&quot;Bismillah&quot;! [Arabic: &quot;In the name of God!&quot;] We will not let you go!&quot;, as rival factions fight over his soul, some wishing to &quot;let [him] go&quot; and &quot;spare him his life from this monstrosity&quot;, with others sending him &quot;thunderbolts and lightning – very, very frightening [to him]&quot;. In &quot;Freddie Mercury: The Definitive Biography&quot;, Lesley-Ann Jones theorises that it is also a figurative representation of the four members: Mercury, May, Taylor, and Deacon respectively. The section concludes with a full choral treatment of the lyric &quot;Beelzebub has a devil put aside for me!&quot;, on a block B major chord. Roger Taylor tops the final chord with a falsetto B in the fifth octave (B5).

Using the 24-track technology available at the time, the &quot;opera&quot; section took about three weeks to finish. Baker said, &quot;Every time Freddie came up with another &quot;Galileo&quot;, I would add another piece of tape to the reel.&quot; Baker recalls that they kept wearing out the tape, which meant having to do transfers.

=== Hard rock (4:07–4:54) ===
The operatic section leads into a rock interlude with a guitar riff written by Mercury. At 4:15, a quadruple-tracked Mercury (in stereo, the four parts are panned two on the left and two on the right) sings angry lyrics addressed to an unspecified &quot;you&quot;, accusing them of betrayal and abuse and insisting &quot;can&#x27;t do this to me, baby&quot;, before the final lines conclude that the singer &quot;just gotta get right outta&quot; an unspecified &quot;here&quot;. Three ascending guitar runs follow. Mercury then plays a similar B run on the piano, as the song builds up to the finale with a &quot;ritardando&quot;.

===Outro (4:54–5:55)===
After Mercury plays ascending octaves of notes from the B mixolydian mode (composed of the notes from the E scale), the song then returns to the tempo and form of the introduction, initially in E major, before quickly modulating to C minor, only to soon go through an abrupt short series of modulations, bringing it back to C minor again in time for the final &quot;nothing really matters&quot; section. A guitar accompanies the chorus &quot;ooh, ooh yeah, ooh yeah&quot;. A double-tracked twin guitar melody is played through an amplifier designed by John Deacon, affectionately nicknamed the &quot;Deacy Amp&quot;. Mercury&#x27;s line &quot;Nothing really matters ...&quot; appears again, &quot;cradled by light piano arpeggios suggesting both resignation (minor tonalities) and a new sense of freedom in the wide vocal span&quot;. After the line &quot;nothing really matters&quot; is repeated multiple times, the song finally concludes in the key of E major, but then changes again to F major just before it ends. The final line, &quot;Any way the wind blows&quot;, is followed by the quiet sound of a large tam-tam that finally expels the tension built up throughout the song.

==Lyrics==
&quot;The New York Times&quot; commented that &quot;the song&#x27;s most distinct feature is the fatalistic lyrics&quot;. Mercury refused to explain his composition other than to say it was about relationships; the band is still protective of the song&#x27;s secret. Brian May supports suggestions that the song contained veiled references to Mercury&#x27;s personal traumas. He recalls &quot;Freddie was a very complex person: flippant and funny on the surface, but he concealed insecurities and problems in squaring up his life with his childhood. He never explained the lyrics, but I think he put a lot of himself into that song.&quot; May, though, says the band had agreed that the core of a lyric was a private issue for the composer. In a BBC Three documentary about the making of &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot;, Roger Taylor maintains that the true meaning of the song is &quot;fairly self-explanatory with just a bit of nonsense in the middle&quot;.

Despite this, critics, both journalistic and academic, have speculated over the meaning behind the song&#x27;s lyrics. Some believe the lyrics describe a suicidal murderer haunted by demons or depict events just preceding an execution. The latter explanation points to Albert Camus&#x27;s novel &quot;The Stranger&quot;, in which a young man confesses to an impulsive murder and has an epiphany before he is executed, as probable inspiration. When the band released a &quot;Greatest Hits&quot; cassette in Iran, a leaflet in Persian was included with translation and explanations. In the explanation, Queen states that &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; is about a young man who has accidentally killed someone and, like Faust, sold his soul to the devil. On the night before his execution, he calls for God saying, &quot;Bismillah&quot; (&quot;In the name of God&quot; in Arabic), and with the help of angels, regains his soul from Shaitan (the devil in Arabic).

Other critics interpreted the lyrics as Mercury&#x27;s way of dealing with personal issues. Music scholar Sheila Whiteley observes that Mercury reached a turning point in his personal life in the year he wrote &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot;. He had been living with Mary Austin for seven years but had just embarked on his first love affair with a man. She suggests that the song provides an insight into Mercury&#x27;s emotional state at the time, &quot;living with Mary (&#x27;Mamma&#x27;, as in Mother Mary) and wanting to break away (&#x27;Mamma mia let me go&#x27;)&quot;. Others suggest it as a veiled reference to coming out, and dealing with the repercussions of the sodomy laws of the time. In addition, the song can be interpreted as coming from the perspective of a person on death row, reflecting on their life and preparing for their last moments.

Still others believe the lyrics were only written to fit with the music, and had no intended meaning; the D.J., television entertainer, and comedian Kenny Everett, who played an influential role in popularising the single on his radio show on Capital Radio, quoted Mercury as claiming the lyrics were simply &quot;random rhyming nonsense&quot;.

==Release==

When the band wanted to release the single in 1975, various executives suggested to them that due to its length of 5 minutes and 55 seconds, it was too long and would never be a hit. Mercury commenting on the length of the song:

The song was played to other musicians who commented the band had no hope of it ever being played on radio. According to Baker, he and the band bypassed this corporate assessment by playing the song for Everett:
: &quot;we had a reel-to-reel copy but we told him he could only have it if he promised not to play it. &#x27;I won&#x27;t play it,&#x27; he said, winking ...&quot;

The plan worked — Everett teased his listeners by playing only parts of the song. Audience demand intensified when Everett played the full song on his show 14 times in 2 days. Hordes of fans attempted to buy the single the following Monday, only to be told by record stores that it had not yet been released. The same weekend, Paul Drew, who ran the RKO General stations in the U.S., heard the track on Everett&#x27;s show in London. Drew managed to get a copy of the tape and started to play it in the U.S., which forced the hand of Queen&#x27;s U.S. label, Elektra Records. In an interview with &quot;Sound on Sound&quot;, Baker observed that &quot;it was a strange situation where radio on both sides of the Atlantic was breaking a record that the record companies said would never get airplay!&quot;

Eventually the unedited single was released, with &quot;I&#x27;m in Love with My Car&quot; as the B-side. Following Everett&#x27;s escapade in October 1975, Eric Hall, a record plugger, gave a copy to David &quot;Diddy&quot; Hamilton to play on his weekday Radio One show. Hall stated &quot;Monster, Monster! This could be a hit!&quot;

The song became the 1975 UK Christmas number one, holding the top position for nine weeks. &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; was the first song ever to get to number one in the UK twice with the same version, and is also the only single to have been Christmas number one twice with the same version. The second was upon its re-release (as a double A-side single with &quot;These Are the Days of Our Lives&quot;) in 1991, following Mercury&#x27;s death, staying at number one for five weeks. The re-released version sold 673,000 copies in 1991 in the UK.

In the US, the single was also a success, although initially to a lesser extent than in the UK. The single, released in December 1975, reached number nine on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America for sales of one million copies.

In a retrospective article, Anthony DeCurtis of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; explained why the song performed less strongly in the US charts by saying that it is &quot;the quintessential example of the kind of thing that doesn&#x27;t exactly go over well in America&quot;. Its chart run of 24 weeks, however, placed it at number 18 on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s year-end chart, higher than some number 1s of the year. With the Canadian record-buying public, the single fared better, reaching number one in the &quot;RPM&quot; national singles chart for the week ending 1 May 1976.

In the US, &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; was re-released as a double A-side cassette single with &quot;The Show Must Go On&quot; in January 1992, two months after the death of Freddie Mercury, with proceeds going to the Magic Johnson Foundation for AIDS research. The song re-entered the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart after 16 years, reaching number two, and spending 17 weeks on the chart. After the release of the Queen biopic named after the song, it re-entered the charts for a third time at number 33, marking 26 years since it last charted.

In March 2021 it was certified Diamond (10× platinum) in the US for combined digital sales and streams equal to 10 million units. It had sold 4.4 million digital copies in the US .

==Promotional video==

Though some artists had made video clips to accompany songs (including Queen themselves; for example, their earlier singles &quot;Keep Yourself Alive&quot;, &quot;Liar&quot;, &quot;Seven Seas of Rhye&quot; and &quot;Killer Queen&quot; already had &quot;pop promos&quot;, as they were known at the time), it was only after the success of &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; that it became a regular practice for record companies to produce promotional videos for artists&#x27; single releases. &quot;The Guardian&quot; stated it &quot;ensured videos would henceforth be a mandatory tool in the marketing of music&quot;. These videos could then be shown on television shows around the world, such as the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;, without the need for the artist to appear in person. A promo video also allowed the artist to have their music broadcast and accompanied by their own choice of visuals rather than dancers such as Pan&#x27;s People. According to May, the video was produced so that the band could avoid miming on &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;, since they would have looked off miming to such a complex song. He also said that the band knew they would be set to appear at Dundee&#x27;s Caird Hall on tour, a date which clashed with the programme, thus a promo would solve the issue. The video has been hailed as launching the MTV age.
The band used Trillion, a subsidiary of Trident Studios, their former management company and recording studio. They hired one of their trucks and got it to Elstree Studios in Hertfordshire, where the band were rehearsing for their tour. The video was directed by Bruce Gowers, who had directed a video of the band&#x27;s 1974 performance at the Rainbow Theatre in London, and was recorded by cameraman Barry Dodd and assistant director/floor manager Jim McCutcheon. The video was recorded in just four hours on 10 November 1975, at a cost of £4,500. Gowers reported that the band was involved in the discussion of the video and the result, and &quot;was a co-operative to that extent, but there was only one leader.&quot;
The video opens with a shot of the four band members standing in diamond formation with their heads tilted back in near darkness as they sing the &quot;a cappella&quot; part. The lights fade up, and the shots cross-fade into close-ups of Mercury. The composition of the shot is the same as Mick Rock&#x27;s cover photograph for their second album &quot;Queen II&quot;. The photo, inspired by a photograph of actress Marlene Dietrich, was the band&#x27;s favourite image of themselves. The video then fades into them playing their instruments. In the opera section of the video, the scene reverts to the &quot;Queen II&quot; standing positions, after which they perform once again on stage during the hard rock segment. In the closing seconds of the video Roger Taylor is depicted stripped to the waist, striking the tam-tam in the manner of the trademark of the Rank Organisation&#x27;s Gongman, familiar in the UK as the opening of all Rank film productions.

All of the special effects were achieved during the recording, rather than editing. The visual effect of Mercury&#x27;s face cascading away (during the echoed lines &quot;Magnifico&quot; and &quot;Let me go&quot;) was accomplished by pointing the camera at a monitor, giving visual feedback, a glare analogous to audio feedback. The honeycomb illusion was created using a shaped lens. The video was edited within five hours because it was due to be broadcast the same week in which it was taped. The video was sent to the BBC as soon as it was completed and aired for the first time on &quot;Top of the Pops&quot; in November 1975.

==Critical reception==
Although the song has become one of the most revered in popular music history, the initial critical reaction was mixed. The UK music papers reacted with bemusement, recognising that the song was original and technically accomplished, but they mostly remained indifferent. Pete Erskine of &quot;NME&quot; observed that, &quot;It&#x27;ll be interesting to see whether it&#x27;ll be played in its entirety on the radio. It&#x27;s performed extremely well, but more in terms of production than anything else... Someone somewhere has decided that the boys&#x27; next release must sound &#x27;epic&#x27;. And it does. They sound extremely self-important.&quot;

Allan Jones of &quot;Melody Maker&quot; was unimpressed, describing the song as &quot;a superficially impressive pastiche of incongruous musical styles&quot; and that Queen &quot;contrived to approximate the demented fury of the Balham Amateur Operatic Society performing &quot;The Pirates of Penzance&quot;... &#x27;Bohemian Rhapsody&#x27; is full of drama, passion and romance and sounds rather like one of those mini-opera affairs that Pete Townsend [&quot;sic&quot;] used to tack on to the end of Who albums&quot;, before concluding, &quot;The significance of the composition eludes me totally, though I must admit to finding it horrifically fascinating. It&#x27;s likely to be a hit of enormous proportions despite its length.&quot; Ray Fox-Cumming of &quot;Record Mirror&quot; was also left unmoved, saying, &quot;It has no immediate selling point whatsoever: among its many parts. there&#x27;s scarcely a shred of a tune and certainly no one line to latch onto. There&#x27;s no denying that it&#x27;s devilishly clever, encompassing everything from bits of operatic harmonies to snatches that sound like Sparks and David Cassidy, but, in the end the whole adds up to less than the sum of its parts.&quot; He did, however, say that it was &quot;unthinkable&quot; that it wouldn&#x27;t be a hit. The most positive review came from &quot;Sounds&quot;, which called it &quot;impossibly disjointed and complex, but a dazzlingly clever epic from the fevered mind of Freddie Mercury&quot;. &quot;Cash Box&quot; called it &quot;a softly sung ode to the prospect of moving on from staid ways&quot; with &quot;good singing&quot; and &quot;good production.&quot; &quot;Record World&quot; called it &quot;a majestic vocal performance that takes on operatic proportions.&quot;

==Legacy==
===Musical impact===
In 1976, when asked for his opinion on &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot;, the Beach Boys&#x27; leader Brian Wilson praised the song as &quot;the most competitive thing that&#x27;s come along in ages&quot; and &quot;a fulfillment and an answer to a teenage prayer—of artistic music&quot;. Producer Steve Levine said the track broke &quot;all sonic production barriers&quot; in a fashion similar to the Beach Boys&#x27; &quot;Good Vibrations&quot; (1966), which also consisted of disparate music sections recorded separately, Phil Spector&#x27;s &quot;Be My Baby&quot; (1963), and 10cc&#x27;s &quot;I&#x27;m Not in Love&quot; (1975). Greg Lake, whose song &quot;I Believe in Father Christmas&quot; was kept from number one in the UK by &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; when it was released in 1975, acknowledged that he was &quot;beaten by one of the greatest records ever made&quot;, describing it as &quot;a once-in-a-lifetime recording&quot;.

Addressing the song&#x27;s enduring popularity, author and music lecturer Jochen Eisentraut wrote in 2012: &quot;A year before punk made it unfashionable, progressive rock had an astounding success with the theoretically over-length (nearly 6-minute) single &#x27;Bohemian Rhapsody&#x27; which bore many of the hallmarks of the &#x27;prog&#x27; genre&quot;. He said it was &quot;unique at this point to hear a hit single in this style&quot;, it was &quot;more accessible than other music of the genre&quot; and was &quot;able to communicate beyond the usual confines of the style&quot;. Author and progressive rock historian Stephen Lambe called it a &quot;remarkable&quot; single and said it &quot;provides a neat but coincidental bridge between prog in its prime and the move to more aggressive songwriting&quot;, suggesting the song &quot;feels like a grotesque (although probably unintentional) parody of progressive rock&quot;. &quot;The New Rolling Stone Album Guide&quot; described it as &quot;either a prog-rock benchmark or the most convoluted novelty song ever recorded&quot;. Writing for the BBC in 2015, the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;″s music critic Greg Kot called it a &quot;prog-rock pocket operetta&quot; and said the song&#x27;s &quot;reign as a work of wigged-out genius rather than a dated gimmick testifies to its go-for-broke attitude—one that has resonated across generations&quot;.

In 2009, &quot;The Guardian&quot;″s music critic, Tom Service, examined the song&#x27;s relationship with the traditions of classical music, describing its popularity as &quot;one of the strangest musical phenomena out there&quot;:

A comparison was also made between the song and Led Zeppelin&#x27;s 1971 epic &quot;Stairway to Heaven&quot; by music writers Pete Prown and HP Newquist. They observed both songs were &quot;a slow, introspective beginning and gradual climb to a raging metal jam and back again&quot;, with the notable distinction being &quot;while Zeppelin meshed folk influences with heavy metal, Queen opted for the light grandeur of the operetta as part of its hard rock&quot;. They said &quot;for sheer cleverness alone, not to mention May&#x27;s riveting electric work, &#x27;Bohemian Rhapsody&#x27; rightfully became one of the top singles of 1975 and established Queen in the elite of seventies rock bands&quot;.

In 2015, &quot;The Economist&quot; described it as &quot;one of the most innovative pieces of the progressive rock era&quot;. It wrote &quot;though Led Zeppelin&#x27;s John Paul Jones and the Beatles&#x27; Paul McCartney had experimented with symphonic elements, and Roger Waters of Pink Floyd and Pete Townshend of the Who had created narrative albums with distinct &#x27;movements&#x27;, none had had the audacity to import a miniature opera into rock music.&quot;

===&quot;Wayne&#x27;s World&quot;===
In 1992, the song enjoyed renewed popularity in the United States after being featured in a scene in the film &quot;Wayne&#x27;s World&quot;, in which the titular character and his friends headbang in a car to the hard rock part near the end of the song. The film&#x27;s director, Penelope Spheeris, was hesitant to use the song, as it did not entirely fit with the lead characters, who were fans of less flamboyant hard rock and heavy metal. Mike Myers insisted that the song fit the scene. According to music scholar Theodore Gracyk, by 1992, when the film was released, even &quot;classic rock&quot; stations had stopped playing the almost six-minute song. Gracyk suggests that beginning the tape in the middle of the song after &quot;the lyrics which provide the song&#x27;s narrative ... forces the film&#x27;s audience to respond to its presence in the scene without the &#x27;commentary&#x27; of the lyrics&quot;. Helped by the song, the soundtrack album of the film was a major hit.

In connection with this, a new video was released, interspersing excerpts from the film with footage from the original Queen video, along with some live footage of the band. Myers was horrified that the record company had mixed clips from &quot;Wayne&#x27;s World&quot; with Queen&#x27;s original video, fearing that this would upset the band. He said, &quot;they&#x27;ve just whizzed on a Picasso.&quot; He asked the record company to tell Queen that the video was not his idea and that he apologised to them. The band, though, sent a reply simply saying, &quot;Thank you for using our song.&quot; This astonished Myers, who responded, &quot;Thank you for even letting me touch the hem of your garments!&quot;

The &quot;Wayne&#x27;s World&quot; video version of &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; won Queen its only MTV Video Music Award for &quot;Best Video from a Film&quot;. When remaining members Brian May and Roger Taylor took the stage to accept the award, Brian May was overcome with emotion and said that &quot;Freddie would be tickled.&quot; In the final scene of the video, a pose of the band from the video from the original &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; clip morphs into an identically posed 1985 photo, first featured in the &quot;One Vision&quot; video.

In the 2018 Queen biopic feature film &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot;, Myers makes a cameo as a fictional record executive who pans the song and refuses to release it as a single, proclaiming that it is too long for radio and that it is not a song that &quot;teenagers can crank up the volume in their car and bang their heads to&quot;, a reference to the aforementioned scene in &quot;Wayne&#x27;s World&quot;.

===Achievements and accolades===
The song has won numerous awards and has been covered and parodied by many artists. At the 19th Annual Grammy Awards in February 1977, &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; received two Grammy Award nominations for Best Pop Vocal Performance by a Duo, Group or Chorus and Best Arrangement for Voices. In October 1977, only two years after its release, the British Phonographic Industry named &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; as the best British single of the period 1952–77. It is a regular entry in greatest-songs polls, and it was named by the Guinness Book of Records in 2002 as the top British single of all time. The song is also listed in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame&#x27;s 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll.

In 2004, the song was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame. , &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; is the second most-played song on British radio, in clubs and on jukeboxes collectively, after Procol Harum&#x27;s &quot;A Whiter Shade of Pale&quot;. On 30 September 2007 for BBC Radio 1&#x27;s 40th birthday, it was revealed on &quot;The Radio 1 Chart Show&quot; that &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; had been the most played song since Radio 1&#x27;s launch.

In December 2018, &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; officially became the most-streamed song from the 20th century, surpassing Nirvana&#x27;s &quot;Smells Like Teen Spirit&quot; and Guns N&#x27; Roses&#x27; &quot;Sweet Child o&#x27; Mine&quot;. &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; also became the most-streamed classic rock song of all time. The number of downloads of the song and original video exceeded 1.6 billion downloads across global on-demand streaming services. The video surpassed one billion views on YouTube in July 2019, making it the oldest music video to reach one billion on the platform, and the first pre-1990s song to reach that figure.

In 2022, the single was selected by the U.S. Library of Congress for preservation in the National Recording Registry as being &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.&quot;

====Polls====
In a 2001 poll of more than 50,000 readers of &quot;The Observer&quot; newspaper and viewers of British TV&#x27;s Channel 4 for the 100 best number-one singles of all time, the song came second to John Lennon&#x27;s &quot;Imagine&quot;. In a 2002 poll of more than 31,000 people conducted for Guinness World Records&#x27; &quot;British Hit Singles&quot;, &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; was voted Britain&#x27;s favourite single, beating Lennon&#x27;s &quot;Imagine&quot; to the top spot. In 2002, it came in 10th in a BBC World Service poll to find the world&#x27;s favourite song.

In the Netherlands, &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; has been in the top five of the annual year&#x27;s end &quot;Top 100 Aller Tijden&quot; (&quot;All-Time Top 100 [Singles]&quot;) since 1977, topping the list eight times, more than any other artists. Since 1999, the Dutch &quot;Top 2000&quot; pop music poll supplanted the Top-100, to list and play the 2,000 all-time greatest songs annually in December, and the song has been ranked first in all but five years (2005, 2010, 2014, 2015 and 2020, when it was runner up).

In a 2012 readers poll conducted by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine, &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; was voted the best vocal performance in rock history. In 2010, the song ranked at 166 on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s &quot;500 Greatest Songs of All Time&quot; list, and was re-ranked at number 17 in 2021.

In 2012, the song topped an ITV poll in the UK to find &quot;The Nation&#x27;s Favourite Number One&quot; over 60 years of music, ahead of Michael Jackson&#x27;s &quot;Billie Jean&quot; (number two), Adele&#x27;s &quot;Someone like You&quot; (number three), Oasis&#x27; &quot;Don&#x27;t Look Back in Anger&quot; (number four) and The Beatles&#x27; &quot;Hey Jude&quot; (number five). The song was also ranked number five in RadioMafia&#x27;s list of &quot;Top 500 Songs&quot;.

===Cover versions===
Over two dozen artists have recorded or performed cover versions of &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot;, including charted single releases by:
* Bad News – a 1986 spoof version produced by Brian May which reached UK number 44
* The Braids – an R&amp;B version recorded for the soundtrack to the 1996 film &quot;High School High&quot; and which peaked at UK number 21, US number 42, and Canada number 13
* Panic! at the Disco – a version recorded for the soundtrack of the 2016 film &quot;Suicide Squad&quot; and which peaked at UK number 80, US number 64 and Canada number 47

A video cover featuring The Muppets also went viral and was subsequently released as a single in late 2009, peaking at number 32 in the UK.

&quot;Weird Al&quot; Yankovic&#x27;s 1993 album &quot;Alapalooza&quot; includes a version of the song entitled &quot;Bohemian Polka&quot;, which is a rearrangement of the entire song as a polka.

===40th anniversary===
To mark the 40th anniversary of &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot;, the song was released on a limited edition 12&quot; vinyl with the original B-side &quot;I&#x27;m In Love With My Car&quot; on 27 November 2015 for Record Store Day 2015. Queen also released &quot;A Night At The Odeon, Live At Hammersmith 75&quot;, on CD, DVD-Video and Blu-ray. This includes the first live &quot;professionally&quot; recorded performance of &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot;. However, the first recording and live performance of &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; was the performance on 14 November 1975 in Liverpool.

=== Auction ===
From 4 August to 5 September 2023, the Freddie Mercury: A World of His Own exhibition was held at Sotheby&#x27;s in New Bond Street, London where almost 1,500 items of Mercury&#x27;s went on display before being sold across six auctions. His Yamaha baby grand piano, which he used to compose &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot;, sold for £1.7 million, while his handwritten lyrics for the song went for £1.38 million. A silver snake bangle worn by Mercury in the &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; music video was sold for £698,500.

==Live performances==

The &quot;a cappella&quot; opening was too complex to perform live, so Mercury tried various ways of introducing the song. When &quot;Mustapha&quot; became a live favourite, Mercury would often sub in that song&#x27;s &quot;a cappella&quot; opening, which was easier to reproduce live as it was only one voice—this combination features in their 1979 live album &quot;Live Killers&quot;. During their 1982 Hot Space Tour, and occasionally at other times, Mercury would do a piano improvisation (generally the introduction to &quot;Death on Two Legs&quot;) that ended with the first notes of the song. Often, the preceding song would end, and Mercury would sit at the piano, say a quick word, and start playing the ballad section. At Live Aid where &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; was their opening song, Mercury commenced with the ballad section.
Initially following the song&#x27;s release, the operatic middle section proved a problem for the band. Because of extensive multi-tracking, it could not be performed on stage. The band did not have enough of a break between the Sheer Heart Attack and A Night at the Opera tours to find a way to make it work live, so they split the song into three sections that were played throughout the night. The opening and closing ballads were played as part of a medley, with &quot;Killer Queen&quot; and &quot;March of the Black Queen&quot; taking the place of the operatic and hard rock sections. In 1976 concerts where the same medley was played, the operatic section from the album would be played from tape as the introduction to the setlist. During this playback, Mercury would appear briefly to sing live for the line, &quot;I see a little sillhouetto of a man&quot;. As the song segued into the hard rock section, the band would emerge on the smoke-filled stage—the playback would end at this point, and the hard rock section would be performed live (without the final ballad section, which appeared later in the set).
Starting with the A Day at the Races Tour in 1977, the band adopted their lasting way of playing the song live. The opening ballad would be played on stage, and after May&#x27;s guitar solo, the lights would go down, the band would leave the stage, and the operatic section would be played from tape, while coloured stage lights provided a light show based around the voices of the opera section. Most playings of the opera section from the tape would often be accompanied by a portion of the song&#x27;s music video containing the footage used for the operatic portion of the song. Other playings would be played over montages of footage filmed from the band members&#x27; other experiences throughout their daily lives. A blast of pyrotechnics after Taylor&#x27;s high note on the final &quot;for me&quot; would announce the band&#x27;s return for the hard rock section and closing ballad. Queen played the song in this form all through the Magic Tour of 1986. This style was also used for the Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert, with Elton John singing the opening ballad and then after the taped operatic section, Axl Rose singing the hard rock section. John and Rose sang the closing ballad part together in a duet.

&quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; was performed by Queen + Paul Rodgers throughout their tours, accompanied by a video of Mercury. Footage from the &quot;Live at Wembley &#x27;86&quot; was used for the 2005–06 tour, and the 1981 Montreal performance used for the Rock the Cosmos Tour. As with the Queen tours, the band went backstage for the operatic section, which was accompanied by a video tribute to Freddie Mercury. When the hard rock section began, the lights came back up to the full band on stage, including Rodgers, who took over lead vocals. Rodgers duetted with the recording of Mercury for the &quot;outro&quot; section, allowing the audience to sing the final &quot;Nothing really matters to me&quot;, while the taped Mercury took a bow for the crowd. Rodgers would then repeat the line, and the final line (&quot;Any way the wind blows&quot;) was delivered with one last shot of Mercury smiling at the audience. Commenting upon this staging, Brian May says that they &quot;had to rise to the challenge of getting Freddie in there in a way which gave him his rightful place, but without demeaning Paul in any way. It also kept us live and &#x27;present&#x27;, although conscious and proud of our past, as we logically should be.&quot;

Since 2012, May and Taylor have toured with former &quot;American Idol&quot; contestant Adam Lambert under the name Queen + Adam Lambert (following two one-off performances together in 2009 and 2011), with &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot; regularly included at the end of their set.

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===



===Year-end charts===



===Decade-end charts===
===All-time charts===

==Certifications==







==Queen comments on the song==



==Personnel==
Source:
* Freddie Mercury – lead and backing vocals, piano, operatic vocals (middle register)
* Brian May – electric guitar, operatic vocals (low register)
* Roger Taylor – drums, timpani, gong, operatic vocals (high register)
* John Deacon – bass guitar

==See also==
* List of Bohemian Rhapsody cover versions
* List of best-selling singles in the United Kingdom
* List of highest-certified digital singles in the United States

== Citations ==
== General references ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q187745" start="6" end="23" title="Bohemian Rhapsody" label="Bohemian Rhapsody"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="55" end="59" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="65" end="70" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193477" start="138" end="158" title="A Night at the Opera (Queen album)" label="A Night at the Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q15869" start="196" end="211" title="Freddie Mercury" label="Freddie Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q203005" start="238" end="243" title="suite (music)" label="suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q191609" start="271" end="288" title="refrain" label="refraining chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3800792" start="328" end="333" title="Introduction (music)" label="intro"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="337" end="343" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="356" end="361" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="376" end="385" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q852466" start="408" end="412" title="Coda (music)" label="coda"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="435" end="451" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q556032" start="709" end="725" title="Roy Thomas Baker" label="Roy Thomas Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435691" start="832" end="838" title="ping-pong recording" label="bounce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760913" start="942" end="949" title="overdub" label="overdub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783211" start="1102" end="1113" title="Scaramouche" label="Scaramouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130969" start="1119" end="1127" title="fandango" label="fandango"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="1129" end="1144" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q632743" start="1146" end="1152" title="The Barber of Seville (play)" label="Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q202492" start="1158" end="1167" title="Beelzebub" label="Beelzebub"/>
<link wikidata="Q273639" start="1195" end="1204" title="Basmala" label="Bismillah"/>
<link wikidata="Q64167917" start="1417" end="1431" title="signature song" label="signature song"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="1437" end="1454" title="music video" label="promotional video"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="1642" end="1655" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q286102" start="1682" end="1712" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Songs of All Time" label="500 Greatest Songs of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="1877" end="1893" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q15869" start="1944" end="1964" title="Death of Freddie Mercury" label="Mercury&amp;#x27;s death"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996416" start="1995" end="2032" title="List of best-selling singles in the United Kingdom" label="third best-selling single of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146194" start="2331" end="2349" title="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World (film)" label="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="2397" end="2416" title="Grammy Hall of Fame" label="Grammy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q27894574" start="2465" end="2482" title="Bohemian Rhapsody (film)" label="Bohemian Rhapsody"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="2509" end="2515" title="streaming media" label="stream"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2562" end="2579" title="List of best-selling singles in the United States#Diamond certification" label="certified diamond"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2670" end="2700" title="List of best-selling singles#Best Selling Singles (based on Certified Sales)" label="best selling songs of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="2732" end="2759" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="2767" end="2786" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q841707" start="2958" end="2963" title="Smile (band)" label="Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q556032" start="3343" end="3359" title="Roy Thomas Baker" label="Roy Thomas Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15873" start="3666" end="3675" title="Brian May" label="Brian May"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935208" start="3989" end="4006" title="Ridge Farm Studio" label="Ridge Farm Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="4010" end="4016" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15880" start="4042" end="4054" title="Roger Taylor (Queen drummer)" label="Roger Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q925637" start="4199" end="4217" title="Rockfield Studios" label="Rockfield Studio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q156990" start="4223" end="4231" title="Monmouth" label="Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="4233" end="4244" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783970" start="4278" end="4291" title="Penrhos, Herefordshire" label="Penrhos Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708607" start="4298" end="4320" title="Kington, Herefordshire" label="Kington, Herefordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474627" start="4380" end="4390" title="Roundhouse Recording Studios" label="Roundhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256786" start="4392" end="4404" title="Sarm East Studios" label="Sarm Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q56277293" start="4406" end="4419" title="Scorpio Sound" label="Scorpio Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q757007" start="4425" end="4445" title="Wessex Sound Studios" label="Wessex Sound Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q697519" start="4587" end="4599" title="C. Bechstein" label="C. Bechstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="4794" end="4808" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="4828" end="4839" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q607742" start="4857" end="4865" title="Hey Jude" label="Hey Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q312053" start="4897" end="4909" title="Rick Wakeman" label="Rick Wakeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="4918" end="4929" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q755988" start="4954" end="4964" title="Hunky Dory" label="Hunky Dory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760913" start="5174" end="5182" title="Overdubbing" label="overdubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323480" start="5314" end="5328" title="Flanging" label="phasing effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q17106047" start="5510" end="5519" title="Stem mixing and mastering" label="sub-mixes"/>
<link wikidata="Q544858" start="5640" end="5647" title="Reel-to-reel audio tape recording" label="spliced"/>
<link wikidata="Q223181" start="5974" end="5982" title="Queen II" label="Queen II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883824" start="6630" end="6640" title="mix automation" label="automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q157205" start="7206" end="7229" title="British Midland International" label="British Midland Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="7409" end="7425" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="7461" end="7470" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q217467" start="7527" end="7535" title="art rock" label="art rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397882" start="7541" end="7556" title="progressive pop" label="progressive pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="7778" end="7786" title="nihilism" label="nihilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175747" start="7803" end="7818" title="Sheila Whiteley" label="Sheila Whiteley"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="7899" end="7912" title="individualism" label="individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="7926" end="7934" title="bohemianism" label="bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q464769" start="7973" end="7981" title="Rhapsody (music)" label="rhapsody"/>
<link wikidata="Q178122" start="8286" end="8290" title="aria" label="aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446979" start="8451" end="8462" title="guitar solo" label="guitar solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q795134" start="8582" end="8589" title="B-flat major" label="B major"/>
<link wikidata="Q934895" start="8591" end="8598" title="E-flat major" label="E major"/>
<link wikidata="Q277793" start="8600" end="8607" title="A major" label="A major"/>
<link wikidata="Q913790" start="8612" end="8619" title="F major" label="F major"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="8783" end="8786" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="8791" end="8795" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="8817" end="8833" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q192353" start="8956" end="8967" title="Jethro Tull (band)" label="Jethro Tull"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="8969" end="8972" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q151012" start="8974" end="8981" title="Genesis (band)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q273171" start="8983" end="9009" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q943241" start="9011" end="9023" title="Gentle Giant" label="Gentle Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q752170" start="9025" end="9048" title="Van der Graaf Generator" label="Van der Graaf Generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145899" start="9054" end="9064" title="Curved Air" label="Curved Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="9274" end="9289" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q193490" start="9735" end="9748" title="Queen (Queen album)" label="My Fairy King"/>
<link wikidata="Q223181" start="9772" end="9800" title="Queen II" label="The March of the Black Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="9887" end="9897" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q795134" start="9914" end="9921" title="B-flat major" label="B major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="9975" end="9997" title="multitrack recording" label="multi-track recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556133" start="10049" end="10060" title="Lip sync" label="lip-syncing"/>
<link wikidata="Q167903" start="10159" end="10168" title="landslide" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q934895" start="10550" end="10557" title="E-flat major" label="E major"/>
<link wikidata="Q14088448" start="10570" end="10585" title="Cadence" label="perfect cadence"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="10876" end="10882" title="Stereophonic sound" label="stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11221917" start="11058" end="11067" title="Diatonic and chromatic" label="chromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112940" start="11068" end="11081" title="Outside (jazz)" label="side-slipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q216745" start="11236" end="11240" title="vamp (music)" label="vamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q192103" start="11329" end="11340" title="John Deacon" label="John Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273079" start="12678" end="12687" title="bell tree" label="bell tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q277793" start="13444" end="13451" title="A major" label="A major"/>
<link wikidata="Q189737" start="13984" end="13991" title="timpani" label="timpani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856554" start="14453" end="14466" title="wall of sound" label="wall of sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q170439" start="14534" end="14545" title="bell effect" label="bell effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783211" start="14804" end="14815" title="Scaramouche" label="Scaramouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130969" start="14821" end="14829" title="fandango" label="fandango"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="14831" end="14846" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q632743" start="14848" end="14854" title="The Barber of Seville (play)" label="Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q202492" start="14860" end="14869" title="Beelzebub" label="Beelzebub"/>
<link wikidata="Q273639" start="14897" end="14906" title="Basmala" label="Bismillah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530448" start="15281" end="15297" title="Lesley-Ann Jones" label="Lesley-Ann Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674" start="15506" end="15511" title="devil" label="devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q795134" start="15548" end="15555" title="B-flat major" label="B major"/>
<link wikidata="Q193935" start="15604" end="15612" title="falsetto" label="falsetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362265" start="15622" end="15634" title="scientific pitch notation" label="fifth octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q460730" start="16065" end="16076" title="riff" label="guitar riff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300113" start="16108" end="16125" title="double tracking" label="quadruple-tracked"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="16616" end="16638" title="Andantino (music)" label="&amp;quot;ritardando&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q321814" start="16723" end="16733" title="Key of D Mixolydian mode (scale)" label="mixolydian"/>
<link wikidata="Q309994" start="16897" end="16904" title="C minor" label="C minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q309994" start="16989" end="16996" title="C minor" label="C minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q596345" start="17265" end="17274" title="Deacy Amp" label="Deacy Amp"/>
<link wikidata="Q208320" start="17776" end="17783" title="tam-tam" label="tam-tam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="17864" end="17882" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q107011665" start="18603" end="18612" title="BBC Three" label="BBC Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q34670" start="19085" end="19097" title="Albert Camus" label="Albert Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163297" start="19117" end="19129" title="The Stranger (Camus novel)" label="The Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="19341" end="19348" title="Farsi language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q332885" start="19532" end="19537" title="Faust" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959257" start="19744" end="19751" title="Shaitan" label="Shaitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="20273" end="20284" title="Mother Mary" label="Mother Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="20396" end="20406" title="coming out" label="coming out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656146" start="20450" end="20460" title="sodomy law" label="sodomy law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083686" start="20562" end="20571" title="death row" label="death row"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="20743" end="20747" title="disc jockey" label="D.J."/>
<link wikidata="Q927532" start="20786" end="20799" title="Kenny Everett" label="Kenny Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035608" start="20880" end="20893" title="Capital London" label="Capital Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750213" start="21954" end="21965" title="RKO General" label="RKO General"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="22163" end="22178" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290478" start="22207" end="22221" title="Sound on Sound" label="Sound on Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="22507" end="22513" title="B-side" label="B-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386649" start="22566" end="22575" title="Eric Hall" label="Eric Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234677" start="22610" end="22642" title="David Hamilton (broadcaster)" label="David &amp;quot;Diddy&amp;quot; Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601144" start="22771" end="22794" title="Christmas number-one singles in the UK" label="UK Christmas number one"/>
<link wikidata="Q847905" start="23115" end="23146" title="These Are the Days of Our Lives" label="These Are the Days of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q15869" start="23173" end="23193" title="Death of Freddie Mercury" label="Mercury&amp;#x27;s death"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="23459" end="23488" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="23519" end="23560" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772375" start="23623" end="23639" title="Anthony DeCurtis" label="Anthony DeCurtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="23649" end="23662" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q517591" start="24274" end="24293" title="The Show Must Go On (Queen song)" label="The Show Must Go On"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730728" start="24391" end="24415" title="Magic Johnson Foundation" label="Magic Johnson Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="24459" end="24488" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q27894574" start="24589" end="24626" title="Bohemian Rhapsody (film)" label="the Queen biopic named after the song"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24746" end="24763" title="List of best-selling singles in the United States#Diamond certification" label="certified Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="24959" end="24970" title="music video" label="video clips"/>
<link wikidata="Q597273" start="25060" end="25079" title="Keep Yourself Alive" label="Keep Yourself Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049271" start="25093" end="25097" title="Liar (Queen song)" label="Liar"/>
<link wikidata="Q840724" start="25111" end="25129" title="Seven Seas of Rhye" label="Seven Seas of Rhye"/>
<link wikidata="Q829960" start="25146" end="25158" title="Killer Queen" label="Killer Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="25335" end="25351" title="record industry" label="record companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="25423" end="25435" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="25626" end="25629" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="25643" end="25658" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046402" start="25862" end="25879" title="Pan&amp;#x27;s People" label="Pan&amp;#x27;s People"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="26117" end="26123" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933232" start="26131" end="26141" title="Caird Hall" label="Caird Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861009" start="26271" end="26278" title="MTV Generation" label="MTV age"/>
<link wikidata="Q907523" start="26320" end="26335" title="Trident Studios" label="Trident Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q22001022" start="26436" end="26451" title="Elstree Studios (Shenley Road)" label="Elstree Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q443806" start="26543" end="26555" title="Bruce Gowers" label="Bruce Gowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288732" start="26625" end="26640" title="Rainbow Theatre" label="Rainbow Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757008" start="26697" end="26715" title="assistant director" label="assistant director"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697002" start="26716" end="26729" title="floor manager" label="floor manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q339170" start="27292" end="27301" title="Mick Rock" label="Mick Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q223181" start="27355" end="27363" title="Queen II" label="Queen II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612" start="27418" end="27434" title="Marlene Dietrich" label="Marlene Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q208320" start="27818" end="27825" title="Gong" label="tam-tam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535788" start="27864" end="27881" title="The Rank Organisation" label="Rank Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581751" start="27889" end="27896" title="Gongman" label="Gongman"/>
<link wikidata="Q130632547" start="28238" end="28253" title="optical feedback" label="visual feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q716215" start="28276" end="28290" title="audio feedback" label="audio feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="28913" end="28916" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730732" start="29275" end="29286" title="Allan Jones (editor)" label="Allan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="29296" end="29308" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q804946" start="29504" end="29510" title="Balham" label="Balham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215463" start="29553" end="29576" title="The Pirates of Penzance" label="The Pirates of Penzance"/>
<link wikidata="Q26933" start="29714" end="29727" title="Pete Townshend" label="Pete Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="29776" end="29779" title="The Who" label="Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q844480" start="30038" end="30051" title="Record Mirror" label="Record Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344131" start="30386" end="30392" title="Sparks (band)" label="Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q457306" start="30397" end="30410" title="David Cassidy" label="David Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q265718" start="30617" end="30623" title="Sounds (magazine)" label="Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="30771" end="30779" title="Cash Box" label="Cash Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422110" start="30940" end="30952" title="Record World" label="Record World"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="31149" end="31163" title="the Beach Boys" label="the Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q313013" start="31177" end="31189" title="Brian Wilson" label="Brian Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347107" start="31372" end="31384" title="Steve Levine" label="Steve Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q842176" start="31499" end="31514" title="Good Vibrations" label="Good Vibrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q213793" start="31599" end="31611" title="Phil Spector" label="Phil Spector"/>
<link wikidata="Q812819" start="31625" end="31635" title="Be My Baby" label="Be My Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q169145" start="31654" end="31658" title="10cc" label="10cc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641864" start="31672" end="31692" title="I&amp;#x27;m Not in Love" label="I&amp;#x27;m Not in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q343075" start="31707" end="31716" title="Greg Lake" label="Greg Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840239" start="31735" end="31764" title="I Believe in Father Christmas" label="I Believe in Father Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="32144" end="32148" title="punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q751678" start="32956" end="32989" title="The Rolling Stone Album Guide" label="The New Rolling Stone Album Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151663" start="33070" end="33082" title="novelty song" label="novelty song"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="33120" end="33123" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="33143" end="33158" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028115" start="33180" end="33188" title="Greg Kot" label="Greg Kot"/>
<link wikidata="Q170384" start="33224" end="33232" title="operetta" label="operetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="33439" end="33451" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q29787036" start="33474" end="33485" title="Tom Service" label="Tom Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="33548" end="33563" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="33705" end="33717" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192023" start="33741" end="33759" title="Stairway to Heaven" label="Stairway to Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172206" start="33783" end="33793" title="Pete Prown" label="Pete Prown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635703" start="33798" end="33809" title="HP Newquist" label="HP Newquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="34004" end="34008" title="Folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="34376" end="34389" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q190243" start="34529" end="34544" title="John Paul Jones (musician)" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="34549" end="34560" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="34567" end="34581" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q180861" start="34628" end="34640" title="Roger Waters" label="Roger Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="34644" end="34654" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q26933" start="34659" end="34673" title="Pete Townshend" label="Pete Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="34677" end="34684" title="the Who" label="the Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146194" start="34982" end="35000" title="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World (film)" label="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q862715" start="35055" end="35063" title="headbanging" label="headbang"/>
<link wikidata="Q441578" start="35147" end="35164" title="Penelope Spheeris" label="Penelope Spheeris"/>
<link wikidata="Q185724" start="35309" end="35319" title="Mike Myers (actor)" label="Mike Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q105726" start="36235" end="36242" title="Urination" label="whizzed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="36248" end="36255" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="36671" end="36692" title="MTV Video Music Award" label="MTV Video Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161109" start="36703" end="36725" title="MTV Video Music Award for Best Video from a Film" label="Best Video from a Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136781" start="37027" end="37033" title="morphing" label="morphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q578149" start="37100" end="37110" title="One Vision" label="One Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q27894574" start="37169" end="37186" title="Bohemian Rhapsody (film)" label="Bohemian Rhapsody"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="37208" end="37213" title="Cameo appearance" label="cameo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525886" start="37660" end="37685" title="19th Annual Grammy Awards" label="19th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="37747" end="37759" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37776" end="37828" title="Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals#Recipients" label="Best Pop Vocal Performance by a Duo, Group or Chorus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37833" end="37860" title="Grammy Award for Best Vocal Arrangement for Two or More Voices#1970s" label="Best Arrangement for Voices"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="37917" end="37946" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="38207" end="38233" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="38319" end="38338" title="Grammy Hall of Fame" label="Grammy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q214486" start="38467" end="38479" title="Procol Harum" label="Procol Harum"/>
<link wikidata="Q300620" start="38493" end="38515" title="A Whiter Shade of Pale" label="A Whiter Shade of Pale"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="38548" end="38559" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754743" start="38607" end="38629" title="The Official Chart" label="The Radio 1 Chart Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q485907" start="38875" end="38898" title="Smells Like Teen Spirit" label="Smells Like Teen Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q835013" start="38940" end="38964" title="Sweet Child o&amp;#x27; Mine" label="Sweet Child o&amp;#x27; Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="39424" end="39443" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="39468" end="39495" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="39640" end="39652" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="39702" end="39711" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="39785" end="39796" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971" start="39810" end="39817" title="Imagine (John Lennon song)" label="Imagine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="39881" end="39903" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281823" start="39916" end="39935" title="British Hit Singles" label="British Hit Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="40105" end="40122" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204848" start="40448" end="40456" title="Top 2000" label="Top 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="40733" end="40746" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="41028" end="41031" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="41139" end="41154" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193319" start="41168" end="41179" title="Billie Jean" label="Billie Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23215" start="41200" end="41205" title="Adele" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q166904" start="41219" end="41235" title="Someone like You (Adele song)" label="Someone like You"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="41258" end="41263" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070349" start="41276" end="41305" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Back in Anger" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Look Back in Anger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="41330" end="41341" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q607742" start="41354" end="41362" title="Hey Jude" label="Hey Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q798748" start="41638" end="41646" title="Bad News (band)" label="Bad News"/>
<link wikidata="Q15873" start="41682" end="41691" title="Brian May" label="Brian May"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302821" start="41804" end="41820" title="High School High" label="High School High"/>
<link wikidata="Q277551" start="41898" end="41917" title="Panic! at the Disco" label="Panic! at the Disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18604504" start="41981" end="41994" title="Suicide Squad (2016 film)" label="Suicide Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953422" start="42094" end="42105" title="The Muppets" label="The Muppets"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349" start="42211" end="42240" title="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic" label="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398103" start="42265" end="42275" title="Alapalooza" label="Alapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42328" end="42342" title="List of &amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic polka medleys#Bohemian Polka" label="Bohemian Polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="42399" end="42404" title="polka" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="42745" end="42747" title="Compact disc" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063273" start="42749" end="42758" title="DVD-Video" label="DVD-Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="42763" end="42770" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q654762" start="43135" end="43149" title="Sotheby&amp;#x27;s" label="Sotheby&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q892187" start="43153" end="43168" title="New Bond Street" label="New Bond Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q188454" start="43279" end="43285" title="Yamaha Corporation" label="Yamaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q958870" start="43717" end="43725" title="Mustapha (song)" label="Mustapha"/>
<link wikidata="Q724694" start="43950" end="43962" title="Live Killers" label="Live Killers"/>
<link wikidata="Q925012" start="43988" end="44002" title="Hot Space Tour" label="Hot Space Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q193740" start="44315" end="44323" title="Live Aid" label="Live Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q718430" start="44656" end="44674" title="Sheer Heart Attack Tour" label="Sheer Heart Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q718430" start="44679" end="44699" title="A Night at the Opera Tour" label="A Night at the Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q829960" start="44900" end="44912" title="Killer Queen" label="Killer Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q436487" start="45563" end="45586" title="A Day at the Races Tour" label="A Day at the Races Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q474100" start="46278" end="46290" title="pyrotechnics" label="pyrotechnics"/>
<link wikidata="Q20616479" start="46537" end="46572" title="the Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert" label="the Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="46579" end="46589" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q11885" start="46660" end="46668" title="Axl Rose" label="Axl Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q846308" start="46811" end="46831" title="Queen + Paul Rodgers" label="Queen + Paul Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q731305" start="46914" end="46938" title="Live at Wembley &amp;#x27;86" label="Live at Wembley &amp;#x27;86"/>
<link wikidata="Q930700" start="46962" end="46974" title="Queen + Paul Rodgers Tour" label="2005–06 tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q755312" start="46984" end="47009" title="Queen Rock Montreal" label="1981 Montreal performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q898802" start="47023" end="47043" title="Rock the Cosmos Tour" label="Rock the Cosmos Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="48066" end="48079" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q190231" start="48097" end="48109" title="Adam Lambert" label="Adam Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q16522487" start="48125" end="48145" title="Queen + Adam Lambert" label="Queen + Adam Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q15869" start="48481" end="48496" title="Freddie Mercury" label="Freddie Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48531" end="48546" title="Opera#Operatic voices" label="operatic vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q15873" start="48567" end="48576" title="Brian May" label="Brian May"/>
<link wikidata="Q15880" start="48629" end="48641" title="Roger Taylor (Queen drummer)" label="Roger Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189737" start="48651" end="48658" title="timpani" label="timpani"/>
<link wikidata="Q208320" start="48660" end="48664" title="gong" label="gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q192103" start="48700" end="48711" title="John Deacon" label="John Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564217" start="48742" end="48782" title="List of Bohemian Rhapsody cover versions" label="List of Bohemian Rhapsody cover versions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996416" start="48785" end="48835" title="List of best-selling singles in the United Kingdom" label="List of best-selling singles in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q131543514" start="48838" end="48900" title="List of highest-certified digital singles in the United States" label="List of highest-certified digital singles in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41957" wikidata="Q179043" url="?curid=41957" title="Electrical impedance">
<text>In electrical engineering, impedance is the opposition to alternating current presented by the combined effect of resistance and reactance in a circuit.

Quantitatively, the impedance of a two-terminal circuit element is the ratio of the complex representation of the sinusoidal voltage between its terminals, to the complex representation of the current flowing through it. In general, it depends upon the frequency of the sinusoidal voltage. 

Impedance extends the concept of resistance to alternating current (AC) circuits, and possesses both magnitude and phase, unlike resistance, which has only magnitude. 
Impedance can be represented as a complex number, with the same units as resistance, for which the SI unit is the ohm ().
Its symbol is usually , and it may be represented by writing its magnitude and phase in the polar form . However, Cartesian complex number representation is often more powerful for circuit analysis purposes.

The notion of impedance is useful for performing AC analysis of electrical networks, because it allows relating sinusoidal voltages and currents by a simple linear law. 
In multiple port networks, the two-terminal definition of impedance is inadequate, but the complex voltages at the ports and the currents flowing through them are still linearly related by the impedance matrix. 

The reciprocal of impedance is admittance, whose SI unit is the siemens, formerly called mho.

Instruments used to measure the electrical impedance are called impedance analyzers.

==History==
Perhaps the earliest use of complex numbers in circuit analysis was by Johann Victor Wietlisbach in 1879 in analysing the Maxwell bridge. Wietlisbach avoided using differential equations by expressing AC currents and voltages as exponential functions with imaginary exponents (see ). Wietlisbach found the required voltage was given by multiplying the current by a complex number (impedance), although he did not identify this as a general parameter in its own right.

The term &quot;impedance&quot; was coined by Oliver Heaviside in July 1886. Heaviside recognised that the &quot;resistance operator&quot; (impedance) in his operational calculus was a complex number. In 1887 he showed that there was an AC equivalent to Ohm&#x27;s law.

Arthur Kennelly published an influential paper on impedance in 1893. Kennelly arrived at a complex number representation in a rather more direct way than using imaginary exponential functions. Kennelly followed the graphical representation of impedance (showing resistance, reactance, and impedance as the lengths of the sides of a right angle triangle) developed by John Ambrose Fleming in 1889. Impedances could thus be added vectorially. Kennelly realised that this graphical representation of impedance was directly analogous to graphical representation of complex numbers (Argand diagram). Problems in impedance calculation could thus be approached algebraically with a complex number representation. Later that same year, Kennelly&#x27;s work was generalised to all AC circuits by Charles Proteus Steinmetz. Steinmetz not only represented impedances by complex numbers but also voltages and currents. Unlike Kennelly, Steinmetz was thus able to express AC equivalents of DC laws such as Ohm&#x27;s and Kirchhoff&#x27;s laws. Steinmetz&#x27;s work was highly influential in spreading the technique amongst engineers.

==Introduction==
In addition to resistance as seen in DC circuits, impedance in AC circuits includes the effects of the induction of voltages in conductors by the magnetic fields (inductance), and the electrostatic storage of charge induced by voltages between conductors (capacitance). The impedance caused by these two effects is collectively referred to as reactance and forms the imaginary part of complex impedance whereas resistance forms the real part.

== Complex impedance ==

The impedance of a two-terminal circuit element is represented as a complex quantity formula_1. The polar form conveniently captures both magnitude and phase characteristics as

:formula_2

where the magnitude formula_3 represents the ratio of the voltage difference amplitude to the current amplitude, while the argument formula_4 (commonly given the symbol formula_5) gives the phase difference between voltage and current. formula_6 is the imaginary unit, and is used instead of formula_7 in this context to avoid confusion with the symbol for electric current.

In Cartesian form, impedance is defined as

:formula_8

where the real part of impedance is the resistance and the imaginary part is the reactance .

Where it is needed to add or subtract impedances, the cartesian form is more convenient; but when quantities are multiplied or divided, the calculation becomes simpler if the polar form is used. A circuit calculation, such as finding the total impedance of two impedances in parallel, may require conversion between forms several times during the calculation. Conversion between the forms follows the normal conversion rules of complex numbers.

== Complex voltage and current ==

To simplify calculations, sinusoidal voltage and current waves are commonly represented as complex-valued functions of time denoted as formula_9 and formula_10.

:formula_11

The impedance of a bipolar circuit is defined as the ratio of these quantities:

:formula_12

Hence, denoting formula_13, we have

:formula_14

The magnitude equation is the familiar Ohm&#x27;s law applied to the voltage and current amplitudes, while the second equation defines the phase relationship.

=== Validity of complex representation ===
This representation using complex exponentials may be justified by noting that (by Euler&#x27;s formula):

:formula_15

The real-valued sinusoidal function representing either voltage or current may be broken into two complex-valued functions. By the principle of superposition, we may analyse the behaviour of the sinusoid on the left-hand side by analysing the behaviour of the two complex terms on the right-hand side. Given the symmetry, we only need to perform the analysis for one right-hand term. The results are identical for the other. At the end of any calculation, we may return to real-valued sinusoids by further noting that

:formula_16

=== Ohm&#x27;s law ===

The meaning of electrical impedance can be understood by substituting it into Ohm&#x27;s law. Assuming a two-terminal circuit element with impedance formula_1 is driven by a sinusoidal voltage or current as above, there holds 

:formula_18

The magnitude of the impedance formula_3 acts just like resistance, giving the drop in voltage amplitude across an impedance formula_1 for a given current formula_10. The phase factor tells us that the current lags the voltage by a phase formula_22 (i.e., in the time domain, the current signal is shifted formula_23 later with respect to the voltage signal).

Just as impedance extends Ohm&#x27;s law to cover AC circuits, other results from DC circuit analysis, such as voltage division, current division, Thévenin&#x27;s theorem and Norton&#x27;s theorem, can also be extended to AC circuits by replacing resistance with impedance.

=== Phasors ===

A phasor is represented by a constant complex number, usually expressed in exponential form, representing the complex amplitude (magnitude and phase) of a sinusoidal function of time. Phasors are used by electrical engineers to simplify computations involving sinusoids (such as in AC circuits), where they can often reduce a differential equation problem to an algebraic one.

The impedance of a circuit element can be defined as the ratio of the phasor voltage across the element to the phasor current through the element, as determined by the relative amplitudes and phases of the voltage and current. This is identical to the definition from Ohm&#x27;s law given above, recognising that the factors of formula_24 cancel.

== Device examples ==

===Resistor===
The impedance of an ideal resistor is purely real and is called &quot;resistive impedance&quot;:

:formula_25

In this case, the voltage and current waveforms are proportional and in phase.

===Inductor and capacitor===
Ideal inductors and capacitors have a purely imaginary &quot;reactive impedance&quot;:

the impedance of inductors increases as frequency increases;

:formula_26

the impedance of capacitors decreases as frequency increases;

:formula_27

In both cases, for an applied sinusoidal voltage, the resulting current is also sinusoidal, but in quadrature, 90 degrees out of phase with the voltage. However, the phases have opposite signs: in an inductor, the current is &quot;lagging&quot;; in a capacitor the current is &quot;leading&quot;.

Note the following identities for the imaginary unit and its reciprocal:

:formula_28

Thus the inductor and capacitor impedance equations can be rewritten in polar form:

:formula_29

The magnitude gives the change in voltage amplitude for a given current amplitude through the impedance, while the exponential factors give the phase relationship.

=== Deriving the device-specific impedances ===
What follows below is a derivation of impedance for each of the three basic circuit elements: the resistor, the capacitor, and the inductor. Although the idea can be extended to define the relationship between the voltage and current of any arbitrary signal, these derivations assume sinusoidal signals. In fact, this applies to any arbitrary periodic signals, because these can be approximated as a sum of sinusoids through Fourier analysis.

====Resistor====
For a resistor, there is the relation
:formula_30

which is Ohm&#x27;s law.

Considering the voltage signal to be
:formula_31

it follows that
:formula_32

This says that the ratio of AC voltage amplitude to alternating current (AC) amplitude across a resistor is formula_33, and that the AC voltage leads the current across a resistor by 0 degrees.

This result is commonly expressed as
:formula_34

====Capacitor====
For a capacitor, there is the relation:
:formula_35

Considering the voltage signal to be
:formula_36

it follows that
:formula_37

and thus, as previously,
:formula_38

Conversely, if the current through the circuit is assumed to be sinusoidal, its complex representation being 
:formula_39
then integrating the differential equation 
:formula_35
leads to 
:formula_41
The &quot;Const&quot; term represents a fixed potential bias superimposed to the AC sinusoidal potential, that plays no role in AC analysis. For this purpose, this term can be assumed to be 0, hence again the impedance 
:formula_42

====Inductor====
For the inductor, we have the relation (from Faraday&#x27;s law):
:formula_43

This time, considering the current signal to be:
:formula_44

it follows that:
:formula_45

This result is commonly expressed in polar form as
:formula_46

or, using Euler&#x27;s formula, as
:formula_47

As in the case of capacitors, it is also possible to derive this formula directly from the complex representations of the voltages and currents, or by assuming a sinusoidal voltage between the two poles of the inductor. In the latter case, integrating the differential equation above leads to a constant term for the current, that represents a fixed DC bias flowing through the inductor. This is set to zero because AC analysis using frequency domain impedance considers one frequency at a time and DC represents a separate frequency of zero hertz in this context.

==Generalised s-plane impedance==
Impedance defined in terms of &quot;jω&quot; can strictly be applied only to circuits that are driven with a steady-state AC signal. The concept of impedance can be extended to a circuit energised with any arbitrary signal by using complex frequency instead of &quot;jω&quot;. Complex frequency is given the symbol formula_48 and is, in general, a complex number. Signals are expressed in terms of complex frequency by taking the Laplace transform of the time domain expression of the signal. The impedance of the basic circuit elements in this more general notation is as follows:

For a DC circuit, this simplifies to formula_49. For a steady-state sinusoidal AC signal formula_50.

=== Formal derivation ===
The impedance formula_1 of an electrical component is defined as the ratio between the Laplace transforms of the voltage over it and the current through it, i.e.

:formula_52

where formula_53 is the complex Laplace parameter. As an example, according to the I-V-law of a capacitor, formula_54, from which it follows that formula_55.

In the phasor regime (steady-state AC, meaning all signals are represented mathematically as simple complex exponentials formula_56 and formula_57 oscillating at a common frequency formula_58), impedance can simply be calculated as the voltage-to-current ratio, in which the common time-dependent factor cancels out:

:formula_59

Again, for a capacitor, one gets that formula_60, and hence formula_61. The phasor domain is sometimes dubbed the frequency domain, although it lacks one of the dimensions of the Laplace parameter. For steady-state AC, the polar form of the complex impedance relates the amplitude and phase of the voltage and current. In particular:
* The magnitude of the complex impedance is the ratio of the voltage amplitude to the current amplitude;
* The phase of the complex impedance is the phase shift by which the current lags the voltage.
These two relationships hold even after taking the real part of the complex exponentials (see phasors), which is the part of the signal one actually measures in real-life circuits.

== Resistance vs reactance ==

Resistance and reactance together determine the magnitude and phase of the impedance through the following relations:

:formula_62

In many applications, the relative phase of the voltage and current is not critical so only the magnitude of the impedance is significant.

=== Resistance ===

Resistance formula_33 is the real part of impedance; a device with a purely resistive impedance exhibits no phase shift between the voltage and current.

:formula_64

=== Reactance ===
Reactance formula_65 is the imaginary part of the impedance; a component with a finite reactance induces a phase shift formula_66 between the voltage across it and the current through it.

:formula_67

A purely reactive component is distinguished by the sinusoidal voltage across the component being in quadrature with the sinusoidal current through the component. This implies that the component alternately absorbs energy from the circuit and then returns energy to the circuit. A pure reactance does not dissipate any power.

==== Capacitive reactance ====

A capacitor has a purely reactive impedance that is inversely proportional to the signal frequency. A capacitor consists of two conductors separated by an insulator, also known as a dielectric.

:formula_68

The minus sign indicates that the imaginary part of the impedance is negative.

At low frequencies, a capacitor approaches an open circuit so no current flows through it.

A DC voltage applied across a capacitor causes charge to accumulate on one side; the electric field due to the accumulated charge is the source of the opposition to the current. When the potential associated with the charge exactly balances the applied voltage, the current goes to zero.

Driven by an AC supply, a capacitor accumulates only a limited charge before the potential difference changes sign and the charge dissipates. The higher the frequency, the less charge accumulates and the smaller the opposition to the current.

==== Inductive reactance ====
Inductive reactance formula_69 is proportional to the signal frequency formula_70 and the inductance formula_71.

:formula_72

An inductor consists of a coiled conductor. Faraday&#x27;s law of electromagnetic induction gives the back emf formula_73 (voltage opposing current) due to a rate-of-change of magnetic flux density formula_74 through a current loop.

:formula_75

Or explicitly in real and imaginary terms:
:formula_76

=== Parallel combination ===

For components connected in parallel, the voltage across each circuit element is the same; the ratio of currents through any two elements is the inverse ratio of their impedances.

Hence the inverse total impedance is the sum of the inverses of the component impedances:
:formula_77

or, when n = 2:
:formula_78
:formula_79

The equivalent impedance formula_80 can be calculated in terms of the equivalent series resistance formula_81 and reactance formula_82.

:formula_83

== Measurement ==
The measurement of the impedance of devices and transmission lines is a practical problem in radio technology and other fields. Measurements of impedance may be carried out at one frequency, or the variation of device impedance over a range of frequencies may be of interest. The impedance may be measured or displayed directly in ohms, or other values related to impedance may be displayed; for example, in a radio antenna, the standing wave ratio or reflection coefficient may be more useful than the impedance alone. The measurement of impedance requires the measurement of the magnitude of voltage and current, and the phase difference between them. Impedance is often measured by &quot;bridge&quot; methods, similar to the direct-current Wheatstone bridge; a calibrated reference impedance is adjusted to balance off the effect of the impedance of the device under test. Impedance measurement in power electronic devices may require simultaneous measurement and provision of power to the operating device.

The impedance of a device can be calculated by complex division of the voltage and current. The impedance of the device can be calculated by applying a sinusoidal voltage to the device in series with a resistor, and measuring the voltage across the resistor and across the device. Performing this measurement by sweeping the frequencies of the applied signal provides the impedance phase and magnitude.

The use of an impulse response may be used in combination with the fast Fourier transform (FFT) to rapidly measure the electrical impedance of various electrical devices.

The LCR meter (Inductance (L), Capacitance (C), and Resistance (R)) is a device commonly used to measure the inductance, resistance and capacitance of a component; from these values, the impedance at any frequency can be calculated.

===Example===
Consider an LC tank circuit. 
The complex impedance of the circuit is
:formula_84
It is immediately seen that the value of formula_85 is minimal (actually equal to 0 in this case) whenever 
:formula_86
Therefore, the fundamental resonance angular frequency is 
:formula_87

== Variable impedance ==
In general, neither impedance nor admittance can vary with time, since they are defined for complex exponentials in which . If the complex exponential voltage to current ratio changes over time or amplitude, the circuit element cannot be described using the frequency domain. However, many components and systems (e.g., varicaps that are used in radio tuners) may exhibit non-linear or time-varying voltage to current ratios that seem to be linear time-invariant (LTI) for small signals and over small observation windows, so they can be roughly described as if they had a time-varying impedance. This description is an approximation: Over large signal swings or wide observation windows, the voltage to current relationship will not be LTI and cannot be described by impedance.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*Transmission line impedance 

== Notes ==
== References ==

*Kline, Ronald R., &quot;Steinmetz: Engineer and Socialist&quot;, Plunkett Lake Press, 2019 (ebook reprint of Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992 ).

== External links ==
*ECE 209: Review of Circuits as LTI Systems – Brief explanation of Laplace-domain circuit analysis; includes a definition of impedance.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="3" end="25" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q179043" start="27" end="36" title="Electrical impedance" label="impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="58" end="77" title="alternating current" label="alternating current"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="114" end="124" title="Electrical_resistance" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q193972" start="129" end="138" title="Electrical_reactance" label="reactance"/>
<link wikidata="Q132629" start="144" end="151" title="electrical circuit" label="circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q210729" start="202" end="217" title="Electrical element" label="circuit element"/>
<link wikidata="Q827674" start="238" end="245" title="phasor" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="268" end="278" title="Sine wave" label="sinusoidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="407" end="416" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="479" end="489" title="Electrical resistance" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="561" end="566" title="Phase (waves)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="648" end="662" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="713" end="720" title="SI unit" label="SI unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q47083" start="728" end="731" title="ohm" label="ohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q62494" start="828" end="833" title="Polar coordinate system" label="polar"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="850" end="889" title="Complex plane" label="Cartesian complex number representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132629" start="1009" end="1028" title="Electrical network" label="electrical networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443617" start="1127" end="1131" title="Port (circuit theory)" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776755" start="1284" end="1300" title="Linear relation" label="linearly related"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424600" start="1308" end="1324" title="Impedance parameters" label="impedance matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q216906" start="1332" end="1342" title="Multiplicative inverse" label="reciprocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q214518" start="1359" end="1369" title="admittance" label="admittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="1377" end="1379" title="SI" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q169893" start="1392" end="1399" title="siemens (unit)" label="siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q169893" start="1417" end="1420" title="mho" label="mho"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793894" start="1487" end="1505" title="impedance analyzer" label="impedance analyzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538586" start="1643" end="1657" title="Maxwell bridge" label="Maxwell bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q168698" start="1750" end="1770" title="exponential function" label="exponential function"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165172" start="1777" end="1786" title="imaginary number" label="imaginary"/>
<link wikidata="Q154345" start="2035" end="2051" title="Oliver Heaviside" label="Oliver Heaviside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162633" start="2147" end="2167" title="operational calculus" label="operational calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41591" start="2243" end="2257" title="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law" label="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q608945" start="2260" end="2275" title="Arthur Kennelly" label="Arthur Kennelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q128823" start="2627" end="2647" title="John Ambrose Fleming" label="John Ambrose Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q13471665" start="2688" end="2699" title="Vector (mathematics and physics)" label="vectorially"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="2838" end="2852" title="Argand diagram" label="Argand diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q60677" start="3047" end="3072" title="Charles Proteus Steinmetz" label="Charles Proteus Steinmetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="3546" end="3560" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q177897" start="3563" end="3573" title="inductance" label="inductance"/>
<link wikidata="Q164399" start="3656" end="3667" title="capacitance" label="capacitance"/>
<link wikidata="Q193972" start="3743" end="3752" title="electrical reactance" label="reactance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165172" start="3767" end="3776" title="imaginary number" label="imaginary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="3832" end="3836" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="3937" end="3944" title="Complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q62494" start="3969" end="3979" title="Polar coordinates" label="polar form"/>
<link wikidata="Q193796" start="4312" end="4326" title="imaginary unit" label="imaginary unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25272" start="4416" end="4432" title="Ampere" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="4438" end="4452" title="Cartesian plane" label="Cartesian form"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="4501" end="4510" title="real part" label="real part"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="4550" end="4564" title="imaginary part" label="imaginary part"/>
<link wikidata="Q193972" start="4572" end="4581" title="Reactance (electronics)" label="reactance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="4993" end="5028" title="Polar form" label="conversion rules of complex numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="5092" end="5100" title="Sine wave" label="sinusoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184871" start="5671" end="5691" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s formula" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q284885" start="5852" end="5865" title="superposition principle" label="superposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q14472924" start="6676" end="6688" title="phase factor" label="phase factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q185889" start="6768" end="6779" title="time domain" label="time domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q466758" start="6977" end="6993" title="voltage divider" label="voltage division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4157078" start="6995" end="7011" title="current divider" label="current division"/>
<link wikidata="Q241868" start="7013" end="7036" title="Thévenin&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Thévenin&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q651593" start="7041" end="7062" title="Norton&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Norton&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7804" end="7818" title="Electrical impedance#Ohm&amp;#x27;s law" label="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321" start="7948" end="7956" title="resistor" label="resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325" start="8148" end="8156" title="inductor" label="inductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="8162" end="8171" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165172" start="8187" end="8196" title="imaginary number" label="imaginary"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="8480" end="8490" title="quadrature phase" label="quadrature"/>
<link wikidata="Q132629" start="9153" end="9160" title="Electrical network" label="circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="9328" end="9334" title="Signal (electrical engineering)" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="9361" end="9371" title="sinusoidal" label="sinusoidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365258" start="9502" end="9518" title="Fourier analysis" label="Fourier analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41591" start="9598" end="9612" title="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law" label="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="9746" end="9765" title="alternating current" label="alternating current"/>
<link wikidata="Q181465" start="10622" end="10640" title="Faraday&amp;#x27;s law of induction" label="Faraday&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q199691" start="11692" end="11709" title="complex frequency" label="complex frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q199691" start="11890" end="11907" title="Laplace transform" label="Laplace transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q185889" start="11915" end="11926" title="time domain" label="time domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q199691" start="12258" end="12275" title="Laplace transform" label="Laplace transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q827674" start="12513" end="12519" title="phasor" label="phasor"/>
<link wikidata="Q168698" start="12606" end="12625" title="complex exponential" label="complex exponential"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13060" end="13070" title="Complex number#Notation of the polar form" label="polar form"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="13320" end="13331" title="phase shift" label="phase shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q827674" start="13465" end="13471" title="phasor" label="phasor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14674" end="14696" title="Inversely proportional#Inverse proportionality" label="inversely proportional"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="14711" end="14720" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="14750" end="14759" title="Electrical conduction" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="14777" end="14786" title="Electrical insulation" label="insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q184996" start="14804" end="14814" title="dielectric" label="dielectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="15049" end="15055" title="Electrical charge" label="charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="15087" end="15101" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202245" start="15189" end="15198" title="potential" label="potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q51379" start="15599" end="15611" title="Proportionality (mathematics)" label="proportional"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="15626" end="15635" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q177897" start="15655" end="15665" title="inductance" label="inductance"/>
<link wikidata="Q181465" start="15736" end="15754" title="Faraday&amp;#x27;s law of induction" label="Faraday&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q185329" start="15799" end="15802" title="Electromotive force" label="emf"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="15868" end="15889" title="magnetic flux density" label="magnetic flux density"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="16611" end="16616" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="16928" end="16941" title="radio antenna" label="radio antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q188364" start="16947" end="16966" title="standing wave ratio" label="standing wave ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852282" start="16970" end="16992" title="reflection coefficient" label="reflection coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q996520" start="17203" end="17229" title="Bridge circuit" label="&amp;quot;bridge&amp;quot; methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q245133" start="17261" end="17278" title="Wheatstone bridge" label="Wheatstone bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q623950" start="18001" end="18023" title="fast Fourier transform" label="fast Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198687" start="18110" end="18119" title="LCR meter" label="LCR meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q732473" start="18369" end="18373" title="LC circuit" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q467463" start="18973" end="18980" title="varicap" label="varicap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544018" start="18999" end="19011" title="Tuner (radio)" label="radio tuners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808960" start="19094" end="19121" title="LTI system theory" label="linear time-invariant (LTI)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19467" end="19494" title="Reflections of signals on conducting lines#trasm line imp equn" label="Transmission line impedance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41958" wikidata="Q504027" url="?curid=41958" title="Lidar">
<text>Lidar (, also LIDAR, an acronym of &quot;light detection and ranging&quot; or &quot;laser imaging, detection, and ranging&quot;) is a method for determining ranges by targeting an object or a surface with a laser and measuring the time for the reflected light to return to the receiver. Lidar may operate in a fixed direction (e.g., vertical) or it may scan multiple directions, in a special combination of 3-D scanning and laser scanning.

Lidar has terrestrial, airborne, and mobile applications. It is commonly used to make high-resolution maps, with applications in surveying, geodesy, geomatics, archaeology, geography, geology, geomorphology, seismology, forestry, atmospheric physics, laser guidance, airborne laser swathe mapping (ALSM), and laser altimetry. It is used to make digital 3-D representations of areas on the Earth&#x27;s surface and ocean bottom of the intertidal and near coastal zone by varying the wavelength of light. It has also been increasingly used in control and navigation for autonomous cars and for the helicopter &quot;Ingenuity&quot; on its record-setting flights over the terrain of Mars. Lidar has since been used extensively for atmospheric research and meteorology. Lidar instruments fitted to aircraft and satellites carry out surveying and mapping a recent example being the U.S. Geological Survey Experimental Advanced Airborne Research Lidar. NASA has identified lidar as a key technology for enabling autonomous precision safe landing of future robotic and crewed lunar-landing vehicles.

The evolution of quantum technology has given rise to the emergence of Quantum Lidar, demonstrating higher efficiency and sensitivity when compared to conventional lidar systems.

== History and etymology ==

The essential concept of lidar was originated by E. H. Synge in 1930, who envisaged the use of powerful searchlights to probe the atmosphere.

Under the direction of Malcolm Stitch, the Hughes Aircraft Company introduced the first lidar-like system in 1961, shortly after the invention of the laser. Intended for satellite tracking, this system combined laser-focused imaging with the ability to calculate distances by measuring the time for a signal to return using appropriate sensors and data acquisition electronics. It was originally called &quot;Colidar&quot; an acronym for &quot;coherent light detecting and ranging&quot;, derived from the term &quot;radar&quot;, itself an acronym for &quot;radio detection and ranging&quot;. All laser rangefinders, laser altimeters and lidar units are derived from the early colidar systems.

The first practical terrestrial application of a colidar system was the &quot;Colidar Mark II&quot;, a large rifle-like laser rangefinder produced in 1963, which had a range of 11 km and an accuracy of 4.5 m, to be used for military targeting. The first mention of lidar as a stand-alone word in 1963 suggests that it originated as a portmanteau of &quot;light&quot; and &quot;radar&quot;: &quot;Eventually the laser may provide an extremely sensitive detector of particular wavelengths from distant objects. Meanwhile, it is being used to study the Moon by &#x27;lidar&#x27; (light radar) ...&quot;
The name &quot;photonic radar&quot; is sometimes used to mean visible-spectrum range finding like lidar.

Lidar&#x27;s first applications were in meteorology, for which the National Center for Atmospheric Research used it to measure clouds and pollution. The general public became aware of the accuracy and usefulness of lidar systems in 1971 during the Apollo 15 mission, when astronauts used a laser altimeter to map the surface of the Moon.
Although the English language no longer treats &quot;radar&quot; as an acronym, (i.e., uncapitalized), the word &quot;lidar&quot; was capitalized as &quot;LIDAR&quot; or &quot;LiDAR&quot; in some publications beginning in the 1980s. No consensus exists on capitalization. Various publications refer to lidar as &quot;LIDAR&quot;, &quot;LiDAR&quot;, &quot;LIDaR&quot;, or &quot;Lidar&quot;. The USGS uses both &quot;LIDAR&quot; and &quot;lidar&quot;, sometimes in the same document; the &quot;New York Times&quot; predominantly uses &quot;lidar&quot; for staff-written articles, although contributing news feeds such as Reuters may use Lidar.

== Theory ==
Lidar uses ultraviolet, visible, or near infrared light to image objects. It can target a wide range of materials, including non-metallic objects, rocks, rain, chemical compounds, aerosols, clouds and even single molecules. A narrow laser beam can map physical features with very high resolutions; for example, an aircraft can map terrain at resolution or better.

Wavelengths vary to suit the target: from about 10 micrometers (infrared) to approximately 250 nanometers (ultraviolet). Typically, light is reflected via backscattering, as opposed to pure reflection one might find with a mirror. Different types of scattering are used for different lidar applications: most commonly Rayleigh scattering, Mie scattering, Raman scattering, and fluorescence. Suitable combinations of wavelengths can allow remote mapping of atmospheric contents by identifying wavelength-dependent changes in the intensity of the returned signal.
The name &quot;photonic radar&quot; is sometimes used to mean visible-spectrum range finding like lidar, although photonic radar more strictly refers to radio-frequency range finding using photonics components.

A lidar determines the distance of an object or a surface with the formula:

:formula_1

where &quot;c&quot; is the speed of light, &quot;d&quot; is the distance between the detector and the object or surface being detected, and &quot;t&quot; is the time spent for the laser light to travel to the object or surface being detected, then travel back to the detector.

The two kinds of lidar detection schemes are &quot;incoherent&quot; or direct energy detection (which principally measures amplitude changes of the reflected light) and coherent detection (best for measuring Doppler shifts, or changes in the phase of the reflected light). Coherent systems generally use optical heterodyne detection. This is more sensitive than direct detection and allows them to operate at much lower power, but requires more complex transceivers.

Both types employ pulse models: either &quot;micropulse&quot; or &quot;high energy&quot;. Micropulse systems utilize intermittent bursts of energy. They developed as a result of ever-increasing computer power, combined with advances in laser technology. They use considerably less energy in the laser, typically on the order of one microjoule, and are often &quot;eye-safe&quot;, meaning they can be used without safety precautions. High-power systems are common in atmospheric research, where they are widely used for measuring atmospheric parameters: the height, layering and densities of clouds, cloud particle properties (extinction coefficient, backscatter coefficient, depolarization), temperature, pressure, wind, humidity, and trace gas concentration (ozone, methane, nitrous oxide, etc.).

== Components ==

=== Laser ===

600–1,000 nm lasers are most common for non-scientific applications. The maximum power of the laser is limited, or an automatic shut-off system which turns the laser off at specific altitudes is used in order to make it eye-safe for the people on the ground.

One common alternative, 1,550 nm lasers, are eye-safe at relatively high power levels since this wavelength is not strongly absorbed by the eye. A trade-off though is that current detector technology is less advanced, so these wavelengths are generally used at longer ranges with lower accuracies. They are also used for military applications because 1,550 nm is not visible in night vision goggles, unlike the shorter 1,000 nm infrared laser.

Airborne topographic mapping lidars generally use 1,064 nm diode-pumped YAG lasers, while bathymetric (underwater depth research) systems generally use 532 nm frequency-doubled diode pumped YAG lasers because 532 nm penetrates water with much less attenuation than 1,064 nm. Laser settings include the laser repetition rate (which controls the data collection speed). Pulse length is generally an attribute of the laser cavity length, the number of passes required through the gain material (YAG, YLF, etc.), and Q-switch (pulsing) speed. Better target resolution is achieved with shorter pulses, provided the lidar receiver detectors and electronics have sufficient bandwidth.

A phased array can illuminate any direction by using a microscopic array of individual antennas. Controlling the timing (phase) of each antenna steers a cohesive signal in a specific direction. Phased arrays have been used in radar since the 1940s. On the order of a million optical antennas are used to see a radiation pattern of a certain size in a certain direction. To achieve this the phase of each individual antenna (emitter) are precisely controlled. It is very difficult, if possible at all, to use the same technique in a lidar. The main problems are that all individual emitters must be coherent (technically coming from the same &quot;master&quot; oscillator or laser source), have dimensions about the wavelength of the emitted light (1 micron range) to act as a point source with their phases being controlled with high accuracy.

Microelectromechanical mirrors (MEMS) are not entirely solid-state. However, their tiny form factor provides many of the same cost benefits. A single laser is directed to a single mirror that can be reoriented to view any part of the target field. The mirror spins at a rapid rate. However, MEMS systems generally operate in a single plane (left to right). To add a second dimension generally requires a second mirror that moves up and down. Alternatively, another laser can hit the same mirror from another angle. MEMS systems can be disrupted by shock/vibration and may require repeated calibration.

=== Scanner and optics ===

Image development speed is affected by the speed at which they are scanned. Options to scan the azimuth and elevation include dual oscillating plane mirrors, a combination with a polygon mirror, and a dual axis scanner. Optic choices affect the angular resolution and range that can be detected. A hole mirror or a beam splitter are options to collect a return signal.

=== Photodetector and receiver electronics ===
Two main photodetector technologies are used in lidar: solid-state photodetectors, such as silicon avalanche photodiodes, or photomultipliers. The sensitivity of the receiver is another parameter that has to be balanced in a lidar design.

=== Position and navigation systems ===

Lidar sensors mounted on mobile platforms such as airplanes or satellites require instrumentation to determine the absolute position and orientation of the sensor. Such devices generally include a Global Positioning System receiver and an inertial measurement unit (IMU).

=== Sensor ===

Lidar uses active sensors that supply their own illumination source. The energy source hits objects and the reflected energy is detected and measured by sensors. Distance to the object is determined by recording the time between transmitted and backscattered pulses and by using the speed of light to calculate the distance traveled. Flash lidar allows for 3-D imaging because of the camera&#x27;s ability to emit a larger flash and sense the spatial relationships and dimensions of area of interest with the returned energy. This allows for more accurate imaging because the captured frames do not need to be stitched together, and the system is not sensitive to platform motion. This results in less distortion.

3-D imaging can be achieved using both scanning and non-scanning systems. &quot;3-D gated viewing laser radar&quot; is a non-scanning laser ranging system that applies a pulsed laser and a fast gated camera. Research has begun for virtual beam steering using Digital Light Processing (DLP) technology.

Imaging lidar can also be performed using arrays of high speed detectors and modulation sensitive detector arrays typically built on single chips using complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) and hybrid CMOS/Charge-coupled device (CCD) fabrication techniques. In these devices each pixel performs some local processing such as demodulation or gating at high speed, downconverting the signals to video rate so that the array can be read like a camera. Using this technique many thousands of pixels / channels may be acquired simultaneously. High resolution 3-D lidar cameras use homodyne detection with an electronic CCD or CMOS shutter.&lt;ref name=&quot;Medina A, Gayá F, and Pozo F 800–805 http://www.opticsinfobase.org/josaa/abstract.cfm?URI=josaa-23-4-800&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

A coherent imaging lidar uses synthetic array heterodyne detection to enable a staring single element receiver to act as though it were an imaging array.

In 2014, Lincoln Laboratory announced a new imaging chip with more than 16,384 pixels, each able to image a single photon, enabling them to capture a wide area in a single image. An earlier generation of the technology with one fourth as many pixels was dispatched by the U.S. military after the January 2010 Haiti earthquake. A single pass by a business jet at over Port-au-Prince was able to capture instantaneous snapshots of squares of the city at a resolution of , displaying the precise height of rubble strewn in city streets. The new system is ten times better, and could produce much larger maps more quickly. The chip uses indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs), which operates in the infrared spectrum at a relatively long wavelength that allows for higher power and longer ranges. In many applications, such as self-driving cars, the new system will lower costs by not requiring a mechanical component to aim the chip. InGaAs uses less hazardous wavelengths than conventional silicon detectors, which operate at visual wavelengths. New technologies for infrared single-photon counting LIDAR are advancing rapidly, including arrays and cameras in a variety of semiconductor and superconducting platforms.

==Classification==

Lidar can be oriented to nadir, zenith, or laterally. For example, lidar altimeters look down, an atmospheric lidar looks up, and lidar-based collision avoidance systems are side-looking.

Laser projections of lidars can be manipulated using various methods and mechanisms to produce a scanning effect: the standard spindle-type, which spins to give a 360-degree view; solid-state lidar, which has a fixed field of view, but no moving parts, and can use either MEMS or optical phased arrays to steer the beams; and flash lidar, which spreads a flash of light over a large field of view before the signal bounces back to a detector.

Lidar applications can be divided into airborne and terrestrial types. The two types require scanners with varying specifications based on the data&#x27;s purpose, the size of the area to be captured, the range of measurement desired, the cost of equipment, and more. Spaceborne platforms are also possible, see satellite laser altimetry.

Airborne lidar (also &quot;airborne laser scanning&quot;) is when a laser scanner, while attached to an aircraft during flight, creates a 3-D point cloud model of the landscape. This is currently the most detailed and accurate method of creating digital elevation models, replacing photogrammetry. One major advantage in comparison with photogrammetry is the ability to filter out reflections from vegetation from the point cloud model to create a digital terrain model which represents ground surfaces such as rivers, paths, cultural heritage sites, etc., which are concealed by trees. Within the category of airborne lidar, there is sometimes a distinction made between high-altitude and low-altitude applications, but the main difference is a reduction in both accuracy and point density of data acquired at higher altitudes. Airborne lidar can also be used to create bathymetric models in shallow water.

The main constituents of airborne lidar include digital elevation models (DEM) and digital surface models (DSM). The points and ground points are the vectors of discrete points while DEM and DSM are interpolated raster grids of discrete points. The process also involves capturing of digital aerial photographs. To interpret deep-seated landslides for example, under the cover of vegetation, scarps, tension cracks or tipped trees airborne lidar is used. Airborne lidar digital elevation models can see through the canopy of forest cover, perform detailed measurements of scarps, erosion and tilting of electric poles.

Airborne lidar data is processed using a toolbox called Toolbox for Lidar Data Filtering and Forest Studies (TIFFS) for lidar data filtering and terrain study software. The data is interpolated to digital terrain models using the software. The laser is directed at the region to be mapped and each point&#x27;s height above the ground is calculated by subtracting the original z-coordinate from the corresponding digital terrain model elevation. Based on this height above the ground the non-vegetation data is obtained which may include objects such as buildings, electric power lines, flying birds, insects, etc. The rest of the points are treated as vegetation and used for modeling and mapping. Within each of these plots, lidar metrics are calculated by calculating statistics such as mean, standard deviation, skewness, percentiles, quadratic mean, etc.

Multiple commercial lidar systems for unmanned aerial vehicles are currently on the market. These platforms can systematically scan large areas, or provide a cheaper alternative to manned aircraft for smaller scanning operations.

The airborne lidar bathymetric technological system involves the measurement of time of flight of a signal from a source to its return to the sensor. The data acquisition technique involves a sea floor mapping component and a ground truth component that includes video transects and sampling. It works using a green spectrum (532 nm) laser beam. Two beams are projected onto a fast rotating mirror, which creates an array of points. One of the beams penetrates the water and also detects the bottom surface of the water under favorable conditions.

Water depth measurable by lidar depends on the clarity of the water and the absorption of the wavelength used. Water is most transparent to green and blue light, so these will penetrate deepest in clean water. Blue-green light of 532 nm produced by frequency doubled solid-state IR laser output is the standard for airborne bathymetry. This light can penetrate water but pulse strength attenuates exponentially with distance traveled through the water. Lidar can measure depths from about , with vertical accuracy in the order of . The surface reflection makes water shallower than about difficult to resolve, and absorption limits the maximum depth. Turbidity causes scattering and has a significant role in determining the maximum depth that can be resolved in most situations, and dissolved pigments can increase absorption depending on wavelength. Other reports indicate that water penetration tends to be between two and three times Secchi depth. Bathymetric lidar is most useful in the depth range in coastal mapping.

On average in fairly clear coastal seawater lidar can penetrate to about , and in turbid water up to about . An average value found by Saputra et al, 2021, is for the green laser light to penetrate water about one and a half to two times Secchi depth in Indonesian waters. Water temperature and salinity have an effect on the refractive index which has a small effect on the depth calculation.

The data obtained shows the full extent of the land surface exposed above the sea floor. This technique is extremely useful as it will play an important role in the major sea floor mapping program. The mapping yields onshore topography as well as underwater elevations. Sea floor reflectance imaging is another solution product from this system which can benefit mapping of underwater habitats. This technique has been used for three-dimensional image mapping of California&#x27;s waters using a hydrographic lidar.

Airborne lidar systems were traditionally able to acquire only a few peak returns, while more recent systems acquire and digitize the entire reflected signal. Scientists analysed the waveform signal for extracting peak returns using Gaussian decomposition. Zhuang et al, 2017 used this approach for estimating aboveground biomass. Handling the huge amounts of full-waveform data is difficult. Therefore, Gaussian decomposition of the waveforms is effective, since it reduces the data and is supported by existing workflows that support interpretation of 3-D point clouds. Recent studies investigated voxelisation. The intensities of the waveform samples are inserted into a voxelised space (3-D grayscale image) building up a 3-D representation of the scanned area. Related metrics and information can then be extracted from that voxelised space. Structural information can be extracted using 3-D metrics from local areas and there is a case study that used the voxelisation approach for detecting dead standing Eucalypt trees in Australia.

Terrestrial applications of lidar (also &quot;terrestrial laser scanning&quot;) happen on the Earth&#x27;s surface and can be either stationary or mobile. Stationary terrestrial scanning is most common as a survey method, for example in conventional topography, monitoring, cultural heritage documentation and forensics. The 3-D point clouds acquired from these types of scanners can be matched with digital images taken of the scanned area from the scanner&#x27;s location to create realistic looking 3-D models in a relatively short time when compared to other technologies. Each point in the point cloud is given the colour of the pixel from the image taken at the same location and direction as the laser beam that created the point.

Terrestrial lidar mapping involves a process of occupancy grid map generation. The process involves an array of cells divided into grids which employ a process to store the height values when lidar data falls into the respective grid cell. A binary map is then created by applying a particular threshold to the cell values for further processing. The next step is to process the radial distance and z-coordinates from each scan to identify which 3-D points correspond to each of the specified grid cell leading to the process of data formation.

Mobile lidar (also &quot;mobile laser scanning&quot;) is when two or more scanners are attached to a moving vehicle to collect data along a path. These scanners are almost always paired with other kinds of equipment, including GNSS receivers and IMUs. One example application is surveying streets, where power lines, exact bridge heights, bordering trees, etc. all need to be taken into account. Instead of collecting each of these measurements individually in the field with a tachymeter, a 3-D model from a point cloud can be created where all of the measurements needed can be made, depending on the quality of the data collected. This eliminates the problem of forgetting to take a measurement, so long as the model is available, reliable and has an appropriate level of accuracy.

==Applications==
There are a wide variety of lidar applications, in addition to the applications listed below, as it is often mentioned in National lidar dataset programs. These applications are largely determined by the range of effective object detection; resolution, which is how accurately the lidar identifies and classifies objects; and reflectance confusion, meaning how well the lidar can see something in the presence of bright objects, like reflective signs or bright sun.

Companies are working to cut the cost of lidar sensors, currently anywhere from about US$1,200 to more than $12,000. Lower prices will make lidar more attractive for new markets.

===Agriculture===
Agricultural robots have been used for a variety of purposes ranging from seed and fertilizer dispersions, sensing techniques as well as crop scouting for the task of weed control.

Lidar can help determine where to apply costly fertilizer. It can create a topographical map of the fields and reveal slopes and sun exposure of the farmland. Researchers at the Agricultural Research Service used this topographical data with the farmland yield results from previous years, to categorize land into zones of high, medium, or low yield. This indicates where to apply fertilizer to maximize yield.

Lidar is now used to monitor insects in the field. The use of lidar can detect the movement and behavior of individual flying insects, with identification down to sex and species. In 2017 a patent application was published on this technology in the United States, Europe, and China.

Another application is crop mapping in orchards and vineyards, to detect foliage growth and the need for pruning or other maintenance, detect variations in fruit production, or count plants.

Lidar is useful in GNSS-denied situations, such as nut and fruit orchards, where foliage causes interference for agriculture equipment that would otherwise utilize a precise GNSS fix. Lidar sensors can detect and track the relative position of rows, plants, and other markers so that farming equipment can continue operating until a GNSS fix is reestablished.

Controlling weeds requires identifying plant species. This can be done by using 3-D lidar and machine learning. Lidar produces plant contours as a &quot;point cloud&quot; with range and reflectance values. This data is transformed, and features are extracted from it. If the species is known, the features are added as new data. The species is labelled and its features are initially stored as an example to identify the species in the real environment. This method is efficient because it uses a low-resolution lidar and supervised learning. It includes an easy-to-compute feature set with common statistical features which are independent of the plant size.

===Archaeology===

Lidar has many uses in archaeology, including planning of field campaigns, mapping features under forest canopy, and overview of broad, continuous features indistinguishable from the ground. Lidar can produce high-resolution datasets quickly and cheaply. Lidar-derived products can be easily integrated into a Geographic Information System (GIS) for analysis and interpretation.

Lidar can also help to create high-resolution digital elevation models (DEMs) of archaeological sites that can reveal micro-topography that is otherwise hidden by vegetation. The intensity of the returned lidar signal can be used to detect features buried under flat vegetated surfaces such as fields, especially when mapping using the infrared spectrum. The presence of these features affects plant growth and thus the amount of infrared light reflected back. For example, at Fort Beauséjour – Fort Cumberland National Historic Site, Canada, lidar discovered archaeological features related to the siege of the Fort in 1755. Features that could not be distinguished on the ground or through aerial photography were identified by overlaying hill shades of the DEM created with artificial illumination from various angles. Another example is work at Caracol by Arlen Chase and his wife Diane Zaino Chase. In 2012, lidar was used to search for the legendary city of La Ciudad Blanca or &quot;City of the Monkey God&quot; in the La Mosquitia region of the Honduran jungle. During a seven-day mapping period, evidence was found of man-made structures. In June 2013, the rediscovery of the city of Mahendraparvata was announced. In southern New England, lidar was used to reveal stone walls, building foundations, abandoned roads, and other landscape features obscured in aerial photography by the region&#x27;s dense forest canopy. In Cambodia, lidar data were used by Damian Evans and Roland Fletcher to reveal anthropogenic changes to Angkor landscape.

In 2012, lidar revealed that the Purépecha settlement of Angamuco in Michoacán, Mexico had about as many buildings as today&#x27;s Manhattan; while in 2016, its use in mapping ancient Maya causeways in northern Guatemala, revealed 17 elevated roads linking the ancient city of El Mirador to other sites. In 2018, archaeologists using lidar discovered more than 60,000 man-made structures in the Maya Biosphere Reserve, a &quot;major breakthrough&quot; that showed the Maya civilization was much larger than previously thought. In 2024, archaeologists using lidar discovered the Upano Valley sites.

===Autonomous vehicles===

Autonomous vehicles may use lidar for obstacle detection and avoidance to navigate safely through environments. The introduction of lidar was a pivotal occurrence that was the key enabler behind Stanley, the first autonomous vehicle to successfully complete the DARPA Grand Challenge. Point cloud output from the lidar sensor provides the necessary data for robot software to determine where potential obstacles exist in the environment and where the robot is in relation to those potential obstacles. Singapore&#x27;s &quot;Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology (SMART)&quot; is actively developing technologies for autonomous lidar vehicles.

The very first generations of automotive adaptive cruise control systems used only lidar sensors.

In transportation systems, to ensure vehicle and passenger safety and to develop electronic systems that deliver driver assistance, understanding the vehicle and its surrounding environment is essential. Lidar systems play an important role in the safety of transportation systems. Many electronic systems which add to the driver assistance and vehicle safety such as Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC), Emergency Brake Assist, and Anti-lock Braking System (ABS) depend on the detection of a vehicle&#x27;s environment to act autonomously or semi-autonomously. Lidar mapping and estimation achieve this.

Current lidar systems use rotating hexagonal mirrors which split the laser beam. The upper three beams are used for vehicle and obstacles ahead and the lower beams are used to detect lane markings and road features. The major advantage of using lidar is that the spatial structure is obtained and this data can be fused with other sensors such as radar, etc. to get a better picture of the vehicle environment in terms of static and dynamic properties of the objects present in the environment. Conversely, a significant issue with lidar is the difficulty in reconstructing point cloud data in poor weather conditions. In heavy rain, for example, the light pulses emitted from the lidar system are partially reflected off of rain droplets which adds noise to the data, called &#x27;echoes&#x27;.

Obstacle detection and road environment recognition using lidar, proposed by Kun Zhou et al. not only focuses on object detection and tracking but also recognizes lane marking and road features. As mentioned earlier the lidar systems use rotating hexagonal mirrors that split the laser beam into six beams. The upper three layers are used to detect the forward objects such as vehicles and roadside objects. The sensor is made of weather-resistant material. The data detected by lidar are clustered to several segments and tracked by Kalman filter. Data clustering here is done based on characteristics of each segment based on object model, which distinguish different objects such as vehicles, signboards, etc. These characteristics include the dimensions of the object, etc. The reflectors on the rear edges of vehicles are used to differentiate vehicles from other objects. Object tracking is done using a two-stage Kalman filter considering the stability of tracking and the accelerated motion of objects Lidar reflective intensity data is also used for curb detection by making use of robust regression to deal with occlusions. The road marking is detected using a modified Otsu method by distinguishing rough and shiny surfaces.

Roadside reflectors that indicate lane border are sometimes hidden due to various reasons. Therefore, other information is needed to recognize the road border. The lidar used in this method can measure the reflectivity from the object. Hence, with this data the road border can also be recognized. Also, the usage of a sensor with weather-robust head helps to detect the objects even in bad weather conditions. Canopy Height Model before and after flood is a good example. Lidar can detect highly detailed canopy height data as well as its road border. Lidar measurements help identify the spatial structure of the obstacle. This helps distinguish objects based on size and estimate the impact of driving over it. Lidar systems provide better range and a large field of view, which helps in detecting obstacles on the curves. This is one of its major advantages over RADAR systems, which have a narrower field of view. The fusion of lidar measurement with different sensors makes the system robust and useful in real-time applications, since lidar dependent systems cannot estimate the dynamic information about the detected object. It has been shown that lidar can be manipulated, such that self-driving cars are tricked into taking evasive action.

===Ecology and conservation===
Lidar has also found many applications for mapping natural and managed landscapes such as forests, wetlands, and grasslands. Canopy heights, biomass measurements, and leaf area can all be studied using airborne lidar systems. Similarly, lidar is also used by many industries, including Energy and Railroad, and the Department of Transportation as a faster way of surveying. Topographic maps can also be generated readily from lidar, including for recreational use such as in the production of orienteering maps. Lidar has also been applied to estimate and assess the biodiversity of plants, fungi, and animals. Using southern bull kelp in New Zealand, coastal lidar mapping data has been compared with population genomic evidence to form hypotheses regarding the occurrence and timing of prehistoric earthquake uplift events.

===Forestry===
Lidar systems have also been applied to improve forestry management. Measurements are used to take inventory in forest plots as well as calculate individual tree heights, crown width and crown diameter. Other statistical analysis use lidar data to estimate total plot information such as canopy volume, mean, minimum and maximum heights, vegetation cover, biomass, and carbon density. Aerial lidar has been used to map the bush fires in Australia in early 2020. The data was manipulated to view bare earth, and identify healthy and burned vegetation.

===Geology and soil science===

High-resolution digital elevation maps generated by airborne and stationary lidar have led to significant advances in geomorphology (the branch of geoscience concerned with the origin and evolution of the Earth surface topography). The lidar abilities to detect subtle topographic features such as river terraces and river channel banks, glacial landforms, to measure the land-surface elevation beneath the vegetation canopy, to better resolve spatial derivatives of elevation, to rockfall detection, to detect elevation changes between repeat surveys have enabled many novel studies of the physical and chemical processes that shape landscapes.
In 2005 the Tour Ronde in the Mont Blanc massif became the first high alpine mountain on which lidar was employed to monitor the increasing occurrence of severe rock-fall over large rock faces allegedly caused by climate change and degradation of permafrost at high altitude.

Lidar is also used in structural geology and geophysics as a combination between airborne lidar and GNSS for the detection and study of faults, for measuring uplift. The output of the two technologies can produce extremely accurate elevation models for terrain – models that can even measure ground elevation through trees. This combination was used most famously to find the location of the Seattle Fault in Washington, United States. This combination also measures uplift at Mount St. Helens by using data from before and after the 2004 uplift. Airborne lidar systems monitor glaciers and have the ability to detect subtle amounts of growth or decline. A satellite-based system, the NASA ICESat, includes a lidar sub-system for this purpose. The NASA Airborne Topographic Mapper is also used extensively to monitor glaciers and perform coastal change analysis.
The combination is also used by soil scientists while creating a soil survey. The detailed terrain modeling allows soil scientists to see slope changes and landform breaks which indicate patterns in soil spatial relationships.

===Atmosphere===


Initially, based on ruby lasers, lidar for meteorological applications was constructed shortly after the invention of the laser and represents one of the first applications of laser technology. Lidar technology has since expanded vastly in capability and lidar systems are used to perform a range of measurements that include profiling clouds, measuring winds, studying aerosols, and quantifying various atmospheric components. Atmospheric components can in turn provide useful information including surface pressure (by measuring the absorption of oxygen or nitrogen), greenhouse gas emissions (carbon dioxide and methane), photosynthesis (carbon dioxide), fires (carbon monoxide), and humidity (water vapor). Atmospheric lidars can be either ground-based, airborne or satellite-based depending on the type of measurement.

Atmospheric lidar remote sensing works in two ways:

# by measuring backscatter from the atmosphere, and 
# by measuring the scattered reflection off the ground (when the lidar is airborne) or other hard surface.

Backscatter from the atmosphere directly gives a measure of clouds and aerosols. Other derived measurements from backscatter such as winds or cirrus ice crystals require careful selecting of the wavelength and/or polarization detected. &quot;Doppler lidar&quot; and &quot;Rayleigh Doppler lidar&quot; are used to measure temperature and wind speed along the beam by measuring the frequency of the backscattered light. The Doppler broadening of gases in motion allows the determination of properties via the resulting frequency shift. Scanning lidars, such as NASA&#x27;s conical-scanning HARLIE, have been used to measure atmospheric wind velocity. The ESA wind mission &quot;ADM-Aeolus&quot; will be equipped with a Doppler lidar system in order to provide global measurements of vertical wind profiles. A doppler lidar system was used in the 2008 Summer Olympics to measure wind fields during the yacht competition.

Doppler lidar systems are also now beginning to be successfully applied in the renewable energy sector to acquire wind speed, turbulence, wind veer, and wind shear data. Both pulsed and continuous wave systems are being used. Pulsed systems use signal timing to obtain vertical distance resolution, whereas continuous wave systems rely on detector focusing.

The term, &quot;eolics&quot;, has been proposed to describe the collaborative and interdisciplinary study of wind using computational fluid mechanics simulations and Doppler lidar measurements.

The ground reflection of an airborne lidar gives a measure of surface reflectivity (assuming the atmospheric transmittance is well known) at the lidar wavelength, however, the ground reflection is typically used for making absorption measurements of the atmosphere. &quot;Differential absorption lidar&quot; (DIAL) measurements utilize two or more closely spaced (less than 1 nm) wavelengths to factor out surface reflectivity as well as other transmission losses, since these factors are relatively insensitive to wavelength. When tuned to the appropriate absorption lines of a particular gas, DIAL measurements can be used to determine the concentration (mixing ratio) of that particular gas in the atmosphere. This is referred to as an &quot;Integrated Path Differential Absorption&quot; (IPDA) approach, since it is a measure of the integrated absorption along the entire lidar path. IPDA lidars can be either pulsed or CW and typically use two or more wavelengths. IPDA lidars have been used for remote sensing of carbon dioxide and methane.

&quot;Synthetic array lidar&quot; allows imaging lidar without the need for an array detector. It can be used for imaging Doppler velocimetry, ultra-fast frame rate imaging (millions of frames per second), as well as for speckle reduction in coherent lidar. An extensive lidar bibliography for atmospheric and hydrospheric applications is given by Grant.

===Law enforcement===
Lidar speed guns are used by the police to measure the speed of vehicles for speed limit enforcement purposes. Additionally, it is used in forensics to aid in crime scene investigations. Scans of a scene are taken to record exact details of object placement, blood, and other important information for later review. These scans can also be used to determine bullet trajectory in cases of shootings.

===Military===

Few military applications are known to be in place and are classified (such as the lidar-based speed measurement of the AGM-129 ACM stealth nuclear cruise missile), but a considerable amount of research is underway in their use for imaging. Higher resolution systems collect enough detail to identify targets, such as tanks. Examples of military applications of lidar include the Airborne Laser Mine Detection System (ALMDS) for counter-mine warfare by Areté Associates.

A NATO report (RTO-TR-SET-098) evaluated the potential technologies to do stand-off detection for the discrimination of biological warfare agents. The potential technologies evaluated were Long-Wave Infrared (LWIR), Differential Scattering (DISC), and Ultraviolet Laser Induced Fluorescence (UV-LIF). The report concluded that : &quot;Based upon the results of the lidar systems tested and discussed above, the Task Group recommends that the best option for the near-term (2008–2010) application of stand-off detection systems is UV-LIF &quot;, however, in the long-term, other techniques such as stand-off Raman spectroscopy may prove to be useful for identification of biological warfare agents.

Short-range compact spectrometric lidar based on Laser-Induced Fluorescence (LIF) would address the presence of bio-threats in aerosol form over critical indoor, semi-enclosed and outdoor venues such as stadiums, subways, and airports. This near real-time capability would enable rapid detection of a bioaerosol release and allow for timely implementation of measures to protect occupants and minimize the extent of contamination.

The Long-Range Biological Standoff Detection System (LR-BSDS) was developed for the U.S. Army to provide the earliest possible standoff warning of a biological attack. It is an airborne system carried by helicopter to detect synthetic aerosol clouds containing biological and chemical agents at long range. The LR-BSDS, with a detection range of 30 km or more, was fielded in June 1997. Five lidar units produced by the German company Sick AG were used for short range detection on Stanley, the autonomous car that won the 2005 DARPA Grand Challenge.

A robotic Boeing AH-6 performed a fully autonomous flight in June 2010, including avoiding obstacles using lidar.

===Mining===

For the calculation of ore volumes is accomplished by periodic (monthly) scanning in areas of ore removal, then comparing surface data to the previous scan.

Lidar sensors may also be used for obstacle detection and avoidance for robotic mining vehicles such as in the Komatsu Autonomous Haulage System (AHS) used in Rio Tinto&#x27;s Mine of the Future.

===Physics and astronomy===

A worldwide network of observatories uses lidars to measure the distance to reflectors placed on the Moon, allowing the position of the Moon to be measured with millimeter precision and tests of general relativity to be done. MOLA, the Mars Orbiting Laser Altimeter, used a lidar instrument in a Mars-orbiting satellite (the NASA Mars Global Surveyor) to produce a spectacularly precise global topographic survey of the red planet. Laser altimeters produced global elevation models of Mars, the Moon (Lunar Orbiter Laser Altimeter (LOLA)) Mercury (Mercury Laser Altimeter (MLA)), NEAR–Shoemaker Laser Rangefinder (NLR). Future missions will also include laser altimeter experiments such as the Ganymede Laser Altimeter (GALA) as part of the Jupiter Icy Moons Explorer (JUICE) mission.

In September, 2008, the NASA &quot;Phoenix&quot; lander used lidar to detect snow in the atmosphere of Mars.

In atmospheric physics, lidar is used as a remote detection instrument to measure densities of certain constituents of the middle and upper atmosphere, such as potassium, sodium, or molecular nitrogen and oxygen. These measurements can be used to calculate temperatures. Lidar can also be used to measure wind speed and to provide information about vertical distribution of the aerosol particles.

At the JET nuclear fusion research facility, in the UK near Abingdon, Oxfordshire, lidar Thomson scattering is used to determine electron density and temperature profiles of the plasma.

===Rock mechanics===

Lidar has been widely used in rock mechanics for rock mass characterization and slope change detection. Some important geomechanical properties from the rock mass can be extracted from the 3-D point clouds obtained by means of the lidar. Some of these properties are: 

* Discontinuity orientation
* Discontinuity spacing and RQD
* Discontinuity aperture
* Discontinuity persistence
* Discontinuity roughness
* Water infiltration

Some of these properties have been used to assess the geomechanical quality of the rock mass through the RMR index. Moreover, as the orientations of discontinuities can be extracted using the existing methodologies, it is possible to assess the geomechanical quality of a rock slope through the SMR index. In addition to this, the comparison of different 3-D point clouds from a slope acquired at different times allows researchers to study the changes produced on the scene during this time interval as a result of rockfalls or any other landsliding processes.

===THOR===

THOR is a laser designed toward measuring Earth&#x27;s atmospheric conditions. The laser enters a cloud cover and measures the thickness of the return halo. The sensor has a fiber optic aperture with a width of that is used to measure the return light.

===Robotics===
Lidar technology is being used in robotics for the perception of the environment as well as object classification. The ability of lidar technology to provide three-dimensional elevation maps of the terrain, high precision distance to the ground, and approach velocity can enable safe landing of robotic and crewed vehicles with a high degree of precision. Lidar are also widely used in robotics for simultaneous localization and mapping and well integrated into robot simulators. Refer to the Military section above for further examples.

===Spaceflight===

Lidar is increasingly being utilized for rangefinding and orbital element calculation of relative velocity in proximity operations and stationkeeping of spacecraft. Lidar has also been used for atmospheric studies from space. Short pulses of laser light beamed from a spacecraft can reflect off tiny particles in the atmosphere and back to a telescope aligned with the spacecraft laser. By precisely timing the lidar echo, and by measuring how much laser light is received by the telescope, scientists can accurately determine the location, distribution and nature of the particles. The result is a revolutionary new tool for studying constituents in the atmosphere, from cloud droplets to industrial pollutants, which are difficult to detect by other means.&quot;

Laser altimetry is used to make digital elevation maps of planets, including the Mars Orbital Laser Altimeter (MOLA) mapping of Mars, the Lunar Orbital Laser Altimeter (LOLA) and Lunar Altimeter (LALT) mapping of the Moon, and the Mercury Laser Altimeter (MLA) mapping of Mercury. It is also used to help navigate the helicopter &quot;Ingenuity&quot; in its record-setting flights over the terrain of Mars.

===Surveying===
Airborne lidar sensors are used by companies in the remote sensing field. They can be used to create a DTM (Digital Terrain Model) or DEM (Digital Elevation Model); this is quite a common practice for larger areas as a plane can acquire wide swaths in a single flyover. Greater vertical accuracy of below can be achieved with a lower flyover, even in forests, where it is able to give the height of the canopy as well as the ground elevation. Typically, a GNSS receiver configured over a georeferenced control point is needed to link the data in with the WGS (World Geodetic System).

Lidar is also in use in hydrographic surveying. Depending upon the clarity of the water lidar can measure depths from with a vertical accuracy of and horizontal accuracy of .

===Transport===

Lidar has been used in the railroad industry to generate asset health reports for asset management and by departments of transportation to assess their road conditions. CivilMaps.com is a leading company in the field. Lidar has been used in adaptive cruise control (ACC) systems for automobiles. Systems such as those by Siemens, Hella, Ouster and Cepton use a lidar device mounted on the front of the vehicle, such as the bumper, to monitor the distance between the vehicle and any vehicle in front of it. In the event, the vehicle in front slows down or is too close, the ACC applies the brakes to slow the vehicle. When the road ahead is clear, the ACC allows the vehicle to accelerate to a speed preset by the driver. Refer to the Military section above for further examples. A lidar-based device, the Ceilometer is used at airports worldwide to measure the height of clouds on runway approach paths.

===Wind farm optimization===

Lidar can be used to increase the energy output from wind farms by accurately measuring wind speeds and wind turbulence. Experimental lidar systems can be mounted on the nacelle of a wind turbine or integrated into the rotating spinner to measure oncoming horizontal winds, winds in the wake of the wind turbine, and proactively adjust blades to protect components and increase power. Lidar is also used to characterise the incident wind resource for comparison with wind turbine power production to verify the performance of the wind turbine by measuring the wind turbine&#x27;s power curve. Wind farm optimization can be considered a topic in &quot;applied eolics&quot;. Another aspect of lidar in wind related industry is to use computational fluid dynamics over lidar-scanned surfaces in order to assess the wind potential, which can be used for optimal wind farms placement.

=== Solar photovoltaic deployment optimization ===

Lidar can also be used to assist planners and developers in optimizing solar photovoltaic systems at the city level by determining appropriate roof tops and for determining shading losses. Recent airborne laser scanning efforts have focused on ways to estimate the amount of solar light hitting vertical building facades, or by incorporating more detailed shading losses by considering the influence from vegetation and larger surrounding terrain.

===Video games===

Recent simulation racing games such as &quot;rFactor Pro&quot;, &quot;iRacing&quot;, &quot;Assetto Corsa&quot; and &quot;Project CARS&quot; increasingly feature race tracks reproduced from 3-D point clouds acquired through lidar surveys, resulting in surfaces replicated with centimeter or millimeter precision in the in-game 3-D environment.

The 2017 exploration game &quot;Scanner Sombre&quot;, by Introversion Software, uses lidar as a fundamental game mechanic.

In &quot;Build the Earth&quot;, lidar is used to create accurate renders of terrain in &quot;Minecraft&quot; to account for any errors (mainly regarding elevation) in the default generation. The process of rendering terrain into Build the Earth is limited by the amount of data available in region as well as the speed it takes to convert the file into block data.

===Other uses===
The video for the 2007 song &quot;House of Cards&quot; by Radiohead was believed to be the first use of real-time 3-D laser scanning to record a music video. The range data in the video is not completely from a lidar, as structured light scanning is also used.

In 2020, Apple introduced the fourth generation of iPad Pro with a lidar sensor integrated into the rear camera module, especially developed for augmented reality (AR) experiences. The feature was later included in the iPhone 12 Pro lineup and subsequent Pro models. On Apple devices, lidar empowers portrait mode pictures with night mode, quickens auto focus and improves accuracy in the Measure app.

In 2022, &quot;Wheel of Fortune&quot; started using lidar technology to track when Vanna White moves her hand over the puzzle board to reveal letters. The first episode to have this technology was in the season 40 premiere.

== Variants ==

In flash lidar, the entire field of view is illuminated with a wide diverging laser beam in a single pulse. This is in contrast to conventional scanning lidar, which uses a collimated laser beam that illuminates a single point at a time, and the beam is raster scanned to illuminate the field of view point-by-point. This illumination method requires a different detection scheme as well. In both scanning and flash lidar, a time-of-flight camera is used to collect information about both the 3-D location and intensity of the light incident on it in every frame. However, in scanning lidar, this camera contains only a point sensor, while in flash lidar, the camera contains either a 1-D or a 2-D sensor array, each pixel of which collects 3-D location and intensity information. In both cases, the depth information is collected using the time of flight of the laser pulse (i.e., the time it takes each laser pulse to hit the target and return to the sensor), which requires the pulsing of the laser and acquisition by the camera to be synchronized. The result is a camera that takes pictures of distance, instead of colors. Flash lidar is especially advantageous, when compared to scanning lidar, when the camera, scene, or both are moving, since the entire scene is illuminated at the same time. With scanning lidar, motion can cause &quot;jitter&quot; from the lapse in time as the laser rasters over the scene.

As with all forms of lidar, the onboard source of illumination makes flash lidar an active sensor. The signal that is returned is processed by embedded algorithms to produce a nearly instantaneous 3-D rendering of objects and terrain features within the field of view of the sensor. The laser pulse repetition frequency is sufficient for generating 3-D videos with high resolution and accuracy. The high frame rate of the sensor makes it a useful tool for a variety of applications that benefit from real-time visualization, such as highly precise remote landing operations. By immediately returning a 3-D elevation mesh of target landscapes, a flash sensor can be used to identify optimal landing zones in autonomous spacecraft landing scenarios.

Seeing at a distance requires a powerful burst of light. The power is limited to levels that do not damage human retinas. Wavelengths must not affect human eyes. However, low-cost silicon imagers do not read light in the eye-safe spectrum. Instead, gallium-arsenide imagers are required, which can boost costs to $200,000. Gallium-arsenide is the same compound used to produce high-cost, high-efficiency solar panels usually used in space applications.

==Alternative technologies==
Computer stereo vision has shown promise as an alternative to lidar for close range applications.

==See also==
*
*

==References==
==Further reading==
*Heritage, E. (2011). 3D laser scanning for heritage. Advice and guidance to users on laser scanning in archaeology and architecture. Available at www.english-heritage.org.uk. 3D Laser Scanning for Heritage | Historic England.
* Heritage, G., &amp; Large, A. (Eds.). (2009). Laser scanning for the environmental sciences. John Wiley &amp; Sons. .
* Maltamo, M., Næsset, E., &amp; Vauhkonen, J. (2014). Forestry Applications of Airborne Laser Scanning: Concepts and Case Studies (Vol. 27). Springer Science &amp; Business Media. .
* Shan, J., &amp; Toth, C. K. (Eds.). (2008). Topographic laser ranging and scanning: principles and processing. CRC press. .
* Vosselman, G., &amp; Maas, H. G. (Eds.). (2010). Airborne and terrestrial laser scanning. Whittles Publishing. .

==External links==
*The USGS Center for LIDAR Information Coordination and Knowledge (CLICK) – A website intended to &quot;facilitate data access, user coordination and education of lidar remote sensing for scientific needs.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q504027" start="0" end="5" title="Lidar" label="Lidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q504027" start="14" end="19" title="Lidar" label="LIDAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522493" start="157" end="163" title="ranging" label="ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="207" end="212" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q94701573" start="407" end="419" title="3-D scanning" label="3-D scanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361664" start="424" end="438" title="laser scanning" label="laser scanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="570" end="579" title="surveying" label="surveying"/>
<link wikidata="Q131089" start="581" end="588" title="geodesy" label="geodesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q619798" start="590" end="599" title="geomatics" label="geomatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="601" end="612" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="614" end="623" title="geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="625" end="632" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="634" end="647" title="geomorphology" label="geomorphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q83371" start="649" end="659" title="seismology" label="seismology"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="661" end="669" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334416" start="671" end="690" title="atmospheric physics" label="atmospheric physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072206" start="692" end="706" title="laser guidance" label="laser guidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773157" start="750" end="765" title="Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter" label="laser altimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q568742" start="794" end="813" title="3D modeling" label="3-D representations"/>
<link wikidata="Q741490" start="1009" end="1023" title="autonomous car" label="autonomous car"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814715" start="1037" end="1069" title="Ingenuity (helicopter)" label="helicopter &amp;quot;Ingenuity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="1120" end="1124" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="1193" end="1204" title="meteorology" label="meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="1234" end="1242" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="1247" end="1256" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="1268" end="1277" title="surveying" label="surveying"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="1387" end="1391" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q107646240" start="1551" end="1569" title="quantum technology" label="quantum technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q28924128" start="1792" end="1803" title="Edward Hutchinson Synge" label="E. H. Synge"/>
<link wikidata="Q196253" start="1929" end="1952" title="Hughes Aircraft Company" label="Hughes Aircraft Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="2402" end="2407" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643652" start="2488" end="2499" title="Rangefinding telemeter" label="rangefinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="2935" end="2940" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q56277702" start="3195" end="3209" title="photonic radar" label="photonic radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q934589" start="3353" end="3393" title="National Center for Atmospheric Research" label="National Center for Atmospheric Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074" start="3413" end="3419" title="clouds" label="clouds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3534" end="3543" title="Apollo 15" label="Apollo 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="4018" end="4022" title="USGS" label="USGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="4116" end="4130" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="4243" end="4250" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="4291" end="4302" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666046" start="4304" end="4311" title="Interferometric visibility" label="visible"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="4316" end="4329" title="near infrared" label="near infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q104541" start="4460" end="4468" title="aerosols" label="aerosols"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="4493" end="4501" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424908" start="4565" end="4576" title="Optical resolution" label="resolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="4696" end="4707" title="micrometer (unit)" label="micrometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="4709" end="4717" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="4740" end="4749" title="nanometer" label="nanometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="4752" end="4763" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q916258" start="4800" end="4811" title="backscatter" label="backscatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193709" start="4963" end="4982" title="Rayleigh scattering" label="Rayleigh scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q901737" start="4984" end="4998" title="Mie scattering" label="Mie scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q466824" start="5000" end="5016" title="Raman scattering" label="Raman scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="5022" end="5034" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q56277702" start="5321" end="5335" title="photonic radar" label="photonic radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q467054" start="5396" end="5405" title="photonics" label="photonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q976981" start="5486" end="5493" title="formula" label="formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="5535" end="5549" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q193147" start="5955" end="5963" title="Coherence (physics)" label="coherent"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="5994" end="6001" title="Doppler effect" label="Doppler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098859" start="6090" end="6118" title="optical heterodyne detection" label="optical heterodyne detection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6586" end="6596" title="Joule#Microjoule" label="microjoule"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6880" end="6902" title="refractive index#Dispersion and absorption" label="extinction coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q83183" start="6929" end="6943" title="depolarization" label="depolarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="7030" end="7043" title="nitrous oxide" label="nitrous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="7096" end="7098" title="nanometre" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="7099" end="7104" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q328989" start="7724" end="7744" title="Night vision device" label="night vision goggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q421189" start="7863" end="7866" title="Yttrium aluminium garnet" label="YAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q810826" start="7881" end="7892" title="bathymetric" label="bathymetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455635" start="7950" end="7967" title="Second-harmonic generation" label="frequency-doubled"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357982" start="8039" end="8050" title="attenuation" label="attenuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6992761" start="8288" end="8291" title="YLF" label="YLF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541709" start="8304" end="8312" title="Q-switch" label="Q-switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q727898" start="8472" end="8484" title="phased array" label="phased array"/>
<link wikidata="Q175561" start="9315" end="9352" title="MEMS" label="Microelectromechanical mirrors (MEMS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124274" start="10042" end="10049" title="azimuth" label="azimuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361664" start="10147" end="10164" title="Laser scanning" label="dual axis scanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q947542" start="10261" end="10274" title="beam splitter" label="beam splitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q210765" start="10372" end="10385" title="photodetector" label="photodetector"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="10418" end="10429" title="Solid-state electronics" label="solid-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q175943" start="10472" end="10482" title="photodiode" label="photodiode"/>
<link wikidata="Q61897384" start="10488" end="10503" title="photomultiplier" label="photomultiplier"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="10841" end="10866" title="Global Positioning System" label="Global Positioning System"/>
<link wikidata="Q941680" start="10883" end="10908" title="inertial measurement unit" label="inertial measurement unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q523366" start="11907" end="11931" title="Digital Light Processing" label="Digital Light Processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q173431" start="12103" end="12142" title="complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor" label="complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="12166" end="12187" title="Charge-coupled device" label="Charge-coupled device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626181" start="12536" end="12554" title="homodyne detection" label="homodyne detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q691823" start="12586" end="12593" title="Shutter (photography)" label="shutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098859" start="12771" end="12807" title="synthetic array heterodyne detection" label="synthetic array heterodyne detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138607" start="12905" end="12923" title="MIT Lincoln Laboratory" label="Lincoln Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618059" start="13529" end="13552" title="indium gallium arsenide" label="indium gallium arsenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126172" start="13964" end="13986" title="Photon counting" label="single-photon counting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523761" start="14061" end="14074" title="Single-photon avalanche diode" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643175" start="14079" end="14094" title="Superconducting nanowire single-photon detector" label="superconducting"/>
<link wikidata="Q145825" start="14152" end="14157" title="nadir" label="nadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q82806" start="14159" end="14165" title="zenith" label="zenith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001988" start="14269" end="14295" title="collision avoidance system" label="collision avoidance system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928951" start="15072" end="15097" title="satellite laser altimetry" label="satellite laser altimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899648" start="15238" end="15253" title="Point cloud" label="3-D point cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q640492" start="15346" end="15369" title="digital elevation model" label="digital elevation model"/>
<link wikidata="Q190149" start="15382" end="15396" title="photogrammetry" label="photogrammetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q640492" start="15548" end="15569" title="Digital Terrain Model" label="digital terrain model"/>
<link wikidata="Q640492" start="16057" end="16080" title="digital elevation model" label="digital elevation model"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="17528" end="17551" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aerial vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q810826" start="17740" end="17751" title="bathymetric" label="bathymetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983322" start="17801" end="17815" title="time of flight" label="time of flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455635" start="18519" end="18536" title="frequency doubled" label="frequency doubled"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20440" end="20462" title="Gaussian decomposition" label="Gaussian decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899648" start="20765" end="20776" title="point cloud" label="point cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q663554" start="20807" end="20812" title="voxel" label="voxel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405491" start="21219" end="21227" title="Eucalypt" label="Eucalypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899648" start="21574" end="21590" title="Point cloud" label="3-D point clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250322" start="21649" end="21662" title="digital image" label="digital image"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899648" start="21844" end="21855" title="point cloud" label="point cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075747" start="22036" end="22065" title="Occupancy grid mapping" label="occupancy grid map generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179435" start="22761" end="22765" title="Satellite navigation" label="GNSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q941680" start="22780" end="22784" title="Inertial measurement unit" label="IMUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300241" start="23012" end="23022" title="Tachymeter (survey)" label="tachymeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973929" start="23459" end="23481" title="National lidar dataset" label="National lidar dataset"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414810" start="24002" end="24020" title="Agricultural robot" label="Agricultural robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739141" start="24169" end="24181" title="weed control" label="weed control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827151" start="24362" end="24391" title="Agricultural Research Service" label="Agricultural Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q179435" start="25091" end="25095" title="GNSS" label="GNSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395703" start="25168" end="25180" title="Error analysis for the Global Positioning System" label="interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q844533" start="26970" end="26985" title="Fort Beauséjour" label="Fort Beauséjour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035336" start="27342" end="27349" title="Caracol" label="Caracol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792123" start="27353" end="27364" title="Arlen F. Chase" label="Arlen Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271616" start="27378" end="27395" title="Diane Zaino Chase" label="Diane Zaino Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367575" start="27457" end="27473" title="La Ciudad Blanca" label="La Ciudad Blanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967159" start="27519" end="27531" title="La Mosquitia (Honduras)" label="La Mosquitia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13473659" start="27686" end="27701" title="Mahendraparvata" label="Mahendraparvata"/>
<link wikidata="Q63614823" start="27958" end="27970" title="Damian Evans" label="Damian Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q45009" start="28078" end="28087" title="Purépecha" label="Purépecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165512" start="28102" end="28110" title="Angamuco" label="Angamuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q79861" start="28114" end="28123" title="Michoacán" label="Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q504904" start="28322" end="28332" title="El Mirador" label="El Mirador"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28440" end="28462" title="Maya Biosphere Reserve#Archaeology" label="Maya Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="28513" end="28530" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q124260053" start="28623" end="28641" title="Upano Valley sites" label="Upano Valley sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q741490" start="28671" end="28690" title="Autonomous car" label="Autonomous vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431175" start="28866" end="28873" title="Stanley (vehicle)" label="Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q507220" start="28933" end="28954" title="DARPA Grand Challenge" label="DARPA Grand Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q333124" start="29333" end="29355" title="Dynamic Radar Cruise Control" label="very first generations"/>
<link wikidata="Q333124" start="29370" end="29393" title="adaptive cruise control" label="adaptive cruise control"/>
<link wikidata="Q190660" start="29855" end="29879" title="Anti-lock braking system" label="Anti-lock Braking System"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="30375" end="30380" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q846780" start="31359" end="31372" title="Kalman filter" label="Kalman filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="32929" end="32942" title="Radar systems" label="RADAR systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134228" start="33469" end="33475" title="canopy (forest)" label="Canopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="33485" end="33492" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q29358" start="33837" end="33849" title="orienteering" label="orienteering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744108" start="33961" end="33979" title="Durvillaea" label="southern bull kelp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229807" start="34046" end="34064" title="population genomics" label="population genomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q640492" start="34786" end="34807" title="digital elevation map" label="digital elevation map"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="34888" end="34901" title="geomorphology" label="geomorphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q749949" start="35428" end="35438" title="Tour Ronde" label="Tour Ronde"/>
<link wikidata="Q671343" start="35446" end="35463" title="Mont Blanc massif" label="Mont Blanc massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="35486" end="35501" title="Alps" label="alpine mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="35629" end="35643" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q334823" start="35715" end="35733" title="structural geology" label="structural geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179435" start="35793" end="35797" title="GNSS" label="GNSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="35829" end="35834" title="Fault (geology)" label="fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592877" start="35851" end="35857" title="Tectonic uplift" label="uplift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442096" start="36085" end="36098" title="Seattle Fault" label="Seattle Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="36102" end="36112" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4675" start="36170" end="36186" title="Mount St. Helens" label="Mount St. Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="36271" end="36278" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="36378" end="36382" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q50019" start="36383" end="36389" title="ICESat" label="ICESat"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="36510" end="36517" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554965" start="36621" end="36632" title="soil survey" label="soil survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q933263" start="36823" end="36833" title="ruby laser" label="ruby laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q104541" start="37173" end="37180" title="aerosol" label="aerosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="37303" end="37319" title="Atmospheric pressure" label="surface pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="37352" end="37358" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="37362" end="37370" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="37373" end="37387" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="37399" end="37413" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="37418" end="37425" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="37428" end="37442" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="37461" end="37466" title="wildfire" label="fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="37468" end="37483" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="37490" end="37498" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q190120" start="37500" end="37511" title="water vapor" label="water vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="37646" end="37660" title="remote sensing" label="remote sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q916258" start="37696" end="37707" title="backscatter" label="backscatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q902598" start="38264" end="38282" title="Doppler broadening" label="Doppler broadening"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="38401" end="38405" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="38495" end="38498" title="ESA" label="ESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="38686" end="38706" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098859" start="40369" end="40384" title="Synthetic array heterodyne detection" label="Synthetic array"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575045" start="40584" end="40591" title="speckle pattern" label="speckle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585339" start="40818" end="40841" title="speed limit enforcement" label="speed limit enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q292421" start="41277" end="41288" title="AGM-129 ACM" label="AGM-129 ACM"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="41475" end="41479" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q862228" start="42236" end="42254" title="Raman spectroscopy" label="Raman spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q877058" start="43195" end="43202" title="Sick AG" label="Sick AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431175" start="43242" end="43249" title="Stanley (vehicle)" label="Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q741490" start="43255" end="43269" title="driverless car" label="autonomous car"/>
<link wikidata="Q507220" start="43288" end="43309" title="DARPA Grand Challenge" label="DARPA Grand Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q890171" start="43322" end="43333" title="Boeing AH-6" label="Boeing AH-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q94741" start="43867" end="43930" title="Lunar Laser Ranging Experiment" label="lidars to measure the distance to reflectors placed on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297564" start="44011" end="44038" title="tests of general relativity" label="tests of general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773157" start="44051" end="44055" title="Mars Orbital Laser Altimeter" label="MOLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="44061" end="44065" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q206300" start="44155" end="44175" title="Mars Global Surveyor" label="Mars Global Surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q129091" start="44640" end="44666" title="Phoenix (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Phoenix&amp;quot; lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="44881" end="44890" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="44892" end="44898" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="44913" end="44921" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="44926" end="44932" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q104541" start="45099" end="45106" title="aerosol" label="aerosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702534" start="45126" end="45129" title="Joint European Torus" label="JET"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="45130" end="45144" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q321381" start="45179" end="45187" title="Abingdon-on-Thames" label="Abingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477639" start="45208" end="45226" title="Thomson scattering" label="Thomson scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="45248" end="45256" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="45297" end="45303" title="Plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133006" start="45864" end="45867" title="Rock mass rating" label="RMR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391291" start="46054" end="46057" title="Slope Mass Rating" label="SMR"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="46637" end="46645" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203659" start="47002" end="47039" title="simultaneous localization and mapping" label="simultaneous localization and mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q478123" start="47202" end="47214" title="Situation awareness" label="rangefinding"/>
<link wikidata="Q272626" start="47219" end="47234" title="orbital element" label="orbital element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376323" start="47250" end="47267" title="relative velocity" label="relative velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093759" start="47271" end="47291" title="proximity operations" label="proximity operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100095" start="47296" end="47310" title="orbital stationkeeping" label="stationkeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="47314" end="47324" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="47355" end="47366" title="atmosphere" label="atmospheric"/>
<link wikidata="Q640492" start="47959" end="47980" title="Digital elevation model" label="digital elevation map"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773157" start="48008" end="48036" title="Mars Orbital Laser Altimeter" label="Mars Orbital Laser Altimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q331778" start="48065" end="48094" title="Lunar Orbital Laser Altimeter" label="Lunar Orbital Laser Altimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814715" start="48245" end="48277" title="Ingenuity (helicopter)" label="helicopter &amp;quot;Ingenuity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="48328" end="48332" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q640492" start="48490" end="48513" title="Digital Elevation Model" label="Digital Elevation Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q215848" start="48906" end="48909" title="World Geodetic System" label="WGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q215848" start="48911" end="48932" title="World Geodetic System" label="World Geodetic System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520887" start="48960" end="48979" title="hydrographic survey" label="hydrographic survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q333124" start="49370" end="49393" title="Adaptive Cruise Control" label="adaptive cruise control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027486" start="49935" end="49945" title="Ceilometer" label="Ceilometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q194356" start="50118" end="50128" title="wind farms" label="wind farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q27070220" start="50235" end="50242" title="nacelle" label="nacelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q49833" start="50248" end="50260" title="wind turbine" label="wind turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q504027" start="50710" end="50736" title="Differential absorption LIDAR" label="&amp;quot;applied eolics&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q815820" start="50797" end="50825" title="computational fluid dynamics" label="computational fluid dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="51075" end="51087" title="photovoltaic" label="photovoltaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191981" start="51171" end="51178" title="shading" label="shading"/>
<link wikidata="Q109941612" start="51511" end="51522" title="rFactor Pro" label="rFactor Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q254255" start="51536" end="51543" title="iRacing" label="iRacing"/>
<link wikidata="Q10896671" start="51557" end="51570" title="Assetto Corsa" label="Assetto Corsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q64118704" start="51587" end="51599" title="Project CARS" label="Project CARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q29832341" start="51842" end="51856" title="Scanner Sombre" label="Scanner Sombre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671616" start="51867" end="51888" title="Introversion Software" label="Introversion Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q99492080" start="51943" end="51958" title="Build the Earth" label="Build the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q49740" start="52027" end="52036" title="Minecraft" label="Minecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444031" start="52351" end="52365" title="House of Cards (Radiohead song)" label="House of Cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="52375" end="52384" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="52588" end="52593" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q93865052" start="52609" end="52638" title="iPad Pro (4th generation)" label="fourth generation of iPad Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026013" start="52684" end="52697" title="camera module" label="camera module"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="52724" end="52741" title="augmented reality" label="augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q100319367" start="52798" end="52818" title="iPhone 12 Pro" label="iPhone 12 Pro lineup"/>
<link wikidata="Q210008" start="52928" end="52938" title="Autofocus" label="auto focus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52968" end="52975" title="Pre-installed iOS apps#Measure" label="Measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567653" start="52997" end="53013" title="Wheel of Fortune (American game show)" label="Wheel of Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q442202" start="53065" end="53076" title="Vanna White" label="Vanna White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230543" start="53291" end="53300" title="beam divergence" label="diverging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571347" start="53396" end="53417" title="collimated beam" label="collimated laser beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641959" start="53477" end="53488" title="raster scan" label="raster scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746063" start="53648" end="53669" title="time-of-flight camera" label="time-of-flight camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451086" start="53921" end="53933" title="sensor array" label="sensor array"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983322" start="54064" end="54078" title="time of flight" label="time of flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q422819" start="55639" end="55655" title="Gallium arsenide" label="gallium-arsenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157586" start="55873" end="55895" title="Computer stereo vision" label="Computer stereo vision"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41960" wikidata="Q285406" url="?curid=41960" title="World's Columbian Exposition">
<text>The World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition, also known as the Chicago World&#x27;s Fair, was a world&#x27;s fair held in Chicago from May 5 to October 31, 1893, to celebrate the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus&#x27;s arrival in the New World in 1492. The centerpiece of the Fair, held in Jackson Park, was a large water pool representing the voyage that Columbus took to the New World. Chicago won the right to host the fair over several competing cities, including New York City, Washington, D.C., and St. Louis. The exposition was an influential social and cultural event and had a profound effect on American architecture, the arts, American industrial optimism, and Chicago&#x27;s image.

The layout of the Chicago Columbian Exposition was predominantly designed by John Wellborn Root, Daniel Burnham, Frederick Law Olmsted, and Charles B. Atwood. It was the prototype of what Burnham and his colleagues thought a city should be. It was designed to follow Beaux-Arts principles of design, namely neoclassical architecture principles based on symmetry, balance, and splendor. The color of the material generally used to cover the buildings&#x27; façades, white staff, gave the fairgrounds its nickname, the White City. Many prominent architects designed its 14 &quot;great buildings&quot;. Artists and musicians were featured in exhibits and many also made depictions and works of art inspired by the exposition.

The exposition covered , featuring nearly 200 new but temporary buildings of predominantly neoclassical architecture, canals and lagoons, and people and cultures from 46 countries. More than 27 million people attended the exposition during its six-month run. Its scale and grandeur far exceeded the other world&#x27;s fairs, and it became a symbol of emerging American exceptionalism, much in the same way that the Great Exhibition became a symbol of the Victorian era United Kingdom.

Dedication ceremonies for the fair were held on October 21, 1892, but the fairgrounds were not opened to the public until May 1, 1893. The fair continued until October 30, 1893. In addition to recognizing the 400th anniversary of the discovery of the New World, the fair served to show the world that Chicago had risen from the ashes of the Great Chicago Fire, which had destroyed much of the city in 1871.

On October 9, 1893, the day designated as Chicago Day, the fair set a world record for outdoor event attendance, drawing 751,026 people. The debt for the fair was soon paid off with a check for $1.5 million (equivalent to $ in ). Chicago has commemorated the fair with one of the stars on its municipal flag.

== History ==

=== Planning and organization ===


Many prominent civic, professional, and commercial leaders from around the United States helped finance, coordinate, and manage the Fair, including Chicago shoe company owner Charles H. Schwab, Chicago railroad and manufacturing magnate John Whitfield Bunn, and Connecticut banking, insurance, and iron products magnate Milo Barnum Richardson, among many others.

The fair was planned in the early 1890s during the Gilded Age of rapid industrial growth, immigration, and class tension. World&#x27;s fairs, such as London&#x27;s 1851 Crystal Palace Exhibition, had been successful in Europe as a way to bring together societies fragmented along class lines.

The first American attempt at a world&#x27;s fair in Philadelphia in 1876 drew crowds, but was a financial failure. Nonetheless, ideas about distinguishing the 400th anniversary of Columbus&#x27; landing started in the late 1880s. Civic leaders in St. Louis, New York City, Washington DC, and Chicago expressed interest in hosting a fair to generate profits, boost real estate values, and promote their cities. Congress was called on to decide the location. New York financiers J. P. Morgan, Cornelius Vanderbilt, and William Waldorf Astor, among others, pledged $15 million to finance the fair if Congress awarded it to New York, while Chicagoans Charles T. Yerkes, Marshall Field, Philip Armour, Gustavus Swift, and Cyrus McCormick, Jr., offered to finance a Chicago fair. What finally persuaded Congress was Chicago banker Lyman Gage, who raised several million additional dollars in a 24-hour period, over and above New York&#x27;s final offer.

Chicago representatives not only fought for the world&#x27;s fair for monetary reasons, but also for reasons of practicality. In a Senate hearing held in January 1890, representative Thomas Barbour Bryan argued that the most important qualities for a world&#x27;s fair were &quot;abundant supplies of good air and pure water&quot;, &quot;ample space, accommodations and transportation for all exhibits and visitors&quot;. He argued that New York had too many obstructions, and Chicago would be able to use large amounts of land around the city where there was &quot;not a house to buy and not a rock to blast&quot; and that it would be located so that &quot;the artisan and the farmer and the shopkeeper and the man of humble means&quot; would be able to easily access the fair. Bryan continued to say that the fair was of &quot;vital interest&quot; to the West, and that the West wanted the location to be Chicago. The city spokesmen would continue to stress the essentials of a successful exposition and that only Chicago was fit to fill these exposition requirements.

The location of the fair was decided through several rounds of voting by the United States House of Representatives. The first ballot showed Chicago with a large lead over New York, St. Louis and Washington, D.C., but short of a majority. Chicago broke the 154-vote majority threshold on the eighth ballot, receiving 157 votes to New York&#x27;s 107.

The exposition corporation and national exposition commission settled on Jackson Park and an area around it as the fair site. Daniel H. Burnham was selected as director of works, and George R. Davis as director-general. Burnham emphasized architecture and sculpture as central to the fair and assembled the period&#x27;s top talent to design the buildings and grounds including Frederick Law Olmsted for the grounds. The temporary buildings were designed in an ornate neoclassical style and painted white, resulting in the fair site being referred to as the &quot;White City&quot;.

The Exposition&#x27;s offices set up shop in the upper floors of the Rand McNally Building on Adams Street, the world&#x27;s first all-steel-framed skyscraper. Davis&#x27; team organized the exhibits with the help of G. Brown Goode of the Smithsonian. The Midway was inspired by the 1889 Paris Universal Exposition, which included ethnological &quot;villages&quot;.
Civil rights leaders protested the refusal to include an African American exhibit. Frederick Douglass, Ida B. Wells, Irvine Garland Penn, and Ferdinand Lee Barnet co-authored a pamphlet entitled &quot;The Reason Why the Colored American is not in the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition – The Afro-American&#x27;s Contribution to Columbian Literature&quot; addressing the issue. Wells and Douglass argued, &quot;when it is asked why we are excluded from the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition, the answer is Slavery.&quot; Ten thousand copies of the pamphlet were circulated in the White City from the Haitian Embassy (where Douglass had been selected as its national representative), and the activists received responses from the delegations of England, Germany, France, Russia, and India.

The exhibition did include a limited number of exhibits put on by African Americans, including exhibits by the sculptor Edmonia Lewis, a painting exhibit by scientist George Washington Carver, and a statistical exhibit by Joan Imogen Howard. Black individuals were also featured in white exhibits, such as Nancy Green&#x27;s portrayal of the character Aunt Jemima for the R. T. Davis Milling Company.

=== Operation ===
The fair opened in May and ran through October 30, 1893. Forty-six nations participated in the fair, which was the first world&#x27;s fair to have national pavilions. They constructed exhibits and pavilions and named national &quot;delegates&quot;; for example, Haiti selected Frederick Douglass to be its delegate. The Exposition drew over 27 million visitors. The fair was originally meant to be closed on Sundays, but the Chicago Woman&#x27;s Club petitioned that it stay open. The club felt that if the exposition was closed on Sunday, it would restrict those who could not take off work during the work-week from seeing it.

The exposition was located in Jackson Park and on the Midway Plaisance on in the neighborhoods of South Shore, Jackson Park Highlands, Hyde Park, and Woodlawn. Charles H. Wacker was the director of the fair. The layout of the fairgrounds was created by Frederick Law Olmsted, and the Beaux-Arts architecture of the buildings was under the direction of Daniel Burnham, Director of Works for the fair. Renowned local architect Henry Ives Cobb designed several buildings for the exposition. The director of the American Academy in Rome, Francis Davis Millet, directed the painted mural decorations. Indeed, it was a coming-of-age for the arts and architecture of the &quot;American Renaissance&quot;, and it showcased the burgeoning neoclassical and Beaux-Arts styles.

=== Assassination of mayor and end of fair ===

The fair ended with the city in shock, as popular mayor Carter Harrison III was assassinated by Patrick Eugene Prendergast two days before the fair&#x27;s closing. Closing ceremonies were canceled in favor of a public memorial service.

Jackson Park was returned to its status as a public park, in much better shape than its original swampy form. The lagoon was reshaped to give it a more natural appearance, except for the straight-line northern end where it still laps up against the steps on the south side of the Palace of Fine Arts/Museum of Science &amp; Industry building. The Midway Plaisance, a park-like boulevard which extends west from Jackson Park, once formed the southern boundary of the University of Chicago, which was being built as the fair was closing (the university has since developed south of the Midway). The university&#x27;s football team, the Maroons, were the original &quot;Monsters of the Midway.&quot; The exposition is mentioned in the university&#x27;s alma mater: &quot;The City White hath fled the earth, / But where the azure waters lie, / A nobler city hath its birth, / The City Gray that ne&#x27;er shall die.&quot;

== Attractions ==

The World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition was the first world&#x27;s fair with an area for amusements that was strictly separated from the exhibition halls. This area, developed by a young music promoter, Sol Bloom, concentrated on Midway Plaisance and introduced the term &quot;midway&quot; to American English to describe the area of a carnival or fair where sideshows are located.

It included carnival rides, among them the original Ferris Wheel, built by George Washington Gale Ferris Jr. This wheel was high and had 36 cars, each of which could accommodate 40 people. The importance of the Columbian Exposition is highlighted by the use of &quot;&quot; (&quot;Chicago wheel&quot;) in many Latin American countries such as Costa Rica and Chile in reference to the Ferris wheel. One attendee, George C. Tilyou, later credited the sights he saw on the Chicago midway for inspiring him to create America&#x27;s first major amusement park, Steeplechase Park in Coney Island, New York.

The fair included life-size reproductions of Christopher Columbus&#x27; three ships, the &quot;Niña&quot; (real name &quot;Santa Clara&quot;), the &quot;Pinta&quot;, and the &quot;Santa María&quot;. These were intended to celebrate the 400th anniversary of Columbus&#x27; discovery of the Americas. The ships were constructed in Spain and then sailed to America for the exposition. The celebration of Columbus was an intergovernmental project, coordinated by American special envoy William Eleroy Curtis, the Queen Regent of Spain, and Pope Leo XIII. The ships were a very popular exhibit.

Eadweard Muybridge gave a series of lectures on the Science of Animal Locomotion in the Zoopraxographical Hall, built specially for that purpose on Midway Plaisance. He used his zoopraxiscope to show his moving pictures to a paying public. The hall was the first commercial movie theater.

The &quot;Street in Cairo&quot; included the popular dancer known as Little Egypt. She introduced America to the suggestive version of the belly dance known as the &quot;hootchy-kootchy,&quot; to a tune said to have been improvised by Sol Bloom (and now more commonly associated with snake charmers) which he had composed when his dancers had no music to dance to. Bloom did not copyright the song, putting it immediately in the public domain.

Also included was the first moving walkway or travelator, which was designed by architect Joseph Lyman Silsbee. It had two different divisions: one where passengers were seated, and one where riders could stand or walk. It ran in a loop down the length of a lakefront pier to a casino.

Although denied a spot at the fair, Buffalo Bill Cody decided to come to Chicago anyway, setting up his &quot;Buffalo Bill&#x27;s Wild West Show&quot; just outside the edge of the exposition. Nearby, historian Frederick Jackson Turner gave academic lectures reflecting on the end of the frontier which Buffalo Bill represented.

The electrotachyscope of Ottomar Anschütz was demonstrated, which used a Geissler tube to project the illusion of moving images.

Louis Comfort Tiffany made his reputation with a stunning chapel designed and built for the Exposition. After the Exposition the Tiffany Chapel was sold several times, even going back to Tiffany&#x27;s estate. It was eventually reconstructed and restored and in 1999 it was installed at the Charles Hosmer Morse Museum of American Art.
Architect Kirtland Cutter&#x27;s Idaho Building, a rustic log construction, was a popular favorite, visited by an estimated 18 million people. The building&#x27;s design and interior furnishings were a major precursor of the Arts and Crafts movement.

=== Anthropology ===
There was an Anthropology Building at the World&#x27;s Fair. Nearby, &quot;The Cliff Dwellers&quot; featured a rock and timber structure that was painted to recreate Battle Rock Mountain in Colorado, a stylized recreation of an American Indian cliff dwelling with pottery, weapons, and other relics on display. There was also an Eskimo display. There were also birch bark wigwams of the Penobscot tribe. Nearby was a working model Indian school, organized by the Office of Indian Affairs, that housed delegations of Native American students and their teachers from schools around the country for weeks at a time.

=== Rail ===
The &quot;John Bull&quot; locomotive was displayed. It was only 62 years old, having been built in 1831. It was the first locomotive acquisition by the Smithsonian Institution. The locomotive ran under its own power from Washington, DC, to Chicago to participate, and returned to Washington under its own power again when the exposition closed. In 1981 it was the oldest surviving operable steam locomotive in the world when it ran under its own power again.

A Baldwin 2-4-2 locomotive was showcased at the exposition, and subsequently the type was known as the &quot;Columbia&quot;.

An original frog switch and portion of the superstructure of the famous 1826 Granite Railway in Massachusetts could be viewed. This was the first commercial railroad in the United States to evolve into a common carrier without an intervening closure. The railway brought granite stones from a rock quarry in Quincy, Massachusetts, so that the Bunker Hill Monument could be erected in Boston. The frog switch is now on public view in East Milton Square, Massachusetts, on the original right-of-way of the Granite Railway.

Transportation by rail was the major mode of transportation. A 26-track train station was built at the southwest corner of the fair. While trains from around the country would unload there, there was a local train to shuttle tourists from the Chicago Grand Central Station to the fair. The newly built Chicago and South Side Rapid Transit Railroad also served passengers from Congress Terminal to the fairgrounds at Jackson Park. The line exists today as part of the CTA Green Line.

=== Country and state exhibition buildings ===
Forty-six countries had pavilions at the exposition. Norway participated by sending the &quot;Viking&quot;, a replica of the Gokstad ship. It was built in Norway and sailed across the Atlantic Ocean by 12 men, led by Captain Magnus Andersen. In 1919, this ship was moved to Lincoln Park. It was relocated in 1996 to Good Templar Park in Geneva, Illinois, where it awaits renovation.

Thirty-four U.S. states also had their own pavilions. The work of noted feminist author Kate McPhelim Cleary was featured during the opening of the Nebraska Day ceremonies at the fair, which included a reading of her poem &quot;Nebraska&quot;. Among the state buildings present at the fair were California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, and Texas; each was meant to be architecturally representative of the corresponding states.

Four United States territories also had pavilions located in one building: Arizona, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Utah.

Visitors to the Louisiana Pavilion were each given a seedling of a cypress tree. This resulted in the spread of cypress trees to areas where they were not native. Cypress trees from those seedlings can be found in many areas of West Virginia, where they flourish in the climate.

The &quot;Illinois&quot; was a detailed, full-scale mockup of an &quot;Indiana&quot;-class battleship, constructed as a naval exhibit.

=== Guns and artillery ===
The German firm Krupp had a pavilion of artillery, which apparently had cost one million dollars to stage, including a coastal gun of 42 cm in bore (16.54 inches) and a length of 33 calibres (45.93 feet, 14 meters). A breech-loaded gun, it weighed 120.46 long tons (122.4 metric tons). According to the company&#x27;s marketing: &quot;It carried a charge projectile weighing from 2,200 to 2,500 pounds which, when driven by 900 pounds of brown powder, was claimed to be able to penetrate at 2,200 yards a wrought-iron plate three feet thick if placed at right angles.&quot;

Nicknamed &quot;The Thunderer&quot;, the gun had an advertised range of 15 miles. On this occasion John Schofield declared Krupps&#x27; guns &quot;the greatest peacemakers in the world&quot;. This gun was later seen as a precursor of the company&#x27;s World War I Dicke Berta howitzers.

=== Religions ===
The 1893 Parliament of the World&#x27;s Religions, which ran from September 11 to September 27, marked the first formal gathering of representatives of Eastern and Western spiritual traditions from around the world. According to Eric J. Sharpe, Tomoko Masuzawa, and others, the event was considered radical at the time, since it allowed non-Christian faiths to speak on their own behalf. For example, it is recognized as the first public mention of the Baháʼí Faith in North America; it was not taken seriously by European scholars until the 1960s.

=== Moving walkway ===
Along the banks of the lake, patrons on the way to the casino were taken on a moving walkway designed by architect Joseph Lyman Silsbee, the first of its kind open to the public, called &quot;The Great Wharf, Moving Sidewalk&quot;, it allowed people to walk along or ride in seats.

=== Horticulture ===
Horticultural exhibits at the Horticultural Hall included cacti and orchids as well as other plants in a greenhouse.

== Architecture ==

=== White City ===

Most of the buildings of the fair were designed in the neoclassical architecture style. The area at the Court of Honor was known as The White City. Façades were made not of stone, but of a mixture of plaster, cement, and jute fiber called staff, which was painted white, giving the buildings their &quot;gleam&quot;. Architecture critics derided the structures as &quot;decorated sheds.” The buildings were clad in white stucco, which, in comparison to the tenements of Chicago, seemed illuminated. It was also called the White City because of the extensive use of street lights, which made the boulevards and buildings usable at night.

In 1892, working under extremely tight deadlines to complete construction, director of works Daniel Burnham appointed Francis Davis Millet to replace the fair&#x27;s official director of color-design, William Pretyman. Pretyman had resigned following a dispute with Burnham. After experimenting, Millet settled on a mix of oil and white lead whitewash that could be applied using compressed air spray painting to the buildings, taking considerably less time than traditional brush painting. Joseph Binks, maintenance supervisor at Chicago&#x27;s Marshall Field&#x27;s Wholesale Store, who had been using this method to apply whitewash to the subbasement walls of the store, got the job to paint the Exposition buildings. Claims this was the first use of spray painting may be apocryphal since journals from that time note this form of painting had already been in use in the railroad industry from the early 1880s.

Many of the buildings included sculptural details and, to meet the Exposition&#x27;s opening deadline, chief architect Burnham sought the help of Chicago Art Institute instructor Lorado Taft to help complete them. Taft&#x27;s efforts included employing a group of talented women sculptors from the Institute known as &quot;the White Rabbits&quot; to finish some of the buildings, getting their name from Burnham&#x27;s comment &quot;Hire anyone, even white rabbits if they&#x27;ll do the work.&quot;

The words &quot;Thine alabaster cities gleam&quot; from the song &quot;America the Beautiful&quot; were inspired by the White City.

==== Role in the City Beautiful movement ====
The White City is largely credited for ushering in the City Beautiful movement and planting the seeds of modern city planning. The highly integrated design of the landscapes, promenades, and structures provided a vision of what is possible when planners, landscape architects, and architects work together on a comprehensive design scheme.

The White City inspired cities to focus on the beautification of the components of the city in which municipal government had control; streets, municipal art, public buildings, and public spaces. The designs of the City Beautiful Movement (closely tied with the municipal art movement) are identifiable by their classical architecture, plan symmetry, picturesque views, and axial plans, as well as their magnificent scale. Where the municipal art movement focused on beautifying one feature in a city, the City Beautiful movement began to make improvements on the scale of the district. The White City of the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition inspired the Merchants Club of Chicago to commission Daniel Burnham to create the Plan of Chicago in 1909.

=== Great buildings ===

There were fourteen main &quot;great buildings&quot; centered around a giant reflective pool called the Grand Basin. Buildings included:
* The Administration Building, designed by Richard Morris Hunt
* The Agricultural Building, designed by Charles McKim of McKim, Mead &amp; White
* The Manufactures and Liberal Arts Building, designed by George B. Post. If this building were standing today, it would rank third in volume (8,500,000m3) and eighth in footprint (130,000 m2) on list of largest buildings. It exhibited works related to literature, science, art and music.
* The Mines and Mining Building, designed by Solon Spencer Beman
* The Electricity Building, designed by Henry Van Brunt and Frank Maynard Howe
* The Machinery Hall, designed by Robert Swain Peabody of Peabody and Stearns
* The Woman&#x27;s Building, designed by Sophia Hayden
* The Transportation Building, designed by Adler &amp; Sullivan
* The Fisheries Building designed by Henry Ives Cobb
* Forestry Building designed by Charles B. Atwood
* Horticultural Building designed by Jenney and Mundie
* Anthropology Building designed by Charles B. Atwood

=== Transportation Building ===
Louis Sullivan&#x27;s polychrome proto-Modern Transportation Building was an outstanding exception to the prevailing style, as he tried to develop an organic American form. Years later, in 1922, he wrote that the classical style of the White City had set back modern American architecture by forty years.

As detailed in Erik Larson&#x27;s popular history &quot;The Devil in the White City&quot;, extraordinary effort was required to accomplish the exposition, and much of it was unfinished on opening day. The famous Ferris Wheel, which proved to be a major attendance draw and helped save the fair from bankruptcy, was not finished until June, because of waffling by the board of directors the previous year on whether to build it. Frequent debates and disagreements among the developers of the fair added many delays. The spurning of Buffalo Bill&#x27;s Wild West Show proved a serious financial mistake. Buffalo Bill set up his highly popular show next door to the fair and brought in a great deal of revenue that he did not have to share with the developers. Nonetheless, construction and operation of the fair proved to be a windfall for Chicago workers during the serious economic recession that was sweeping the country.

=== Surviving structures ===
Almost all of the fair&#x27;s structures were designed to be temporary; of the more than 200 buildings erected for the fair, the only two which still stand in place are the Palace of Fine Arts and the World&#x27;s Congress Auxiliary Building. From the time the fair closed until 1920, the Palace of Fine Arts housed the Field Columbian Museum (now the Field Museum of Natural History, since relocated); in 1933 (having been completely rebuilt in permanent materials), the Palace building re-opened as the Museum of Science and Industry. The second building, the World&#x27;s Congress Building, was one of the few buildings not built in Jackson Park, instead it was built downtown in Grant Park. The cost of construction of the World&#x27;s Congress Building was shared with the Art Institute of Chicago, which, as planned, moved into the building (the museum&#x27;s current home) after the close of the fair.

The three other significant buildings that survived the fair represented Norway, the Netherlands, and the State of Maine. The Norway Building was a recreation of a traditional wooden stave church. After the Fair it was relocated to Lake Geneva, and in 1935 was moved to a museum called Little Norway in Blue Mounds, Wisconsin. In 2015 it was dismantled and shipped back to Norway, where it was restored and reassembled. The second is the Maine State Building, designed by Charles Sumner Frost, which was purchased by the Ricker family of Poland Spring, Maine. They moved the building to their resort to serve as a library and art gallery. The Poland Spring Preservation Society now owns the building, which was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1974. The third is The Dutch House, which was moved to Brookline, Massachusetts.

The 1893 Viking ship that was sailed to the Exposition from Norway by Captain Magnus Andersen is located in Geneva, Illinois. The ship is open to visitors on scheduled days April through October.

The main altar at St. John Cantius in Chicago, as well as its matching two side altars, are reputed to be from the Columbian Exposition.

Since many of the other buildings at the fair were intended to be temporary, they were removed after the fair. The White City so impressed visitors (at least before air pollution began to darken the façades) that plans were considered to refinish the exteriors in marble or some other material. These plans were abandoned in July 1894, when much of the fair grounds was destroyed in a fire.

=== Gallery ===
=== Later criticisms ===
Frank Lloyd Wright later wrote that &quot;By this overwhelming rise of grandomania I was confirmed in my fear that a native architecture would be set back at least fifty years.&quot;

According to University of Notre Dame history professor Gail Bederman, the event symbolized a male-dominated and Eurocentrist society. In her 1995 text &quot;Manliness and Civilization&quot;, she writes, &quot;The White City, with its vision of future perfection and of the advanced racial power of manly commerce and technology, constructed civilization as an ideal of white male power.&quot; According to Bederman, people of color were barred entirely from participating in the organization of the White City and were instead given access only to the Midway exhibit, &quot;which specialized in spectacles of barbarous races – &#x27;authentic&#x27; villages of Samoans, Egyptians, Dahomans, Turks, and other exotic peoples, populated by actual imported &#x27;natives.&#x27;&quot;

Two small exhibits were included in the White City&#x27;s &quot;Woman&#x27;s Building&quot; which addressed women of color. One, entitled &quot;Afro-American&quot; was installed in a distant corner of the building. The other, called &quot;Woman&#x27;s Work in Savagery,&quot; included baskets, weavings, and African, Polynesian, and Native American arts. Though they were produced by living women of color, the materials were represented as relics from the distant past, embodying &quot;the work of white women&#x27;s own distant evolutionary foremothers.&quot;

=== Visitors ===
Helen Keller, along with her mentor Anne Sullivan and Dr. Alexander Graham Bell, visited the fair in summer 1893. Keller described the fair in her autobiography &quot;The Story of My Life&quot;. Early in July, a Wellesley College English teacher named Katharine Lee Bates visited the fair. The White City later inspired the reference to &quot;alabaster cities&quot; in her poem and lyrics &quot;America the Beautiful&quot;. The exposition was extensively reported by Chicago publisher William D. Boyce&#x27;s reporters and artists. There is a very detailed and vivid description of all facets of this fair by the Persian traveler Mirza Mohammad Ali Mo&#x27;in ol-Saltaneh written in Persian. He departed from Persia on April 20, 1892, especially for the purpose of visiting the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition.

Pierre de Coubertin visited the fair with his friends Paul Bourget and Samuel Jean de Pozzi. He devotes the first chapter of his book &quot;Souvenirs d&#x27;Amérique et de Grèce&quot; (1897) to the visit. Swami Vivekananda visited the fair to attend the Parliament of the World&#x27;s Religions and delivered his famous speech &quot;Sisters and Brothers of America!&quot;. Kubota Beisen was an official delegate of Japan. As an artist, he sketched hundreds of scenes, some of which were later used to make woodblock print books about the Exhibition. Serial killer H. H. Holmes attended the fair with two of his eventual victims, Annie and Minnie Williams.
Bulgarian writer Aleko Konstantinov visited the fair and wrote his nonfiction book &quot;To Chicago and Back&quot;.

== Souvenirs ==
Examples of exposition souvenirs can be found in various American museum collections. One example, copyrighted in 1892 by John W. Green, is a folding hand fan with detailed illustrations of landscapes and architecture. Charles W Goldsmith produced a set of ten postcard designs, each in full colour, showing the buildings constructed for the exhibition. Columbian Exposition coins were also minted for the event.

== Electricity ==
The effort to power the Fair with electricity, which became a demonstration piece for Westinghouse Electric and the alternating current system they had been developing for many years, took place at the end of what has been called the War of the currents between DC and AC. Westinghouse initially did not put in a bid to power the Fair but agreed to be the contractor for a local Chicago company that put in a low bid of US$510,000 to supply an alternating current-based system.

Edison General Electric, which at the time was merging with the Thomson-Houston Electric Company to form General Electric, put in a US$1.72 million bid to power the Fair and its planned 93,000 incandescent lamps with direct current. After the Fair committee went over both proposals, Edison General Electric re-bid their costs at $554,000 but Westinghouse underbid them by 70 cents per lamp to get the contract. Westinghouse could not use the Edison incandescent lamp since the patent belonged to General Electric and they had successfully sued to stop use of all patent infringing designs. Since Edison specified a sealed globe of glass in his design Westinghouse found a way to sidestep the Edison patent by quickly developing a lamp with a ground-glass stopper in one end, based on a Sawyer-Man &quot;stopper&quot; lamp patent they already had. The lamps worked well but were short-lived, requiring a small army of workmen to constantly replace them.

Westinghouse Electric had severely underbid the contract and struggled to supply all the equipment specified, including twelve 1,000-horsepower single-phase AC generators and all the lighting and other equipment required. They also had to fend off a last-minute lawsuit by General Electric claiming the Westinghouse Sawyer-Man-based stopper lamp infringed on the Edison incandescent lamp patent.

The International Exposition was held in an Electricity Building which was devoted to electrical exhibits. A statue of Benjamin Franklin was displayed at the entrance. The exposition featured interior and exterior light and displays as well as displays of Thomas Edison&#x27;s kinetoscope, search lights, a seismograph, electric incubators for chicken eggs, and Morse code telegraph.
All the exhibits were from commercial enterprises. Participants included General Electric, Brush, Western Electric, and Westinghouse. The Westinghouse Company displayed several polyphase systems. The exhibits included a switchboard, polyphase generators, step-up transformers, transmission line, step-down transformers, commercial size induction motors and synchronous motors, and rotary direct current converters (including an operational railway motor). The working scaled system allowed the public a view of a system of polyphase power which could be transmitted over long distances, and be utilized, including the supply of direct current. Meters and other auxiliary devices were also present.

Part of the space occupied by the Westinghouse Company was devoted to demonstrations of electrical devices developed by Nikola Tesla including induction motors and the generators used to power the system. The rotating magnetic field that drove these motors was explained through a series of demonstrations including an &quot;Egg of Columbus&quot; that used the two-phase coil in the induction motors to spin a copper egg making it stand on end.

Tesla himself showed up for a week in August to attend the International Electrical Congress, being held at the fair&#x27;s Agriculture Hall, and put on a series of demonstrations of his wireless lighting system in a specially set up darkened room at the Westinghouse exhibit. These included demonstrations he had previously performed throughout America and Europe including using a nearby coil to light a wireless gas-discharge lamp held in his hand.

Also at the Fair, the Chicago Athletic Association Football team played one of the first night football games against West Point (the earliest being on September 28, 1892, between Mansfield State Normal and Wyoming Seminary). Chicago won the game, 14–0. The game lasted only 40 minutes, compared to the normal 90 minutes.

== Music ==

=== Musicians ===

* John Philip Sousa′s Band played for the Exposition dedication celebration in Chicago, 10 October through 21 October 1892.
* Joseph Douglass, classical violinist, who achieved wide recognition after his performance there and became the first African-American violinist to conduct a transcontinental tour and the first to tour as a concert violinist.
* Sissieretta Jones, a soprano known as &quot;the Black Patti&quot; and an already-famous opera singer.
* A paper on African-American spirituals and shouts by Abigail Christensen was read to attendees.

There were many other black artists at the fair, ranging from minstrel and early ragtime groups to more formal classical ensembles to street buskers.
*Scott Joplin, pianist, from Texarkana, Texas; became widely known for his piano playing at the fair.

=== Other music and musicians ===
* The first Indonesian music performance in the United States was at the exposition. The gamelan instruments used in the performance were later placed in the Field Museum of Natural History.
* A group of hula dancers led to increased awareness of Hawaiian music among Americans throughout the country.
* Stoughton Musical Society, the oldest choral society in the United States, presented the first concerts of early American music at the exposition.
* The first eisteddfod (a Welsh choral competition with a history spanning many centuries) held outside Wales was held in Chicago at the exposition.
* A 250-voice Mormon Tabernacle Choir competed in the Eisteddfod, taking the second place prize of $1,000. This was the first appearance of the choir outside the Utah Territory.
* On August 12, 1893, Antonín Dvořák conducted a gala &quot;Bohemian Day&quot; concert at the exposition, besieged by visitors including the conductor of the Chicago Symphony, who arranged for performance of Dvořák&#x27;s &quot;American&quot; string quartet, just completed in Spillville, Iowa, during a Dvořák family vacation in a Czech-speaking community there.
* American composer Amy Beach (1867–1944) was commissioned by the Board of Lady Managers of the fair to compose a choral work (Festival Jubilate, op. 17) for the opening of the Woman&#x27;s Building.
* Sousa&#x27;s Band played concerts in the south bandstand on the Great Plaza, 25 May to 28 June 1893.
* The University of Illinois Military Band conducted by student leaders Charles Elder and Richard Sharpe played concerts twice daily in the Illinois Building 9 June to 24 June 1893. Soloists were William Sandford, euphonium; Charles Elder, clarinet; William Steele, cornet. The band members slept on cots on the top floor of the building.
* On June 8, 1893, The Exposition Orchestra, an expanded version of the Chicago Symphony conducted by guest conductor Vojtěch I. Hlaváč, played the American premiere of Modest Mussorgsky&#x27;s &quot;A Night on Bald Mountain&quot; as part of a concert of Russian folk music.
* A pipe organ containing over 3,900 pipes, one of the largest in the world at the time, was built by the Farrand &amp; Votey Organ Company to the specifications of Chicago organist Clarence Eddy. It was one of the first great organs to rely on electrical connections from its keys to its pipes.
* Musicologist Anna Morsch and composer Charlotte Sporleder presented a program of German music.
* Composer and pianist Anita Socola Specht won the title &quot;best amateur pianist in the United States,&quot; although some of the judges told her, &quot;You are not an amateur, you are an artist!&quot;

== Art ==
=== American artists exhibiting ===
==== Painters ====

* Adam Emory Albright
* Henry Alexander
* Maitland Armstrong
* William Jacob Baer
* William Bliss Baker
* Cecilia Beaux
* James Carroll Beckwith
* Enella Benedict 
* Frank Weston Benson
* Daniel Folger Bigelow 
* Ralph Albert Blakelock 
* Edwin Howland Blashfield
* Mary Cassatt
* Sarah Paxton Ball Dodson
* Thomas Eakins
* Charles Morgan McIlhenney
* Gari Melchers
* Anna Lea Merritt
* John Harrison Mills
* Robert Crannell Minor
* Louis Moeller
* Harry Humphrey Moore
* Edward Moran
* John Singer Sargent

==== Sculptors ====
* Sarah Fisher Ames, sculptor
* John J. Boyle sculptor
* Cyrus Edwin Dallin, sculptor – &quot;Signal of Peace&quot;
* Charles Grafly – &quot;Bust of Daedalus&quot;
* Mary Lawrence, sculptor
* Edward Kemeys
* Theo Alice Ruggles Kitson (as Theo Alice Ruggles)
* Aloys Loeher
* Carol Brooks MacNeil (as Caroline Brooks)
* Helen Farnsworth Mears
* Samuel Murray – &quot;Bust of Walt Whitman&quot;
* William Rudolf O&#x27;Donovan – &quot;Bust of Thomas Eakins&quot;
* Bessie Potter
* Peter Moran
* George D. Peterson
* Preston Powers
* Katherine Prescott
* A. Phimister Proctor
* John Rogers
* Carl Rohl-Smith
* Lorado Taft
* Douglas Tilden
* Luella Varney
=== Japanese art ===
Japan&#x27;s artistic contribution was mainly in porcelain, cloisonné enamel, metalwork and embroidery. While 55 paintings and 24 sculptures came from Japan, 271 of the 290 exhibits in the Palace of Fine Arts were Japanese. Artists represented included Miyagawa Kozan, Yabu Meizan, Namikawa Sōsuke, and Suzuki Chokichi.

=== Women artists exhibiting ===

The women artists at the Woman&#x27;s Building included Anna Lownes, Viennese painter Rosa Schweninger, and many others. American composer Amy Cheney Beach was commissioned by the Board of Lady Managers of the fair to compose a choral work (Festival Jubilate, op. 17) for the opening of the Woman&#x27;s Building. The Mrs Potts sad-iron system was on display. Ami Mali Hicks&#x27; stencil design was selected to adorn the frieze in the assembly room of the Women&#x27;s Building. Musicologist Anna Morsch and composer Charlotte Sporleder presented a program of German music.

The Woman&#x27;s Building included a Woman&#x27;s Building Library Exhibit, which had 7,000 books – all by women. The Woman&#x27;s Building Library was meant to show the cumulative contribution of the world&#x27;s women to literature.

== &quot;Greatest Refrigerator on Earth&quot; fire tragedy ==
A large Romanesque structure called &quot;Greatest Refrigerator on Earth&quot; stored thousands of pounds of the Exposition&#x27;s food and held an ice-skating rink for patrons. The large structure demonstrated artificial freezing, a recent development, and was planned by architect Franklin P. Burnham. The structure&#x27;s floor space was 130 by 255 feet and its height reached almost 200 feet. On the evening of July 10, 1893, the &quot;Greatest Refrigerator on Earth&quot; caught fire. Two firemen entered, one sliding down a rope and another on a line of hose, and both were trapped in the burning refrigerator. A total of fifteen people died, twelve firefighters and three civilians, in front of a crowd of more than a thousand fairgoers. The only artifact that survived the fire was a twelve-foot copper statue of Christopher Columbus, which was kept as a monument to the men who lost their lives and is kept by the fire museum of Chicago.

== Notable firsts ==

=== Concepts ===
* Frederick Jackson Turner lectured on his Frontier thesis.
* The Pledge of Allegiance was first performed at the exposition by a mass of school children lined up in military fashion.
* Contribution to Chicago&#x27;s nickname, the &quot;Windy City&quot;. Some argue that Charles Anderson Dana of the &quot;New York Sun&quot; coined the term related to the hype of the city&#x27;s promoters. Other evidence, however, suggests the term was used as early as 1881 in relation to either Chicago&#x27;s &quot;windbag&quot; politicians or to its weather.

=== Commemorations ===
* United States Mint offered its first commemorative coins: the Columbian Exposition quarter dollar and Columbian Exposition half dollar
* The United States Post Office Department produced its first picture postcards and Columbian Issue commemorative stamps.

=== Edibles and potables ===
* Cream of Wheat
* The brownie was invented by Bertha Palmer for the 1893 World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition.
* Milton Hershey bought a European exhibitor&#x27;s chocolate manufacturing equipment and added chocolate products to his caramel manufacturing business.
* Juicy Fruit gum
* Quaker Oats
* Shredded Wheat
* Pabst Blue Ribbon
* Peanut butter
* Aunt Jemima pancake mix was widely popularized by spokesperson Nancy Green&#x27;s pancake cooking and story telling performances.
* Cracker Jack&#x27;s new recipe was introduced at the Exposition
* Vienna Sausage started selling its frankfurters and sausages near one of the entrances to the Midway Plaisance, just outside the Old Vienna Village. The company later became known as Vienna Beef, famously recognized as &quot;Chicago&#x27;s Hot Dog&quot;.

=== Inventions and manufacturing advances ===
* A device that made plates for printing books in Braille, unveiled by Frank Haven Hall, who met Helen Keller and her teacher Anne Sullivan at the exhibit.
* Moving walkway, or travelator
* The third rail giving electric power to elevated trains led directly to its first continuing US use.
* The &quot;clasp locker&quot;, a clumsy slide fastener and forerunner to the zipper was demonstrated by Whitcomb L. Judson
* Elongated coins (the squashed penny)
* Ferris Wheel
* First fully electrical kitchen including an automatic dishwasher
* Phosphorescent lamps (a precursor to fluorescent lamps)
* John T. Shayne &amp; Company, the local Chicago furrier helped America gain respect on the world stage of manufacturing
* Clark cell as a standard for measuring voltage
* A first prototype of a pressurized aerosol spray, by Francis Davis Millet.
* The first practical electric automobile, invented by William Morrison.

=== Organizations ===
* Congress of Mathematicians, precursor to International Congress of Mathematicians
* Interfaith dialogue (the Parliament of the World&#x27;s Religions)
** First recorded public mention of the Baháʼí Faith in North America

=== Performances ===
* The poet and humorist Benjamin Franklin King, Jr. first performed at the exposition.
* Bodybuilder Eugen Sandow demonstrated feats of strength, promoted by Florenz Ziegfeld.
* Magician Harry Houdini and his brother Theodore performed their magic act at the Midway.

== Later years ==

The exposition was one influence leading to the rise of the City Beautiful movement. Results included grand buildings and fountains built around Olmstedian parks, shallow pools of water on axis to central buildings, larger park systems, broad boulevards and parkways and, after the start of the 20th century, zoning laws and planned suburbs. Examples of the City Beautiful movement&#x27;s works include the City of Chicago, the Columbia University campus, and the National Mall in Washington, D.C.

After the fair closed, J.C. Rogers, a banker from Wamego, Kansas, purchased several pieces of art that had hung in the rotunda of the U.S. Government Building. He also purchased architectural elements, artifacts and buildings from the fair. He shipped his purchases to Wamego. Many of the items, including the artwork, were used to decorate his theater, now known as the Columbian Theatre.

Memorabilia such as books, tokens, published photographs, and well-printed admission tickets saved by guests are popular among collectors.

The George Washington University maintains a small collection of exposition tickets for viewing and research purposes. The collection is currently cared for by GWU&#x27;s Special Collections Research Center, located in the Estelle and Melvin Gelman Library.

When the exposition ended the Ferris Wheel was moved to Chicago&#x27;s north side, next to an exclusive neighborhood. An unsuccessful Circuit Court action was filed against the owners of the wheel to have it moved. The wheel stayed there until it was moved to St. Louis for the 1904 World&#x27;s Fair.

The Columbian Exposition has celebrated many anniversaries since the fair in 1893. The Chicago Historical Society held an exhibition to commemorate the fair. The Grand Illusions exhibition was centered around the idea that the Columbian Exposition was made up of a series of illusions. The commemorative exhibition contained partial reconstructions, a video detailing the fair, and a catalogue similar to the one sold at the World&#x27;s Fair of 1893.

== Academic views ==
Henry Adams wrote in his 1907 &quot;Education&quot;: “The Exposition denied philosophy ... [S]ince Noah’s Ark, no such Babel of loose and ill-jointed, such vague and ill-defined and unrelated thoughts and half-thoughts and experimental out-cries... had ruffled the surface of the Lakes.”

Michel-Rolph Trouillot wrote that the academic aspect of the event was not very important, even though the Harvard Peabody Museum, the Smithsonian Institution, and Franz Boas made contributions.

== In popular culture ==
* The Exposition is portrayed in the 2017 historical film, &quot;The Current War,&quot; concerning the competition between George Westinghouse and Thomas Edison to establish the dominant form of electricity in the United States.
* &quot;1893: A World&#x27;s Fair Mystery&quot;, an interactive fiction by Peter Nepstad that recreates the Exposition in detail.
* &quot;Against the Day&quot;, a fictional novel that takes place during the Exposition during the first act.
* &quot;The Devil in the White City&quot;, a non-fiction book intertwining the true tales of the architect behind the Exposition and serial killer H. H. Holmes.
* &quot;Timebound&quot;, a time travel novel by Rysa Walker, culminates at the Exposition.
* &quot;&quot;, a 2005 documentary film about the Exposition by Mark Bussler.
* The Exposition served as the setting for &quot;Against Odds,&quot; a novel by Emma Murdock Van Deventer.
* &quot;Jimmy Corrigan, the Smartest Kid on Earth&quot;, a graphic novel set in part at the Exposition
* &quot;Wonder of the Worlds&quot;, an adventure novel where Nikola Tesla, Mark Twain, and Houdini pursue Martian agents who have stolen a powerful crystal from Tesla at the Exposition.
* &quot;The Will of an Eccentric&quot;, an adventure novel by Jules Verne. The Exposition is evoked with admiration in the early chapters.
* The Exposition appears in the season 1 episode &quot;The World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition&quot; of the NBC series &quot;Timeless&quot;.
* The Exposition is referenced in Sufjan Stevens&#x27;s song in his album &quot;Illinois&quot;, &quot;Come On! Feel The Illinoise!&quot;, which consists of two parts. Part 1 is titled, &quot;World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition&quot;.
* The Exposition plays a role in the historical novel, &quot;Owen Glen&quot;, by Ben Ames Williams.
* Mystery Train Island, a video game level on Poptropica released in 2011, is based on and is partially set at the Exposition, referred to as the 1893 Chicago World&#x27;s Fair in the game.
* &quot;BioShock Infinite&quot;, a 2013 video game. The floating city-state of Columbia was created at the Exposition and toured across the world to promote American exceptionalism.
* The exposition is a key setting of the novel &quot;The City Beautiful&quot; by Aden Polydoros.
* The exposition appears in the travel book by Aleko Konstantinov, &quot;To Chicago and Back&quot;.
* The young adult novel &quot;Fair Weather&quot; by Illinois native author Richard Peck takes thirteen-year-old Rosie Beckett and her family from their downstate family farm to the 1893 World&#x27;s Fair in Chicago.
* &quot;The Dark Pictures Anthology: The Devil in Me&quot;, a 2022 video game which was inspired by H. H. Holmes murder castle.
* The Exposition appears in &quot;1893&quot;, the third episode of the second season of the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) television series &quot;Loki&quot; (2023). In the episode, Loki and Mobius M. Mobius attend the Exposition in search of Ravonna Renslayer and Miss Minutes, and encounter Victor Timely, a variant of Kang the Conqueror, whose help they need to save the multiverse.
* The Exposition also appears in the post-credits scene of the MCU film &quot;Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania&quot; (2023), which uses footage from &quot;Loki&quot; despite being released before it.

== See also ==

* &quot;Signal of Peace&quot;
* &quot;Kwanusila&quot;
* List of world expositions
* List of world&#x27;s fairs
* Benjamin W. Kilburn, stereoscopic view concession
* H. H. Holmes, serial killer associated with the 1893 World&#x27;s Fair
* St. John Cantius Church (Chicago), whose main altar, as well as its matching two side altars, reputedly originate from the 1893 Columbian Exposition
* Spectacle Reef Light
* World&#x27;s Largest Stove
* World&#x27;s Largest Cedar Bucket
* Fairy lamp, candle sets popularized at Queen Victoria&#x27;s Golden Jubilee were used to illuminate an island at the Expo
* St. Louis Autumnal Festival Association

== Notes ==
== References ==

* The project documenting The World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition of 1893 – Website main page, About the project
* 
* 
* Neuberger, Mary. 2006. &quot;To Chicago and Back: Alecko Konstantinov, Rose Oil, and the Smell of Modernity&quot; in &quot;Slavic Review&quot;, Fall 2006.
* Larson, Erik. The Devil in the White City: Murder, Magic, and Madness at the Fair That Changed America. New York: Vintage Books a Division of Random House, Inc., 2003.
* Ramsland, Katherine. “H. H. Holmes: Master of Illusion”. crime library. 2014. October 1, 2014. 
* Redman, Samuel J. &quot;Bone Rooms: From Scientific Racism to Human Prehistory in Museums&quot;. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 2016.
* Placko, Dane. “Chilling Tour inside Serial Killer H. H. Holmes’ ‘Murder Castle’”. My Fox Chicago. Apr. 28, 2014. Oct 2, 2014.
* French, Leanne; Grimm, Laura; Pak, Eudie. “H. H. Holmes Biography”. Biography. 2014. October 1, 2014.
* French, Leanne; Grimm, Laura; Pak, Eudie. H. H. Holmes – The World Fair. Television clip. Biography. 2014. A&amp;E Television Networks, LLC, 2014. Video from biography.com.
* French, Leanne; Grimm, Laura; Pak, Eudie. H. H. Holmes – Chicago Expansion. Television clip. Biography. 2014. A&amp;E Television Networks, LLC, 2014. Video from biography.com.
* French, Leanne; Grimm, Laura; Pak, Eudie. H. H. Holmes – Finding the Victims. Television Clip. Biography. 2014. A&amp;E Television Networks, LLC, 2014. Video from biography.com.
* French, Leanne; Grimm, Laura; Pak, Eudie. H. H. Holmes – Full Biography. Television clip. Biography. 2014. A&amp;E Television Networks, LLC, 2014. Video from biography.com.

== Further reading ==

* Appelbaum, Stanley (1980). &quot;The Chicago World&#x27;s Fair of 1893.&quot; New York: Dover Publications, Inc. 
* Arnold, C.D. &quot;Portfolio of Views: The World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition&quot;. National Chemigraph Company, Chicago &amp; St. Louis, 1893.
* Bancroft, Hubert Howe. &quot;The Book of the Fair: An Historical and Descriptive Presentation of the World&#x27;s Science, Art and Industry, As Viewed through the Columbian Exposition at Chicago in 1893&quot;. New York: Bounty, 1894.
* Barrett, John Patrick, &quot;Electricity at the Columbian Exposition&quot;. R.R. Donnelley, 1894.
* Bertuca, David, ed. &quot;World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition: A Centennial Bibliographic Guide&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1996. 
* Buel, James William. &quot;The Magic City.&quot; New York: Arno Press, 1974. 
* Burg, David F. &quot;Chicago&#x27;s White City of 1893.&quot; Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky, 1976. 
* Corn, Wanda M. &quot;Women Building History: Public Art at the 1893 Columbian Exposition.&quot; Berkeley: University of California Press, 2011.
* Dybwad, G. L., and Joy V. Bliss, &quot;Annotated Bibliography: World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition, Chicago 1893&quot;. Book Stops Here, 1992. 
* Eagle, Mary Kavanaugh Oldham, d. 1903, ed. &quot;The Congress of Women: Held in the Woman&#x27;s Building, World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, U. S. A., 1893, With Portraits, Biographies and Addresses&quot;. Chicago: Monarch Book Company, 1894.
* Elliott, Maud Howe, 1854–1948, ed. &quot;Art and Handicraft in the Woman&#x27;s Building of the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893&quot;. Chicago and New York: Rand, McNally and Co., 1894.
* Gonzalez, Robert Alexander. Designing Pan-America: U.S. Architectural Visions for the Western Hemisphere&quot;. Austin, Texas: University of Texas Press, 2011.
*Green, Christopher T. &quot;A Stage Set for Assimilation: The Model Indian School at the World’s Columbian Exposition&quot;. &quot;Winterthur Portfolio&quot;. Vol. 51, No. 2/3 (Summer/Autumn 2017).
* &quot;Glimpses of the World&#x27;s Fair: A Selection of Gems of the White City Seen Through A Camera&quot;, Laird &amp; Lee Publishers, Chicago: 1893, accessed February 13, 2009.
* International Congress of Mathematicians, Mathematical papers read at the International Mathematical Congress : held in connection with the World&#x27;s Columbian exposition, Chicago, 1893 (1st : 1893 : Chicago).
* Jaegerová, Anna. &quot;Ideals of Authenticity: Euro-American Sculptural Representations of Native Americans at the World’s Columbian Exposition of 1893&quot;. Diploma thesis. July 8, 2021. Masaryk University, Faculty of Arts.
* Larson, Erik. &quot;Devil in the White City: Murder, Magic, and Madness at the Fair That Changed America.&quot; New York: Crown, 2003. .
* Ormos, István: &quot;Cairo in Chicago : Cairo street at the world&#x27;s Columbian exposition of 1893&quot;, Le Caire : Institut Francais d&#x27;Archéologie Orientale (IFAO), 2021; 
* &quot;Photographs of the World&#x27;s Fair: an elaborate collection of photographs of the buildings, grounds and exhibits of the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition with a special description of The Famous Midway Plaisance&quot;. Chicago: Werner, 1894.
* Peck, Richard, &quot;Fair Weather&quot;, an adventure novel about a 13-year-old being away from home for the first time and visiting the fair.
* Reed, Christopher Robert. &quot;&quot;All the World Is Here!&quot; The Black Presence at White City&quot;. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2000. 
* Rydell, Robert, and Carolyn Kinder Carr, eds. &quot;Revisiting the White City: American Art at the 1893 World&#x27;s Fair&quot;. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 1993. 
* Silkenat, David. &quot;Workers in the White City: Working Class Culture at the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition,&quot; Illinois State Historical Journal 2011 (104): 266-300.
* Wells, Ida B. &quot;The Reason Why the Colored American Is Not in the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition: The Afro-American&#x27;s Contribution to Columbian Literature.&quot; Originally published 1893. Reprint ed., edited by Robert W. Rydell. Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 1999. 
* World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition (1893 : Chicago, Ill.). Board of Lady Managers. &quot;List of Books Sent by Home and Foreign Committees to the Library of the Woman&#x27;s Building, World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893&quot; by World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition (1893 : Chicago). Board of Lady Managers; edited by Edith E. Clarke. Chicago: n. pub., ca. 1894. A bibliography.
* Yandell, Enid. &quot;Three Girls in a Flat&quot; by Enid Yandell, Jean Loughborough and Laura Hayes. Chicago: Bright, Leonard and Co., 1892. Biographical account of women at the fair.
== External links ==

* Expo 1893 Chicago at Bureau International des Expositions
* The 1893 World&#x27;s Fair in Chicago (worldsfairchicago1893.com). A standalone website that covers all aspects of the Exposition
* Chicago 1893 is a media project about the Exposition which includes a book, film, and augmented reality
* The Columbian Exposition in American culture.
* Photographs of the 1893 Columbian Exposition 
* Interactive map of Columbian Exposition
* The Story of the Columbian Expo Battleship &quot;Illinois Bell&quot;
*President Benjamin Harrison: Celebrating the 400th Anniversary of the Discovery of America Shapell Manuscript Foundation
* The 1893 World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition Reading Room.
* Robert N. Dennis Collection of Stereoscopic Views: Exhibitions 1893. Search results, at New York Public Library Digital Collections
* The Winterthur Library Overview of an archival collection on the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition.
* Columbian Theatre History and information about artwork from the U.S. Government Building.
* Photographs and interactive map from the 1893 Columbian Exposition from the University of Chicago
* Video simulations from the 1893 Columbian Exposition from UCLA&#x27;s Urban Simulation Team 
* 1893 Columbian Exposition Concerts
* Edgar Rice Burroughs&#x27; Amazing Summer of &#x27;93 – Columbian Exposition
* International Eisteddfod chair, Chicago, 1893
* Photographs of the Exposition from the Hagley Digital Archives
* Map of Chicago Columbian Exposition from the American Geographical Society Library
* Interactive Map of the Chicago Columbian Exposition, created in the Harvard Worldmap Platform
* President Harrison: Worlds Columbian Exposition Shapell Manuscript Foundation
* Guide to the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition Ticket Collection, 1893, Special Collections Research Center, Estelle and Melvin Gelman Library, The George Washington University 
* Guide to World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition resources at Field Museum Library
* Guide to the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition Records 1891–1930 at the University of Chicago Special Collections Research Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="4" end="37" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="57" end="82" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="Chicago World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q172754" start="90" end="107" title="world&amp;#x27;s fair" label="world&amp;#x27;s fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="116" end="123" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="194" end="214" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="237" end="246" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157432" start="293" end="305" title="Jackson Park (Chicago)" label="Jackson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="471" end="484" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="486" end="502" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="508" end="517" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304178" start="617" end="629" title="Architecture of the United States" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q94005" start="775" end="793" title="John Wellborn Root" label="John Wellborn Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q316639" start="795" end="809" title="Daniel Burnham" label="Daniel Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q364187" start="811" end="832" title="Frederick Law Olmsted" label="Frederick Law Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958459" start="838" end="855" title="Charles B. Atwood" label="Charles B. Atwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268134" start="965" end="975" title="Beaux-Arts architecture" label="Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="1005" end="1030" title="neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496332" start="1169" end="1174" title="Staff (building material)" label="staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="1540" end="1545" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="1551" end="1557" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13411007" start="1727" end="1745" title="List of world&amp;#x27;s fairs" label="world&amp;#x27;s fairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q464148" start="1782" end="1805" title="American exceptionalism" label="American exceptionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q273095" start="1837" end="1853" title="Great Exhibition" label="Great Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="1877" end="1890" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q70520" start="2249" end="2267" title="Great Chicago Fire" label="Great Chicago Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402799" start="2609" end="2623" title="Flag of Chicago" label="municipal flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q104008585" start="2914" end="2933" title="John Whitfield Bunn" label="John Whitfield Bunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860300" start="2997" end="3019" title="Milo Barnum Richardson" label="Milo Barnum Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753636" start="3092" end="3102" title="Gilded Age" label="Gilded Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q273095" start="3210" end="3235" title="Crystal Palace Exhibition" label="Crystal Palace Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q984109" start="3367" end="3408" title="Centennial Exposition" label="world&amp;#x27;s fair in Philadelphia in 1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="3813" end="3825" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313721" start="3827" end="3847" title="Cornelius Vanderbilt" label="Cornelius Vanderbilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q326229" start="3853" end="3874" title="William Waldorf Astor" label="William Waldorf Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066292" start="3983" end="4000" title="Charles T. Yerkes" label="Charles T. Yerkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902746" start="4002" end="4016" title="Marshall Field" label="Marshall Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378975" start="4018" end="4031" title="Philip Armour" label="Philip Armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q106502086" start="4033" end="4047" title="Gustavus Swift" label="Gustavus Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201096" start="4053" end="4073" title="Cyrus McCormick, Jr." label="Cyrus McCormick, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1358688" start="4161" end="4171" title="Lyman Gage" label="Lyman Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q93859563" start="4468" end="4488" title="Thomas Barbour Bryan" label="Thomas Barbour Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157432" start="5782" end="5794" title="Jackson Park (Chicago)" label="Jackson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999763" start="5835" end="5852" title="Burnham and Root" label="Daniel H. Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4264986" start="5892" end="5907" title="George R. Davis (Illinois politician)" label="George R. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q364187" start="6087" end="6108" title="Frederick Law Olmsted" label="Frederick Law Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="6177" end="6189" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291429" start="6361" end="6382" title="Rand McNally Building" label="Rand McNally Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333772" start="6509" end="6523" title="G. Brown Goode" label="G. Brown Goode"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="6531" end="6542" title="Smithsonian" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q957317" start="6575" end="6606" title="1889 Paris Universal Exposition" label="1889 Paris Universal Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q215562" start="6741" end="6759" title="Frederick Douglass" label="Frederick Douglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q289428" start="6761" end="6773" title="Ida B. Wells" label="Ida B. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q28864242" start="6775" end="6794" title="Irvine Garland Penn" label="Irvine Garland Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q27500222" start="6800" end="6820" title="Ferdinand Lee Barnett (Chicago)" label="Ferdinand Lee Barnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q512065" start="7567" end="7580" title="Edmonia Lewis" label="Edmonia Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q296898" start="7614" end="7638" title="George Washington Carver" label="George Washington Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823215" start="7669" end="7687" title="Joan Imogen Howard" label="Joan Imogen Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962716" start="7753" end="7764" title="Nancy Green" label="Nancy Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871822" start="7799" end="7810" title="Aunt Jemima" label="Aunt Jemima"/>
<link wikidata="Q215562" start="8144" end="8162" title="Frederick Douglass" label="Frederick Douglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q28604515" start="8292" end="8317" title="Chicago Woman&amp;#x27;s Club" label="Chicago Woman&amp;#x27;s Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157432" start="8527" end="8539" title="Jackson Park (Chicago)" label="Jackson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378479" start="8551" end="8567" title="Midway Plaisance" label="Midway Plaisance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143666" start="8632" end="8641" title="Hyde Park, Chicago" label="Hyde Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816105" start="8647" end="8655" title="Woodlawn, Chicago" label="Woodlawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078665" start="8657" end="8674" title="Charles H. Wacker" label="Charles H. Wacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5723624" start="8922" end="8937" title="Henry Ives Cobb" label="Henry Ives Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345302" start="9031" end="9051" title="Francis Davis Millet" label="Francis Davis Millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q466675" start="9167" end="9187" title="American Renaissance" label="American Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268134" start="9244" end="9254" title="Beaux-Arts architecture" label="Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q295333" start="9368" end="9387" title="Carter Harrison III" label="Carter Harrison III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146452" start="9408" end="9434" title="Patrick Eugene Prendergast" label="Patrick Eugene Prendergast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378479" start="9896" end="9912" title="Midway Plaisance" label="Midway Plaisance"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="10015" end="10036" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q15646290" start="10216" end="10238" title="Monsters of the Midway" label="Monsters of the Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q844450" start="10299" end="10309" title="Alma mater (song)" label="alma mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="10566" end="10585" title="Amusement park" label="area for amusements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555503" start="10689" end="10698" title="Sol Bloom" label="Sol Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378479" start="10716" end="10732" title="Midway Plaisance" label="Midway Plaisance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534976" start="10845" end="10853" title="sideshow" label="sideshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q301527" start="10921" end="10933" title="Ferris Wheel (1893)" label="Ferris Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q925160" start="10944" end="10977" title="George Washington Gale Ferris Jr." label="George Washington Gale Ferris Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q202570" start="11253" end="11265" title="Ferris wheel" label="Ferris wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38823158" start="11281" end="11297" title="George C. Tilyou" label="George C. Tilyou"/>
<link wikidata="Q741612" start="11425" end="11442" title="Steeplechase Park" label="Steeplechase Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q628201" start="11446" end="11458" title="Coney Island" label="Coney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q501652" start="11566" end="11570" title="Niña (ship)" label="Niña"/>
<link wikidata="Q501355" start="11624" end="11629" title="Pinta (ship)" label="Pinta"/>
<link wikidata="Q107900" start="11651" end="11662" title="Santa María (ship)" label="Santa María"/>
<link wikidata="Q18324162" start="11953" end="11974" title="William Eleroy Curtis" label="William Eleroy Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q538125" start="11980" end="12001" title="Maria Christina of Austria" label="Queen Regent of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="12007" end="12020" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q190568" start="12062" end="12080" title="Eadweard Muybridge" label="Eadweard Muybridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q220330" start="12240" end="12253" title="zoopraxiscope" label="zoopraxiscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="12266" end="12281" title="Film" label="moving pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649896" start="12421" end="12433" title="Little Egypt (dancer)" label="Little Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q182863" start="12491" end="12502" title="belly dance" label="belly dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411278" start="12522" end="12537" title="The Streets of Cairo, or the Poor Little Country Maid" label="hootchy-kootchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="12781" end="12794" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q847580" start="12825" end="12839" title="moving walkway" label="moving walkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380947" start="12887" end="12907" title="Joseph Lyman Silsbee" label="Joseph Lyman Silsbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q202285" start="13120" end="13137" title="Buffalo Bill Cody" label="Buffalo Bill Cody"/>
<link wikidata="Q548462" start="13294" end="13318" title="Frederick Jackson Turner" label="Frederick Jackson Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q950472" start="13417" end="13434" title="electrotachyscope" label="electrotachyscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q70995" start="13438" end="13454" title="Ottomar Anschütz" label="Ottomar Anschütz"/>
<link wikidata="Q537792" start="13486" end="13499" title="Geissler tube" label="Geissler tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q182593" start="13515" end="13523" title="illusion" label="illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q107478" start="13527" end="13540" title="history of cinema" label="moving images"/>
<link wikidata="Q312950" start="13543" end="13564" title="Louis Comfort Tiffany" label="Louis Comfort Tiffany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801199" start="13672" end="13686" title="Tiffany Chapel" label="Tiffany Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079149" start="13834" end="13877" title="Charles Hosmer Morse Museum of American Art" label="Charles Hosmer Morse Museum of American Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416227" start="13889" end="13904" title="Kirtland Cutter" label="Kirtland Cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987313" start="13912" end="13926" title="Idaho Building (Chicago World&amp;#x27;s Fair)" label="Idaho Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q330369" start="14104" end="14128" title="Arts and Crafts movement" label="Arts and Crafts movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q131242" start="14481" end="14487" title="Eskimo" label="Eskimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q277986" start="14524" end="14530" title="wigwam" label="wigwam"/>
<link wikidata="Q774932" start="14539" end="14548" title="Penobscot" label="Penobscot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081474" start="14789" end="14798" title="John Bull (locomotive)" label="John Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="14931" end="14954" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="15000" end="15014" title="Washington, DC" label="Washington, DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q171043" start="15169" end="15185" title="steam locomotive" label="steam locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q804868" start="15241" end="15248" title="Baldwin Locomotive Works" label="Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036539" start="15249" end="15254" title="2-4-2" label="2-4-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q82818" start="15377" end="15381" title="Switch frog" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q287266" start="15442" end="15457" title="Granite Railway" label="Granite Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q561457" start="15569" end="15583" title="common carrier" label="common carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q49143" start="15673" end="15694" title="Quincy, Massachusetts" label="Quincy, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009561" start="15708" end="15728" title="Bunker Hill Monument" label="Bunker Hill Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q739428" start="15798" end="15831" title="Milton, Massachusetts" label="East Milton Square, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128254" start="15849" end="15861" title="Right-of-way (transportation)" label="right-of-way"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492278" start="16189" end="16234" title="South Side Elevated Railroad" label="Chicago and South Side Rapid Transit Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160831" start="16263" end="16280" title="Congress Terminal" label="Congress Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q96383996" start="16303" end="16315" title="Jackson Park station (World&amp;#x27;s Fair)" label="Jackson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q117309" start="16354" end="16357" title="Chicago Transit Authority" label="CTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176204" start="16358" end="16368" title="Green Line (CTA)" label="Green Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q62589" start="16471" end="16477" title="Union between Sweden and Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929446" start="16512" end="16518" title="Viking (replica Viking longship)" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q640851" start="16543" end="16555" title="Gokstad ship" label="Gokstad ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="16602" end="16616" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123262" start="16692" end="16704" title="Lincoln Park" label="Lincoln Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q576152" start="16755" end="16771" title="Geneva, Illinois" label="Geneva, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375649" start="16890" end="16910" title="Kate McPhelim Cleary" label="Kate McPhelim Cleary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="17290" end="17315" title="United States territories" label="United States territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="17360" end="17367" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="17369" end="17379" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="17381" end="17389" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="17395" end="17399" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873232" start="17686" end="17706" title="Battleship Illinois (replica)" label="&amp;quot;Illinois&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519671" start="17747" end="17783" title="Indiana-class battleship" label="&amp;quot;Indiana&amp;quot;-class battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q679201" start="17861" end="17866" title="Krupp" label="Krupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q667419" start="18100" end="18108" title="long ton" label="long ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703941" start="18283" end="18295" title="brown powder" label="brown powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q996047" start="18519" end="18533" title="John Schofield" label="John Schofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q168706" start="18685" end="18696" title="Dicke Berta" label="Dicke Berta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752626" start="18736" end="18776" title="Parliament of the World&amp;#x27;s Religions" label="Parliament of the World&amp;#x27;s Religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386792" start="18956" end="18970" title="Eric J. Sharpe" label="Eric J. Sharpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394733" start="18972" end="18987" title="Tomoko Masuzawa" label="Tomoko Masuzawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="19180" end="19192" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q847580" start="19378" end="19392" title="moving walkway" label="moving walkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380947" start="19415" end="19435" title="Joseph Lyman Silsbee" label="Joseph Lyman Silsbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q14560" start="19662" end="19667" title="cacti" label="cacti"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="19672" end="19678" title="orchid" label="orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="19709" end="19719" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="19817" end="19842" title="neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496332" start="20001" end="20006" title="Staff (building material)" label="staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q33526" start="20183" end="20189" title="stucco" label="stucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078374" start="20219" end="20227" title="tenement" label="tenement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345302" start="20518" end="20538" title="Francis Davis Millet" label="Francis Davis Millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q378312" start="20742" end="20751" title="whitewash" label="whitewash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055935" start="20795" end="20806" title="spray paint" label="spray paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773569" start="20946" end="20983" title="Marshall Field&amp;#x27;s Wholesale Store" label="Marshall Field&amp;#x27;s Wholesale Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q239303" start="21462" end="21483" title="Chicago Art Institute" label="Chicago Art Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869845" start="21495" end="21506" title="Lorado Taft" label="Lorado Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995249" start="21643" end="21656" title="White Rabbits (sculptors)" label="White Rabbits"/>
<link wikidata="Q463167" start="21888" end="21909" title="America the Beautiful" label="America the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755539" start="22051" end="22074" title="City Beautiful movement" label="City Beautiful movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818431" start="22993" end="23007" title="Merchants Club" label="Merchants Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q316639" start="23033" end="23047" title="Daniel Burnham" label="Daniel Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q940298" start="23293" end="23312" title="Richard Morris Hunt" label="Richard Morris Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q657848" start="23354" end="23367" title="Charles Follen McKim" label="Charles McKim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915267" start="23371" end="23394" title="McKim, Mead &amp;amp; White" label="McKim, Mead &amp;amp; White"/>
<link wikidata="Q670136" start="23453" end="23467" title="George B. Post" label="George B. Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029700" start="23591" end="23616" title="list of largest buildings" label="list of largest buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489585" start="23729" end="23748" title="Solon Spencer Beman" label="Solon Spencer Beman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489826" start="23789" end="23804" title="Henry Van Brunt" label="Henry Van Brunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23303106" start="23809" end="23827" title="Frank M. Howe" label="Frank Maynard Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350174" start="23862" end="23882" title="Robert Swain Peabody" label="Robert Swain Peabody"/>
<link wikidata="Q41165043" start="23908" end="23933" title="The Woman&amp;#x27;s Building (Chicago)" label="The Woman&amp;#x27;s Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562886" start="23947" end="23960" title="Sophia Hayden Bennett" label="Sophia Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683278" start="24004" end="24024" title="Adler &amp;amp; Sullivan" label="Adler &amp;amp; Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5723624" start="24062" end="24077" title="Henry Ives Cobb" label="Henry Ives Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958459" start="24110" end="24127" title="Charles B. Atwood" label="Charles B. Atwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q715701" start="24165" end="24182" title="Jenney and Mundie" label="Jenney and Mundie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958459" start="24219" end="24236" title="Charles B. Atwood" label="Charles B. Atwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q243240" start="24270" end="24284" title="Louis Sullivan" label="Louis Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223298" start="24591" end="24602" title="Erik Larson (author)" label="Erik Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q283445" start="24632" end="24659" title="The Devil in the White City" label="The Devil in the White City"/>
<link wikidata="Q301527" start="24788" end="24800" title="Ferris Wheel (1893)" label="Ferris Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q202285" start="25107" end="25119" title="Buffalo Bill" label="Buffalo Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414079" start="25702" end="25721" title="Palace of Fine Arts, Chicago" label="Palace of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796889" start="25730" end="25770" title="Art Institute of Chicago Building" label="World&amp;#x27;s Congress Auxiliary Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122595" start="25881" end="25912" title="Field Museum of Natural History" label="Field Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414079" start="26034" end="26064" title="Museum of Science and Industry (Chicago)" label="Museum of Science and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q159085" start="26212" end="26222" title="Grant Park (Chicago)" label="Grant Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q239303" start="26307" end="26331" title="Art Institute of Chicago" label="Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="26565" end="26571" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q746310" start="26622" end="26634" title="stave church" label="stave church"/>
<link wikidata="Q266433" start="26725" end="26738" title="Little Norway, Wisconsin" label="Little Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671310" start="26742" end="26764" title="Blue Mounds, Wisconsin" label="Blue Mounds, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715237" start="26877" end="26897" title="Maine State Building" label="Maine State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572109" start="26977" end="26997" title="Poland Spring, Maine" label="Poland Spring, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="27164" end="27200" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731265" start="27223" end="27238" title="The Dutch House (Brookline, Massachusetts)" label="The Dutch House"/>
<link wikidata="Q49142" start="27259" end="27283" title="Brookline, Massachusetts" label="Brookline, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929446" start="27290" end="27306" title="Viking (replica Viking longship)" label="1893 Viking ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q576152" start="27394" end="27410" title="Geneva, Illinois" label="Geneva, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588888" start="27501" end="27528" title="St. John Cantius in Chicago" label="St. John Cantius in Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604" start="28054" end="28072" title="Frank Lloyd Wright" label="Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q178848" start="28251" end="28275" title="University of Notre Dame" label="University of Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q38203" start="29600" end="29612" title="Helen Keller" label="Helen Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q239135" start="29636" end="29649" title="Anne Sullivan" label="Anne Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="29658" end="29679" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567059" start="29767" end="29787" title="The Story of My Life (biography)" label="The Story of My Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q49205" start="29812" end="29829" title="Wellesley College" label="Wellesley College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363035" start="29852" end="29871" title="Katharine Lee Bates" label="Katharine Lee Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q463167" start="29995" end="30016" title="America the Beautiful" label="America the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q742952" start="30085" end="30101" title="William D. Boyce" label="William D. Boyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="30213" end="30220" title="Persians" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="30283" end="30290" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="30309" end="30315" title="Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82984" start="30414" end="30433" title="Pierre de Coubertin" label="Pierre de Coubertin"/>
<link wikidata="Q198644" start="30468" end="30480" title="Paul Bourget" label="Paul Bourget"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471213" start="30485" end="30505" title="Samuel Jean de Pozzi" label="Samuel Jean de Pozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47478" start="30619" end="30636" title="Swami Vivekananda" label="Swami Vivekananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752626" start="30668" end="30708" title="Parliament of the World&amp;#x27;s Religions" label="Parliament of the World&amp;#x27;s Religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441301" start="30787" end="30800" title="Kubota Beisen" label="Kubota Beisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q360680" start="30978" end="30990" title="H. H. Holmes" label="H. H. Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="31070" end="31078" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q935407" start="31087" end="31105" title="Aleko Konstantinov" label="Aleko Konstantinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q213051" start="31137" end="31147" title="nonfiction" label="nonfiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810887" start="31159" end="31178" title="To Chicago and Back" label="To Chicago and Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q193220" start="31353" end="31361" title="hand fan" label="hand fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149947" start="31557" end="31583" title="Columbian half dollar" label="Columbian Exposition coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="31721" end="31742" title="Westinghouse Electric (1886)" label="Westinghouse Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q124164" start="31751" end="31770" title="alternating current" label="alternating current"/>
<link wikidata="Q868337" start="31869" end="31888" title="War of the currents" label="War of the currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244162" start="32178" end="32210" title="Thomson-Houston Electric Company" label="Thomson-Houston Electric Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="32219" end="32235" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="32331" end="32345" title="direct current" label="direct current"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="33585" end="33602" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="33722" end="33735" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q669700" start="33743" end="33754" title="kinetoscope" label="kinetoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q946042" start="33756" end="33768" title="search light" label="search light"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="33773" end="33784" title="seismograph" label="seismograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q640719" start="33795" end="33805" title="incubator (egg)" label="incubators"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="33828" end="33838" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="33839" end="33848" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="33948" end="33964" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q391639" start="34027" end="34043" title="polyphase system" label="polyphase system"/>
<link wikidata="Q589666" start="34070" end="34081" title="Telephone switchboard" label="switchboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="34113" end="34124" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207450" start="34186" end="34201" title="induction motor" label="induction motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q845675" start="34207" end="34224" title="synchronous motor" label="synchronous motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9036" start="34669" end="34681" title="Nikola Tesla" label="Nikola Tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q207450" start="34692" end="34707" title="induction motor" label="induction motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="34717" end="34727" title="Electrical generator" label="generators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256476" start="34758" end="34781" title="rotating magnetic field" label="rotating magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499460" start="34874" end="34889" title="Tesla&amp;#x27;s Egg of Columbus" label="Egg of Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q233002" start="34910" end="34919" title="Two-phase electric power" label="two-phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q29899647" start="35054" end="35087" title="International Electrical Congress" label="International Electrical Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q922672" start="35410" end="35428" title="gas-discharge lamp" label="gas-discharge lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095491" start="35470" end="35512" title="Chicago Athletic Association Football team" label="Chicago Athletic Association Football team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35537" end="35551" title="night game#Gridiron football" label="night football"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148024" start="35566" end="35576" title="Army Black Knights football" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751699" start="35628" end="35650" title="Mansfield University of Pennsylvania" label="Mansfield State Normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903753" start="35655" end="35671" title="Wyoming Seminary" label="Wyoming Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q295935" start="35805" end="35822" title="John Philip Sousa" label="John Philip Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282684" start="35929" end="35944" title="Joseph Douglass" label="Joseph Douglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787518" start="36156" end="36173" title="Sissieretta Jones" label="Sissieretta Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q212024" start="36288" end="36298" title="spiritual (music)" label="spirituals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334818" start="36303" end="36309" title="ring shout" label="shouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667696" start="36313" end="36332" title="Abigail Christensen" label="Abigail Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q841192" start="36419" end="36427" title="minstrel" label="minstrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="36468" end="36477" title="Classical music" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q191499" start="36508" end="36520" title="Scott Joplin" label="Scott Joplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210921" start="36656" end="36672" title="Music of Indonesia" label="Indonesian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q194492" start="36733" end="36740" title="gamelan" label="gamelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q866636" start="36848" end="36852" title="hula" label="hula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071834" start="36891" end="36905" title="music of Hawaii" label="Hawaiian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620555" start="36948" end="36973" title="Stoughton Musical Society" label="Stoughton Musical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q670265" start="37107" end="37117" title="eisteddfod" label="eisteddfod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052606" start="37258" end="37281" title="Mormon Tabernacle Choir" label="Mormon Tabernacle Choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q128026" start="37406" end="37420" title="Utah Territory" label="Utah Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298" start="37444" end="37458" title="Antonín Dvořák" label="Antonín Dvořák"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050470" start="37580" end="37596" title="Chicago Symphony" label="Chicago Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q172092" start="37650" end="37658" title="String Quartet No. 12 (Dvořák)" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903233" start="37699" end="37715" title="Spillville, Iowa" label="Spillville, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q235699" start="37806" end="37815" title="Amy Beach" label="Amy Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050470" start="38500" end="38516" title="Chicago Symphony" label="Chicago Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q132682" start="38597" end="38614" title="Modest Mussorgsky" label="Modest Mussorgsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q285976" start="38628" end="38652" title="A Night on Bald Mountain" label="A Night on Bald Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095405" start="38885" end="38898" title="Clarence Eddy" label="Clarence Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q110324682" start="39039" end="39058" title="Charlotte Sporleder" label="Charlotte Sporleder"/>
<link wikidata="Q110624828" start="39119" end="39138" title="Anita Socola Specht" label="Anita Socola Specht"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679020" start="39370" end="39389" title="Adam Emory Albright" label="Adam Emory Albright"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453845" start="39392" end="39407" title="Henry Alexander (painter)" label="Henry Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q17308757" start="39410" end="39428" title="Maitland Armstrong" label="Maitland Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499205" start="39431" end="39449" title="William Jacob Baer" label="William Jacob Baer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005637" start="39452" end="39471" title="William Bliss Baker" label="William Bliss Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q466677" start="39474" end="39487" title="Cecilia Beaux" label="Cecilia Beaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061583" start="39490" end="39512" title="James Carroll Beckwith" label="James Carroll Beckwith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39515" end="39531" title="Enella Benedict " label="Enella Benedict "/>
<link wikidata="Q956055" start="39534" end="39553" title="Frank Weston Benson" label="Frank Weston Benson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39556" end="39578" title="Daniel Folger Bigelow " label="Daniel Folger Bigelow "/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39581" end="39604" title="Ralph Albert Blakelock " label="Ralph Albert Blakelock "/>
<link wikidata="Q5346254" start="39607" end="39631" title="Edwin Howland Blashfield" label="Edwin Howland Blashfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q173223" start="39634" end="39646" title="Mary Cassatt" label="Mary Cassatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104971" start="39649" end="39673" title="Sarah Paxton Ball Dodson" label="Sarah Paxton Ball Dodson"/>
<link wikidata="Q214905" start="39676" end="39689" title="Thomas Eakins" label="Thomas Eakins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387035" start="39720" end="39733" title="Gari Melchers" label="Gari Melchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850565" start="39736" end="39752" title="Anna Lea Merritt" label="Anna Lea Merritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14218110" start="39777" end="39798" title="Robert Crannell Minor" label="Robert Crannell Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061930" start="39801" end="39814" title="Louis Moeller" label="Louis Moeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q42164662" start="39817" end="39837" title="Harry Humphrey Moore" label="Harry Humphrey Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q966864" start="39840" end="39852" title="Edward Moran" label="Edward Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q155626" start="39855" end="39874" title="John Singer Sargent" label="John Singer Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q29898604" start="39898" end="39915" title="Sarah Fisher Ames" label="Sarah Fisher Ames"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053421" start="39928" end="39941" title="John J. Boyle (sculptor)" label="John J. Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148931" start="39953" end="39971" title="Cyrus Edwin Dallin" label="Cyrus Edwin Dallin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512718" start="39990" end="40005" title="Signal of Peace" label="Signal of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078353" start="40014" end="40028" title="Charles Grafly" label="Charles Grafly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780051" start="40062" end="40075" title="Mary Lawrence (sculptor)" label="Mary Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343908" start="40088" end="40101" title="Edward Kemeys" label="Edward Kemeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781420" start="40104" end="40129" title="Theo Alice Ruggles Kitson" label="Theo Alice Ruggles Kitson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104968" start="40156" end="40168" title="Aloys Loeher" label="Aloys Loeher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044270" start="40171" end="40191" title="Carol Brooks MacNeil" label="Carol Brooks MacNeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702231" start="40215" end="40237" title="Helen Farnsworth Mears" label="Helen Farnsworth Mears"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147565" start="40240" end="40253" title="Samuel Murray (sculptor)" label="Samuel Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017821" start="40291" end="40320" title="William Rudolf O&amp;#x27;Donovan" label="William Rudolf O&amp;#x27;Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899918" start="40359" end="40372" title="Bessie Potter Vonnoh" label="Bessie Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241973" start="40410" end="40424" title="Preston Powers" label="Preston Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376515" start="40427" end="40445" title="Katherine T. Hooper Prescott" label="Katherine Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719845" start="40448" end="40468" title="A. Phimister Proctor" label="A. Phimister Proctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q143750" start="40471" end="40482" title="John Rogers (sculptor)" label="John Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040723" start="40485" end="40500" title="Carl Rohl-Smith" label="Carl Rohl-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869845" start="40503" end="40514" title="Lorado Taft" label="Lorado Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302032" start="40517" end="40531" title="Douglas Tilden" label="Douglas Tilden"/>
<link wikidata="Q56754160" start="40534" end="40547" title="Luella A. Varney Serrao" label="Luella Varney"/>
<link wikidata="Q910924" start="40618" end="40627" title="Japanese pottery and porcelain" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102226" start="40629" end="40638" title="cloisonné" label="cloisonné"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740501" start="40822" end="40836" title="Makuzu Kozan" label="Miyagawa Kozan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46103484" start="40838" end="40849" title="Yabu Meizan" label="Yabu Meizan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11566135" start="40851" end="40866" title="Namikawa Sōsuke" label="Namikawa Sōsuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q41165043" start="40949" end="40970" title="The Woman&amp;#x27;s Building (Chicago)" label="Woman&amp;#x27;s Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q28162494" start="40980" end="40991" title="Anna Lownes" label="Anna Lownes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367124" start="41010" end="41026" title="Rosa Schweninger" label="Rosa Schweninger"/>
<link wikidata="Q235699" start="41063" end="41079" title="Amy Cheney Beach" label="Amy Cheney Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q115475563" start="41104" end="41126" title="Board of Lady Managers of the World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Commission" label="Board of Lady Managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q30094587" start="41242" end="41267" title="Mary Florence Potts" label="Mrs Potts sad-iron system"/>
<link wikidata="Q33059345" start="41284" end="41298" title="Ami Mali Hicks" label="Ami Mali Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q183272" start="41346" end="41352" title="frieze" label="frieze"/>
<link wikidata="Q110324682" start="41442" end="41461" title="Charlotte Sporleder" label="Charlotte Sporleder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491744" start="42081" end="42100" title="Franklin Pierce Burnham" label="Franklin P. Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q11786880" start="42721" end="42732" title="fire museum" label="fire museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q548462" start="42787" end="42811" title="Frederick Jackson Turner" label="Frederick Jackson Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917318" start="42828" end="42843" title="Frontier thesis" label="Frontier thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q875611" start="42851" end="42871" title="Pledge of Allegiance (United States)" label="Pledge of Allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885350" start="43022" end="43032" title="Windy City (nickname)" label="Windy City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958396" start="43056" end="43077" title="Charles Anderson Dana" label="Charles Anderson Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983260" start="43091" end="43103" title="New York Sun (historical)" label="New York Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141049" start="43359" end="43377" title="United States Mint" label="United States Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078153" start="43421" end="43456" title="Columbian Exposition quarter dollar" label="Columbian Exposition quarter dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149947" start="43461" end="43493" title="Columbian Exposition half dollar" label="Columbian Exposition half dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109672" start="43500" end="43536" title="United States Post Office Department" label="United States Post Office Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q192425" start="43564" end="43572" title="postcard" label="postcard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149941" start="43578" end="43614" title="Columbian Issue" label="Columbian Issue commemorative stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q10752167" start="43648" end="43662" title="Cream of Wheat" label="Cream of Wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q503129" start="43669" end="43676" title="Chocolate brownie" label="brownie"/>
<link wikidata="Q474672" start="43693" end="43706" title="Bertha Palmer" label="Bertha Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q737720" start="43757" end="43771" title="Milton Hershey" label="Milton Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8086165" start="43911" end="43922" title="Juicy Fruit" label="Juicy Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699694" start="43929" end="43940" title="Quaker Oats" label="Quaker Oats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503454" start="43943" end="43957" title="Shredded Wheat" label="Shredded Wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045297" start="43960" end="43977" title="Pabst Blue Ribbon" label="Pabst Blue Ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q147651" start="43980" end="43993" title="Peanut butter" label="Peanut butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871822" start="43996" end="44007" title="Aunt Jemima" label="Aunt Jemima"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962716" start="44059" end="44070" title="Nancy Green" label="Nancy Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q455721" start="44128" end="44140" title="Cracker Jack" label="Cracker Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q327316" start="44194" end="44208" title="Vienna Sausage" label="Vienna Sausage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928307" start="44377" end="44388" title="Vienna Beef" label="Vienna Beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="44546" end="44553" title="Braille" label="Braille"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44567" end="44583" title="List of people from Jacksonville, Illinois#Authors and academics" label="Frank Haven Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q38203" start="44593" end="44605" title="Helen Keller" label="Helen Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q239135" start="44622" end="44635" title="Anne Sullivan" label="Anne Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q847580" start="44654" end="44668" title="Moving walkway" label="Moving walkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q748825" start="44690" end="44700" title="third rail" label="third rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q101761" start="44865" end="44871" title="zipper" label="zipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q731876" start="44892" end="44910" title="Whitcomb L. Judson" label="Whitcomb L. Judson"/>
<link wikidata="Q917901" start="44913" end="44927" title="Elongated coin" label="Elongated coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q301527" start="44952" end="44964" title="Ferris Wheel (1893)" label="Ferris Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q182925" start="45071" end="45088" title="fluorescent lamps" label="fluorescent lamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997835" start="45092" end="45120" title="John T. Shayne &amp;amp; Company" label="John T. Shayne &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q898656" start="45214" end="45224" title="Clark cell" label="Clark cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="45253" end="45257" title="volt" label="volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q659495" start="45286" end="45311" title="Aerosol spray" label="pressurized aerosol spray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345302" start="45316" end="45336" title="Francis Davis Millet" label="Francis Davis Millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q193692" start="45360" end="45379" title="Electric car" label="electric automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355707" start="45393" end="45409" title="William Morrison (chemist)" label="William Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q860611" start="45477" end="45517" title="International Congress of Mathematicians" label="International Congress of Mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304214" start="45520" end="45539" title="Interfaith dialogue" label="Interfaith dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752626" start="45545" end="45585" title="Parliament of the World&amp;#x27;s Religions" label="Parliament of the World&amp;#x27;s Religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="45627" end="45639" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888656" start="45703" end="45730" title="Benjamin Franklin King, Jr." label="Benjamin Franklin King, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q57608" start="45780" end="45792" title="Eugen Sandow" label="Eugen Sandow"/>
<link wikidata="Q95024" start="45837" end="45853" title="Florenz Ziegfeld Jr." label="Florenz Ziegfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q131545" start="45866" end="45879" title="Harry Houdini" label="Harry Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5790107" start="45896" end="45904" title="Theodore Hardeen" label="Theodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755539" start="46026" end="46049" title="City Beautiful movement" label="City Beautiful movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q364187" start="46111" end="46121" title="Frederick Law Olmsted" label="Olmstedian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="46394" end="46413" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q465811" start="46430" end="46443" title="National Mall" label="National Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906062" start="46515" end="46529" title="Wamego, Kansas" label="Wamego, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726889" start="46832" end="46853" title="the Columbian Theatre" label="the Columbian Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="47000" end="47028" title="George Washington University" label="George Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530482" start="47238" end="47252" title="Gelman Library" label="Gelman Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="47515" end="47524" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520847" start="47533" end="47555" title="1904 World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1904 World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q458390" start="48032" end="48043" title="Henry Adams" label="Henry Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731604" start="48062" end="48083" title="The Education of Henry Adams" label="&amp;quot;Education&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836249" start="48321" end="48343" title="Michel-Rolph Trouillot" label="Michel-Rolph Trouillot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249027" start="48428" end="48450" title="Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology" label="Harvard Peabody Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="48456" end="48479" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q76857" start="48485" end="48495" title="Franz Boas" label="Franz Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q27765260" start="48607" end="48622" title="The Current War" label="The Current War"/>
<link wikidata="Q262367" start="48665" end="48684" title="George Westinghouse" label="George Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="48689" end="48702" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="" start="48779" end="48812" title="1893: A World&amp;#x27;s Fair Mystery" label="1893: A World&amp;#x27;s Fair Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691072" start="48909" end="48924" title="Against the Day" label="Against the Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q283445" start="49019" end="49046" title="The Devil in the White City" label="The Devil in the White City"/>
<link wikidata="Q360680" start="49158" end="49170" title="H. H. Holmes" label="H. H. Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391607" start="49220" end="49231" title="Rysa Walker" label="Rysa Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q61594800" start="49327" end="49339" title="Mark Bussler" label="Mark Bussler"/>
<link wikidata="Q50218665" start="49421" end="49446" title="Emma Murdock Van Deventer" label="Emma Murdock Van Deventer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179029" start="49456" end="49497" title="Jimmy Corrigan, the Smartest Kid on Earth" label="Jimmy Corrigan, the Smartest Kid on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031798" start="49559" end="49579" title="Wonder of the Worlds" label="Wonder of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170544" start="49745" end="49769" title="The Will of an Eccentric" label="The Will of an Eccentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q33977" start="49799" end="49810" title="Jules Verne" label="Jules Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23647166" start="49999" end="50007" title="Timeless (TV series)" label="Timeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q319502" start="50049" end="50063" title="Sufjan Stevens" label="Sufjan Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658831" start="50095" end="50103" title="Illinois (Sufjan Stevens album)" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885219" start="50328" end="50345" title="Ben Ames Williams" label="Ben Ames Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022094" start="50393" end="50403" title="Poptropica" label="Poptropica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074746" start="50545" end="50562" title="BioShock Infinite" label="BioShock Infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112443" start="50616" end="50624" title="Columbia (name)" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q464148" start="50694" end="50717" title="American exceptionalism" label="American exceptionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q115097638" start="50772" end="50790" title="The City Beautiful (novel)" label="The City Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q935407" start="50863" end="50881" title="Aleko Konstantinov" label="Aleko Konstantinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810887" start="50889" end="50908" title="To Chicago and Back" label="To Chicago and Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328339" start="50991" end="51003" title="Richard Peck (writer)" label="Richard Peck"/>
<link wikidata="" start="51140" end="51184" title="The Dark Pictures Anthology: The Devil in Me" label="The Dark Pictures Anthology: The Devil in Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q360680" start="51232" end="51244" title="H. H. Holmes" label="H. H. Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q123142817" start="51294" end="51298" title="1893 (Loki)" label="1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q112610403" start="51331" end="51344" title="Loki season 2" label="second season"/>
<link wikidata="Q642878" start="51352" end="51377" title="Marvel Cinematic Universe" label="Marvel Cinematic Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q64349029" start="51408" end="51412" title="Loki (TV series)" label="Loki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51443" end="51447" title="Loki (Marvel Cinematic Universe)#2012 variant" label="Loki"/>
<link wikidata="Q112122181" start="51452" end="51468" title="Mobius M. Mobius (Marvel Cinematic Universe)" label="Mobius M. Mobius"/>
<link wikidata="Q112122181" start="51504" end="51521" title="Ravonna Renslayer (Marvel Cinematic Universe)" label="Ravonna Renslayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q107088537" start="51526" end="51538" title="Miss Minutes" label="Miss Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q112122179" start="51554" end="51567" title="Victor Timely (Marvel Cinematic Universe)" label="Victor Timely"/>
<link wikidata="Q112122179" start="51582" end="51600" title="Kang the Conqueror (Marvel Cinematic Universe)" label="Kang the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q112975801" start="51635" end="51645" title="Multiverse (Marvel Cinematic Universe)" label="multiverse"/>
<link wikidata="" start="51725" end="51758" title="Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania" label="Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512718" start="51873" end="51888" title="Signal of Peace" label="Signal of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6450201" start="51903" end="51912" title="Kwanusila" label="Kwanusila"/>
<link wikidata="Q172754" start="51921" end="51946" title="List of world expositions" label="List of world expositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q13411007" start="51949" end="51975" title="List of world&amp;#x27;s fairs" label="List of world&amp;#x27;s fairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889343" start="51978" end="51997" title="Benjamin W. Kilburn" label="Benjamin W. Kilburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q360680" start="52030" end="52042" title="H. H. Holmes" label="H. H. Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588888" start="52103" end="52136" title="St. John Cantius Church (Chicago)" label="St. John Cantius Church (Chicago)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575096" start="52254" end="52274" title="Spectacle Reef Light" label="Spectacle Reef Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035243" start="52306" end="52339" title="World&amp;#x27;s Largest Cedar Bucket" label="World&amp;#x27;s Largest Cedar Bucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431007" start="52342" end="52352" title="Fairy lamp" label="Fairy lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q113350365" start="52466" end="52505" title="St. Louis Autumnal Festival Association" label="St. Louis Autumnal Festival Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q622329" start="53419" end="53428" title="The Biography Channel" label="Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q83723" start="53562" end="53594" title="A&amp;amp;E Networks" label="A&amp;amp;E Television Networks, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748811" start="54449" end="54470" title="Hubert Howe Bancroft" label="Bancroft, Hubert Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551345" start="55083" end="55111" title="University Press of Kentucky" label="University Press of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6474057" start="56341" end="56356" title="Laird &amp;amp; Lee" label="Laird &amp;amp; Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q860611" start="56414" end="56454" title="International Congress of Mathematicians" label="International Congress of Mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q763586" start="56818" end="56836" title="Masaryk University" label="Masaryk University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223298" start="56857" end="56869" title="Erik Larson (author)" label="Larson, Erik"/>
<link wikidata="Q283445" start="56877" end="56961" title="The Devil in the White City" label="Devil in the White City: Murder, Magic, and Madness at the Fair That Changed America"/>
<link wikidata="Q11130954" start="57698" end="57722" title="Indiana University Press" label="Indiana University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q289428" start="58091" end="58104" title="Ida B. Wells" label="Wells, Ida B."/>
<link wikidata="Q4785686" start="60396" end="60419" title="Hagley Digital Archives" label="Hagley Digital Archives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41961" wikidata="Q6661985" url="?curid=41961" title="Data processing">
<text>Data processing is the collection and manipulation of digital data to produce meaningful information. Data processing is a form of &quot;information processing&quot;, which is the modification (processing) of information in any manner detectable by an observer.

== Functions ==

Data processing may involve various processes, including:

* Validation – Ensuring that supplied data is correct and relevant.
* Sorting – &quot;arranging items in some sequence and/or in different sets.&quot;
* Summarization (statistical) or (automatic) – reducing detailed data to its main points.
* Aggregation – combining multiple pieces of data.
* Analysis – the &quot;collection, organization, analysis, interpretation and presentation of data.&quot;
* Reporting – list detail or summary data or computed information.
* Classification – separation of data into various categories.

== History ==

The United States Census Bureau history illustrates the evolution of data processing from manual through electronic procedures.

=== Manual data processing ===

Although widespread use of the term &quot;data processing&quot; dates only from the 1950s, data processing functions have been performed manually for millennia. For example, bookkeeping involves functions such as posting transactions and producing reports like the balance sheet and the cash flow statement. Completely manual methods were augmented by the application of mechanical or electronic calculators. A person whose job was to perform calculations manually or using a calculator was called a &quot;computer.&quot;

The 1890 United States census schedule was the first to gather data by individual rather than household. A number of questions could be answered by making a check in the appropriate box on the form. From 1850 to 1880 the Census Bureau employed &quot;a system of tallying, which, by reason of the increasing number of combinations of classifications required, became increasingly complex. Only a limited number of combinations could be recorded in one tally, so it was necessary to handle the schedules 5 or 6 times, for as many independent tallies.&quot; &quot;It took over 7 years to publish the results of the 1880 census&quot; using manual processing methods.

=== Automatic data processing ===

The term &quot;automatic data processing&quot; was applied to operations performed by means of unit record equipment, such as Herman Hollerith&#x27;s application of punched card equipment for the 1890 United States census. &quot;Using Hollerith&#x27;s punchcard equipment, the Census Office was able to complete tabulating most of the 1890 census data in 2 to 3 years, compared with 7 to 8 years for the 1880 census. It is estimated that using Hollerith&#x27;s system saved some $5 million in processing costs&quot; in 1890 dollars even though there were twice as many questions as in 1880.

=== Computerized data processing ===

Computerized data processing, or electronic data processing represents a later development, with a computer used instead of several independent pieces of equipment. The Census Bureau first made limited use of electronic computers for the 1950 United States census, using a UNIVAC I system, delivered in 1952.

=== Other developments ===
The term &quot;data processing&quot; has mostly been subsumed by the more general term &quot;information technology&quot; (IT). The older term &quot;data processing&quot; is suggestive of older technologies. For example, in 1996 the &quot;Data Processing Management Association&quot; (DPMA) changed its name to the &quot;Association of Information Technology Professionals&quot;. Nevertheless, the terms are approximately synonymous.

== Applications ==

=== Commercial data processing ===

Commercial data processing involves a large volume of input data, relatively few computational operations, and a large volume of output. For example, an insurance company needs to keep records on tens or hundreds of thousands of policies, print and mail bills, and receive and post payments.

=== Data analysis ===

In science and engineering, the terms &quot;data processing&quot; and &quot;information systems&quot; are considered too broad, and the term &quot;data processing&quot; is typically used for the initial stage followed by a data analysis in the second stage of the overall data handling.

Data analysis uses specialized algorithms and statistical calculations that are less often observed in a typical general business environment. For data analysis, software suites like SPSS or SAS, or their free counterparts such as DAP, gretl, or PSPP are often used. These tools are usually helpful for processing various huge data sets, as they are able to handle enormous amount of statistical analysis.

==Systems==
A data processing system is a combination of machines, people, and processes that for a set of inputs produces a defined set of outputs. The inputs and outputs are interpreted as data, facts, information etc. depending on the interpreter&#x27;s relation to the system.

A term commonly used synonymously with &quot;data or storage (codes) processing system&quot; is &quot;information system&quot;. With regard particularly to electronic data processing, the corresponding concept is referred to as electronic data processing system.

===Examples===

====Simple example====
A very simple example of a data processing system is the process of maintaining a check register. Transactions— checks and deposits— are recorded as they occur and the transactions are summarized to determine a current balance. Monthly the data recorded in the register is reconciled with a hopefully identical list of transactions processed by the bank.

A more sophisticated record keeping system might further identify the transactions— for example deposits by source or checks by type, such as charitable contributions. This information might be used to obtain information like the total of all contributions for the year.

The important thing about this example is that it is a &quot;system&quot;, in which, all transactions are recorded consistently, and the same method of bank reconciliation is used each time.

====Real-world example====
This is a flowchart of a data processing system combining manual and computerized processing to handle accounts receivable, billing, and general ledger

== See also ==
*Big data
*Computation
*Computer science
*Decision-making software
*Information Age
*Information and communications technology
*Information technology
*Scientific computing

== Notes ==

== External links ==

== References ==

== Further reading ==

*Bourque, Linda B.; Clark, Virginia A. (1992) &quot;Processing Data: The Survey Example&quot;. (Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences, no. 07-085). SAGE Publications. 
*Levy, Joseph (1967) &quot;Punched Card Data Processing&quot;. McGraw-Hill Book Company.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6661985" start="0" end="15" title="Data processing" label="Data processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929239" start="23" end="33" title="data collection" label="collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306762" start="341" end="351" title="Data validation" label="Validation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303697" start="409" end="416" title="Sorting" label="Sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370484" start="492" end="519" title="Summary statistic" label="Summarization (statistical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394144" start="523" end="534" title="Automatic summarization" label="(automatic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692253" start="582" end="593" title="Aggregate data" label="Aggregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q938438" start="633" end="641" title="Statistical analysis" label="Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43229" start="666" end="678" title="organization" label="organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937265" start="739" end="748" title="Operational reporting" label="Reporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227256" start="806" end="820" title="Data classification (business intelligence)" label="Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="887" end="914" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707847" start="1218" end="1229" title="bookkeeping" label="bookkeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q46834" start="1309" end="1322" title="balance sheet" label="balance sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q460184" start="1331" end="1350" title="cash flow statement" label="cash flow statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q211586" start="1415" end="1425" title="mechanical calculator" label="mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="1440" end="1450" title="calculator" label="calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11202952" start="1550" end="1558" title="Human computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095711" start="1571" end="1596" title="1890 United States census" label="1890 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q259059" start="1661" end="1670" title="household" label="household"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381169" start="2281" end="2306" title="Electronic data processing" label="automatic data processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927915" start="2361" end="2382" title="unit record equipment" label="unit record equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q192145" start="2392" end="2408" title="Herman Hollerith" label="Herman Hollerith"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="2431" end="2443" title="punched card" label="punched card"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095711" start="2462" end="2487" title="1890 United States census" label="1890 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381169" start="2929" end="2955" title="electronic data processing" label="electronic data processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="3105" end="3125" title="electronic computers" label="electronic computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q585978" start="3134" end="3159" title="1950 United States census" label="1950 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044055" start="3169" end="3177" title="UNIVAC I" label="UNIVAC I"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="3326" end="3348" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809863" start="3472" end="3510" title="Data Processing Management Association" label="Data Processing Management Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q121182" start="4116" end="4134" title="information system" label="information system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988917" start="4263" end="4276" title="data analysis" label="data analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="4359" end="4368" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="4374" end="4385" title="statistical" label="statistical"/>
<link wikidata="Q181596" start="4511" end="4515" title="SPSS" label="SPSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003932" start="4519" end="4522" title="SAS (software)" label="SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204274" start="4559" end="4562" title="DAP (software)" label="DAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q292952" start="4564" end="4569" title="gretl" label="gretl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848165" start="4574" end="4578" title="PSPP" label="PSPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11019" start="4792" end="4799" title="machine" label="machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="4842" end="4848" title="Input/output" label="inputs"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="4875" end="4882" title="Input/output" label="outputs"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="4926" end="4930" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q188572" start="4932" end="4936" title="fact" label="fact"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="4939" end="4950" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5119" end="5137" title="Information system#Types of information system" label="information system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381169" start="5173" end="5199" title="electronic data processing" label="electronic data processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q185092" start="6177" end="6186" title="flowchart" label="flowchart"/>
<link wikidata="Q328554" start="6270" end="6289" title="accounts receivable" label="accounts receivable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977520" start="6304" end="6318" title="general ledger" label="general ledger"/>
<link wikidata="Q858810" start="6336" end="6344" title="Big data" label="Big data"/>
<link wikidata="Q12525525" start="6346" end="6357" title="Computation" label="Computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="6359" end="6375" title="Computer science" label="Computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249204" start="6377" end="6401" title="Decision-making software" label="Decision-making software"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="6403" end="6418" title="Information Age" label="Information Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="6420" end="6461" title="Information and communications technology" label="Information and communications technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="6463" end="6485" title="Information technology" label="Information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q117801" start="6487" end="6507" title="Computational science" label="Scientific computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q251266" start="6744" end="6761" title="SAGE Publications" label="SAGE Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153156" start="6827" end="6851" title="McGraw-Hill Book Company" label="McGraw-Hill Book Company"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41962" wikidata="Q643284" url="?curid=41962" title="Chicago River">
<text>The Chicago River is a system of rivers and canals with a combined length of that runs through the city of Chicago, including its center (the Chicago Loop). Though not especially long, the river is notable because it is one of the reasons for Chicago&#x27;s geographic importance: the related Chicago Portage is a link between the Great Lakes and the Mississippi River Basin, and ultimately the Gulf of Mexico.

The river is also noteworthy for its natural and human-engineered history. In 1887, the Illinois General Assembly decided to reverse the flow of the Chicago River through civil engineering by taking water from Lake Michigan and discharging it into the Mississippi River watershed, partly in response to concerns created by an extreme weather event in 1885 that threatened the city&#x27;s water supply. In 1889, the state created the Chicago Sanitary District (now the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District) to replace the Illinois and Michigan Canal with the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal, a much larger waterway, because the former had become inadequate to serve the city&#x27;s increasing sewage and commercial navigation needs. Completed by 1900, the project reversed the flow of the main stem and South Branch and altered the flow of the North Branch by using a series of canal locks and pumping stations, increasing the flow from Lake Michigan into the river, causing the river to empty into the new canal instead. In 1999, the system was named a &quot;Civil Engineering Monument of the Millennium&quot; by the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE).

The river is represented on the municipal flag of Chicago by two horizontal blue stripes. Its three branches serve as the inspiration for the municipal device, a three-branched, Y-shaped symbol that is found on many buildings and other structures throughout Chicago.

==Course==
When it followed its natural course, the North and South Branches of the Chicago River converged at Wolf Point to form the main stem, which jogged southward from the present course of the river to avoid a baymouth bar, entering Lake Michigan at about the level of present-day Madison Street. Today, the main stem of the Chicago River flows west from Lake Michigan to Wolf Point, where it converges with the North Branch to flow into the South Branch, where the river&#x27;s course goes south and west to empty in the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal.

===North Branch===

Early settlers named the North Branch of the Chicago River the Guarie River, or Gary&#x27;s River, after a trader who may have settled the west bank of the river a short distance north of Wolf Point, at what is now Fulton Street. The source of the North Branch is in the northern suburbs of Chicago where its three principal tributaries converge. The Skokie River—or East Fork—rises from a flat plain, historically a wetland, near Park City, Illinois to the west of the city of Waukegan. It then flows southward, paralleling the shore of Lake Michigan, through wetlands, the Greenbelt Forest Preserve and a number of golf courses towards Highland Park, Illinois. South of Highland Park the river passes the Chicago Botanic Gardens and through an area of former marshlands known as the Skokie Lagoons. From the west, the Middle Fork arises near Rondout, Illinois and flows southwards through Lake Forest and Highland Park. The two tributaries of the North and Middle forks merge at the Watersmeet Woods forest preserve west of Wilmette. From there the North Branch flows south towards Morton Grove. The third tributary, the West Fork, rises near Mettawa and flows south through Lincolnshire, Bannockburn, Deerfield, and Northbrook, meeting the North Branch at Morton Grove. In recognition of the work of Ralph Frese in promoting canoeing on and conservation of Chicago-area rivers, the forest preserve district of Cook County, Illinois has designated a section of the East Fork and North Branch from Willow Road in Northfield to Dempster Street in Morton Grove the &quot;Ralph Frese River Trail&quot;.

The North Branch continues southwards through Niles, entering the city of Chicago near the intersection of Milwaukee Avenue and Devon Avenue, from where it serves as the boundary of the Forest Glen community area with Norwood Park and Jefferson Park. This stretch of the river meanders in a south-easterly direction, passing through golf courses and forest preserves until it reaches Foster Avenue, where it passes through residential neighborhoods on the north side of the Albany Park community area. In River Park the river meets the North Shore Channel, a canal with water pumped from Lake Michigan (at Wilmette), built between 1907 and 1910 to increase the flow of the North Branch and help flush it into the South Branch and from there to the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal. From the confluence with the North Shore Channel south to Belmont Avenue the North Branch flows through mostly residential neighborhoods in a man-made channel that was dug to straighten and deepen the river, helping it to carry the additional flow from the North Shore Channel.

South of Belmont the North Branch is lined with a mixture of residential developments, retail parks, and industry until it reaches the industrial area known as the Clybourn Corridor. Here it passes beneath the Cortland Street Drawbridge, which was the first &#x27;Chicago-style&#x27; fixed-trunnion bascule bridge built in the United States, and is designated as an ASCE Civil Engineering Landmark and a Chicago Landmark.

At North Avenue, south of the North Avenue Bridge, the North Branch divides, the original course of the river makes a curve along the west side of Goose Island, whilst the North Branch Canal cuts off the bend, forming the island. The North Branch Canal—or Ogden&#x27;s Canal—was completed in 1857, and was originally wide and deep allowing craft navigating the river to avoid the bend. The 1902 Cherry Avenue Bridge, just south of North Avenue, was constructed to carry the Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul Railway onto Goose Island. It is a rare example of an asymmetric bob-tail swing bridge and was designated a Chicago Landmark in 2007. From Goose Island the North Branch continues to flow south east to Wolf Point where it joins the main stem.

===Main stem===


Since the late 19th century, the source of the main stem of the Chicago River is Lake Michigan. Water enters the river through sluice gates at the Chicago River Controlling Works with a small additional flow provided for the passage of boats between the river and Lake Michigan through the Chicago Harbor Lock. The surface level of the river is maintained at below the Chicago City Datum ( above mean sea level) except for when there is excessive storm run-off into the river or when the level of the lake is more than 2 feet below the Chicago City Datum. Acoustic velocity meters at the Columbus Drive Bridge and the T. J. O&#x27;Brien lock on the Calumet River monitor the diversion of water from Lake Michigan to the Mississippi River basin, which is limited to an average of per second per year over the 40-year period from 1980 to 2020.

The main stem flows west from the controlling works at Lake Michigan; passing beneath the Outer Drive, Columbus Drive, Michigan Avenue, Wabash Avenue, State Street, Dearborn Street, Clark Street, La Salle Street, Wells Street, and Franklin Street bridges &quot;en route&quot; to its confluence with the North Branch at Wolf Point. At McClurg Court it passes the Centennial Fountain, which was built in 1989 to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago; between May and October the fountain sends an arc of water over the river for ten minutes every hour. On the north bank of the river, near the Chicago Landmark Michigan Avenue Bridge, is Pioneer Court, which marks the site of the homestead of Jean Baptiste Point du Sable who is recognized as the founder of Chicago. On the south bank of the river is the site of Fort Dearborn, an army fort, first established in 1803. Notable buildings surrounding this area include the NBC Tower, the Tribune Tower, and the Wrigley Building. The river turns slightly to the south west between Michigan Avenue and State Street, passing the Trump International Hotel and Tower, 35 East Wacker, and 330 North Wabash. Turning west again the river passes Marina City, the Reid, Murdoch &amp; Co. Building, and Merchandise Mart, and 333 Wacker Drive.

Since the early 2000s, the south shore of the main stem has been developed as the Chicago Riverwalk. It provides a linear, lushly landscaped park intended to offer a peaceful escape from the busy Loop and a tourist attraction. Different sections are named Market, Civic, Arcade, and Confluence. The plans reflect ideas first proposed by the Burnham Plan as early as 1909.

===South Branch===

Before reversal, the South Branch generally arose with joining forks in the marshy area called Mud Lake to flow to where it met the North Branch at Wolf Point forming the main branch. Since reversal, the source of the South Branch of the Chicago River is the confluence of the North Branch and main stem at Wolf Point. From here the river flows south passing the Lake Street, Randolph Street, Washington Street, Madison Street, Monroe Street, Adams Street, Jackson Boulevard, Van Buren Street, Ida B. Wells Drive, and Harrison Street bridges before leaving the downtown Loop community area. Notable buildings that line this stretch of the river include the Boeing Company World Headquarters, the Civic Opera House, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, Union Station and Willis Tower.

The river continues southwards past railroad yards and the St. Charles Air Line Bridge. Between Polk and 18th Streets the river originally made a meander to the east; between 1927 and 1929 the river was straightened and moved west at this point to make room for a railroad terminal. The river turns to the southwest at Ping Tom Memorial Park where it passes under the Chicago Landmark Canal Street railroad bridge. The river turns westward where it is crossed by the Dan Ryan Expressway; these immovable bridges have a clearance of requiring large ships that pass underneath to have folding masts.

At Ashland Avenue the river widens to form the U.S. Turning Basin, the west bank of which was the starting point of the Illinois and Michigan Canal. Prior to 1983, this was where the US Coast Guard Rules of the Road, Great Lakes ended &amp; Rules of the Road, Western Rivers began. Since 1983, there is just a single Inland Navigational Rules passed by Congressional Act in 1980 (Public Law 96-591). At the basin the river is joined by a tributary, the South Fork of the river, which is commonly given the nickname Bubbly Creek. A bridge used to span the South Fork at this point that was too low for boats to pass meaning that their cargo needed to be unloaded at the bridge, and the neighborhood at its east end became known as Bridgeport. The river continues to the south west, entering the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal at Damen Avenue. The original West Fork of the South Branch, which before 1935 led towards Mud Lake and the Chicago Portage, has been filled in; a triangular intrusion into the north bank at Damen Avenue marks the place where it diverged from the course of the canal. From there, the water flows down the canal through the southwest side of Chicago and southwestern suburbs and, in time, into the Des Plaines River between Crest Hill on the west and Lockport on the east, just north of the border between Crest Hill and Joliet, Illinois, eventually reaching the Gulf of Mexico.

===Discharge===
The United States Geological Survey monitors water flow at a number of sites in the Chicago River system. Discharge from the North Branch is measured at Grand Avenue; between 2004 and 2010 this averaged per second. During the winter months as much as 75% of the flow in the North Branch is due to the discharge of treated sewage from the North Side Water Reclamation Plant into the North Shore Channel. Flow on the main stem is measured at Columbus Drive; between 2000 and 2006 this averaged per second.

== History ==
===Name===
The name Chicago derives from the 17th century French rendering of &quot;shikaakwa&quot; or &quot;chicagou&quot;, the Native American name for ramps (&quot;Allium tricoccum&quot;), a type of edible wild leek, which grew abundantly near the river. The river, and its region, were named after the plant.

===Exploration and settlement===
Louis Jolliet and Jacques Marquette, though probably not the first Europeans to visit the area, are the first recorded to have visited the Chicago River in 1673, when they wrote of their discovery of the geographically vital Chicago Portage. Marquette returned in 1674, camped a few days near the mouth of the river, then moved on to the Chicago River–Des Plaines River portage, where he stayed through the winter of 1674–75. The Fox Wars effectively closed the Chicago area to Europeans in the first part of the 18th century. The first non-native to re-settle in the area may have been a trader named Guillory, who might have had a trading post near Wolf Point on the Chicago River in around 1778. In 1823 a government expedition used the name Gary River (phonetic spelling of &quot;Guillory&quot;) to refer to the north branch of the Chicago River.

Jean Baptiste Point du Sable is widely regarded as the first permanent resident of Chicago; he built a farm on the northern bank at the mouth of the river in the 1780s. The earliest known record of Pointe du Sable living in Chicago is the diary of Hugh Heward, who made a journey through Illinois in the spring of 1790. Antoine Ouilmette claimed to have arrived in Chicago shortly after this in July 1790.

In 1795, in a then minor part of the Treaty of Greenville, an Indian confederation granted treaty rights to the United States, to a parcel of land at the mouth of the &quot;Chicago River&quot;. This was followed by the 1816 Treaty of St. Louis and Treaty of Chicago, which ceded additional land in the Chicago area. In 1803, Fort Dearborn was constructed on the bank opposite what had been Point du Sable&#x27;s settlement, on the site of the present-day Michigan Avenue Bridge. Lieutenant James Strode Swearingen, who led the troops from Detroit to Chicago to establish the fort, described the river as being about wide and upwards of deep at the place where the fort was intended to be built; the riverbanks were high on the south side and on the north.

===Early modifications===
Between 1816 and 1828 soldiers from Fort Dearborn cut channels through the sandbar at the mouth of the river to allow yawls to bring supplies to the fort. These channels rapidly clogged with sand requiring a new one to be cut. On March 2, 1833, $25,000 was appropriated by Congress for harbor works, and work began in June of that year under the supervision of Major George Bender, the commandant at Fort Dearborn. In January 1834 James Allen took over the supervision of this work and, aided by a February storm that breached the sandbar, on July 12, 1834, the harbor works had progressed enough to allow a schooner, the &quot;Illinois&quot; to sail up the river to Wolf Point and dock at the wharf of Newberry &amp; Dole. The initial entrance through the sandbar was wide and deep, flanked by piers long on the south wall and long to the north. Allen&#x27;s work continued, and by October 1837 the still unfinished piers had been extended to respectively.

In 1848, the Illinois and Michigan canal linked the river to the Illinois River and the Mississippi Valley across the Chicago Portage. This canal was the farthest west, and the last, of a series of United States&#x27; government land grant canals. It provided the only water route from New York City to New Orleans through the country&#x27;s interior and Chicago.

=== Reversing the flow ===


During the last ice age, the area that became Chicago was covered by Lake Chicago, which drained south into the Mississippi Valley. As the ice and water retreated, a short ridge was exposed about a mile inland, which generally separated the Great Lakes&#x27; watershed from the Mississippi Valley, except in times of heavy precipitation or when winter ice flows prevented drainage. By the time Europeans arrived, the Chicago River flowed sluggishly into Lake Michigan from Chicago&#x27;s flat plain. As Chicago grew, this allowed sewage and other pollution into the clean-water source for the city, contributing to several public health problems, like typhoid fever. Starting in 1848, much of the Chicago River&#x27;s flow was also diverted across the Chicago Portage into the Illinois and Michigan Canal. In 1871, the old canal was deepened in an attempt to completely reverse the river&#x27;s flow but the reversal of the river only lasted one season.

Finally, in 1900, the Sanitary District of Chicago, then headed by William Boldenweck, completely reversed the flow of the main stem and South Branch of the river using a series of canal locks, increasing the river&#x27;s flow from Lake Michigan and causing it to empty into the newly completed Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal. In 1999, this system was named a &quot;Civil Engineering Monument of the Millennium&quot; by the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE). Before this time, the Chicago River was known by many local residents of Chicago as &quot;the stinking river&quot; because of the massive amounts of sewage and pollution that poured into the river from Chicago&#x27;s booming industrial economy.

Through the 1980s, the river was quite dirty and often filled with garbage; however, during the 1990s, it underwent extensive cleaning as part of an effort at beautification by Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley.

In 2005, researchers at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign created a three-dimensional, hydrodynamic simulation of the Chicago River, which suggested that density currents are the cause of an observed bi-directional wintertime flow in the river. At the surface, the river flows east to west, away from Lake Michigan, as expected. But deep below, near the riverbed, water seasonally travels west to east, toward the lake.

All outflows from the Great Lakes Basin are regulated by the joint U.S.-Canadian Great Lakes Commission, and the outflow through the Chicago River is set under a U.S. Supreme Court decision (1967, modified 1980 and 1997). The city of Chicago is allowed to remove of water from the Great Lakes system; about half of this, , is sent down the Chicago River, while the rest is used for drinking water. In late 2005, the Chicago-based Alliance for the Great Lakes proposed re-separating the Great Lakes and Mississippi River basins to address such ecological concerns as the spread of invasive species.

=== &quot;Eastland&quot; disaster ===

In 1915, the SS &quot;Eastland&quot;, an excursion steam-liner preparing to leave the dock on the south gangway between the Clark Street Bridge and La Salle Street Bridge, rolled over, killing 844 of the more than 2500 passengers. The roll of the heavy steamer happened very quickly and many of the passengers were trapped under water by the hull, moving objects such as pianos and tables, the crush of bodies, or their heavy clothes. Frantic if disordered rescue attempts ensued and early versions of what may be regarded as trauma teams formed to address the shocking scene. The site on the south bank at the southeast end of the La Salle Street Bridge is now the location of a memorial first dedicated in 1989.

=== Chicago flood of 1992 ===

On April 13, 1992, a flood occurred when a pile driven into the riverbed caused stress fractures in the wall of a long-abandoned tunnel of the Chicago Tunnel Company near the Kinzie Street railroad bridge (not to be confused with the Kinzie Street Bridge). Most of the network of underground freight railway, which encompasses much of downtown, was eventually flooded, along with the lower levels of buildings it once serviced and attached underground shops and pedestrian ways.

===Bridges===


The first bridge across the Chicago River was constructed over the North Branch near the present day Kinzie Street in 1832. A second bridge, over the South Branch near Randolph Street, was added in 1833. The first moveable bridge was constructed across the main stem at Dearborn Street in 1834. Today, the Chicago River has 38 movable bridges spanning it, down from a peak of 52 bridges. These bridges are of several different types, including trunnion bascule, Scherzer rolling lift, swing bridges, and vertical-lift bridges.

==Pollution==
The Chicago River has been highly affected by industrial and residential development with attendant changes to the quality of the water and riverbanks. Several species of freshwater fish are known to inhabit the river, including largemouth and smallmouth bass, rock bass, crappie, bluegill, catfish, and carp. The river also has a large population of crayfish. The South Fork of the Main (South) Branch, which was the primary sewer for the Union Stock Yards and the meat packing industry, was once so polluted that it became known as Bubbly Creek. Illinois has issued advisories regarding eating fish from the river due to PCB and mercury contamination, including a &quot;do not eat&quot; advisory for carp more than 12 inches long. There are concerns that silver carp and bighead carp, now invasive species in the Mississippi and Illinois Rivers, may reach the Great Lakes through the Chicago River. A program on the north channel next to Goose Island seeks to increase wildlife habitat through the use of floating plant islands. The program is managed by the non-profit conservation group Urban Rivers with assistance from the Shedd Aquarium. As with some other bodies of water in the United States, the river has seen several successful efforts to improve water quality since the passage of the Clean Water Act of 1972 and related state and local efforts.

==Recreation==
Despite the pollution concerns, the Chicago River remains a very popular target for freshwater recreational fishing. In 2006, the Chicago Park District started the annual &quot;Mayor Daley&#x27;s Chicago River Fishing Festival&quot;, which has increased in popularity with each year. Between 2013 and 2016, the Chicago Park District opened four boat houses, two on the south branch and two on the north, for river recreation.

==Mouth of the river==
== Dyeing the river ==
=== Saint Patrick&#x27;s Day ===
 As part of a more than fifty-year-old Chicago tradition, the Chicago River is dyed green in observance of Saint Patrick&#x27;s Day. The actual event occurs on the Saturday on or before March 17.

The tradition of dyeing the river green arose by accident in 1961 when plumbers used fluorescein dye to trace sources of illegal pollution discharges. The dyeing of the river is still sponsored by the local plumbers union. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) disallowed the use of fluorescein for this purpose, since it was shown to be harmful to the river. The parade committee switched to a mix involving forty pounds of powdered vegetable dye. Though the committee closely guards the exact formula, they insist that it has been tested and verified safe for the environment.

The environmental organization Friends of the Chicago River disapproves of dyeing the river, saying the practice &quot;gives the impression that it is lifeless and artificial&quot;, adding &quot;Friends doesn&#x27;t think that the river should be treated as a decoration for an annual holiday, but treasured and cared for as the wonderful natural and recreational resource it deserves to be&quot;.

In 2009 First Lady Michelle Obama, a Chicago native, inspired by the river tradition, requested that the water in the White House fountains be dyed green to celebrate Saint Patrick&#x27;s Day.

=== Chicago Cubs rally ===
For the Chicago Cubs rally and parade for their 2016 World Series Championship celebrations, the river was dyed Cubs blue. Friends of the Chicago River executive director Margaret Frisbie told the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot;, &quot;We do not want to set a precedent where, every time we want to celebrate, we dye the river a different color and potentially hurt the aquatic life that lives in it. While it may seem festive, it&#x27;s actually potentially harming a natural resource.&quot;

== McCormick Bridgehouse and Chicago River Museum ==
The southwest bridgehouse of the DuSable Bridge (Michigan Avenue) serves as a museum on the river, its history, its challenges, and its renaissance. The McCormick Bridgehouse &amp; Chicago River Museum is a 5-floor, 1,613-square-foot (149.9 m2) museum that opened on June 10, 2006; it is named for Robert R. McCormick, formerly owner of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; and president of the Chicago Sanitary District. The Robert R. McCormick Foundation was the major donor that helped meet the $950,000 cost to open the museum. It is run by the Friends of the Chicago River, a non-profit environmental organization. Visitors are also allowed to access the bridge&#x27;s gear room; during the spring and fall bridge lifting visitors can see the bridge gears in operation as the leaves are raised and lowered. Due to its small size and tight access stairway only 79 people are allowed inside the museum at any one time. In October 2019, Chicago Tribune cultural arts writer Steve Johnson profiled the museum, calling its gear room where the DuSable Bridge mechanics can be viewed &quot;a little chamber of heaven for infrastructure nerds&quot;.

==Monitoring the impact of extreme weather events on the Chicago District==
The US Army Corps of Engineers have monitored the development of harbors and channels for navigation on the Great Lakes since the early 1800s. They began monitoring hydrological conditions and lake levels in 1918. A December 26, 2012 report revealed that Chicago District navigation infrastructure did receive significant impacts from Hurricane Sandy with some areas experiencing severe shoaling. Chicago Shoreline Project mitigated the damage of the storm event.

The same report noted that the low Great Lakes levels were drought-induced, caused by a very hot, dry summer and a lack of a solid snowpack in the winter of 2012. At the time of the report, December 2012, Lake Michigan-Huron was 28 inches below its long-term average which is near the record lows of 1964. Historic lake levels for Lake Michigan reported from 1918 to 1998 show that the low levels observed in 1964 were the lowest since 1918. In 2012 Lake Michigan-Huron&#x27;s seasonal rise was about 4 inches where it usually is about 12 inches. Normally the Chicago River water level is two feet lower than the lake and therefore does not flow into the lake. If the lake level falls too low threatening to reverse the river flow, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago would be forced to close locks between the lake and river for longer periods of time, limiting navigation. A reversal flow of the Chicago River into Lake Michigan would have a negative impact on navigation and on the quality of Lake Michigan water, which is the source of drinking water. Chicago&#x27;s raw sewage in the river is normally carried upstream toward the Mississippi River which flows south towards the Gulf of Mexico. On January 9, 2013, Chicago meteorologists announced 320 days without at least one inch of snowfall. Water levels in the lake started to level off with the river and sewage was visible at the cusp of the locks, just a few hundred feet from Lake Michigan. David St. Pierre, executive director of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago warned the low lake levels were nearing a point of real concern. However, the District maintains that it is not possible for the river to reverse due to low lake level alone.

Measurements taken by the US Army Corps in January 2013 revealed that both Lake Michigan and Lake Huron had reached their &quot;lowest ebb since record keeping began in 1918, and the lakes could set additional records over the next few months, the corps said. The lakes were 74 centimetres (29 inches) below their long-term average and had declined 43 centimetres (17 inches) since January 2012&quot;.

==See also==
*Bubbly Creek
* Centennial Fountain
* Ogden Slip
* Illinois Department of Transportation
* List of bridges documented by the Historic American Engineering Record in Illinois
* List of rivers of Illinois

==Notes and references==
=== Notes ===
=== References ===
=== Bibliography ===
* 
* 


== External links ==
* Chicago River Live Camera Stream; Provided by TravelTV, hosted atop the Fox News Chicago Bureau
* Friends of the Chicago River
* Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago

; News</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q643284" start="4" end="17" title="Chicago River" label="Chicago River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="107" end="114" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q70626" start="142" end="154" title="Chicago Loop" label="Chicago Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095748" start="293" end="308" title="Chicago Portage" label="Chicago Portage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="331" end="342" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="351" end="374" title="Mississippi Valley" label="Mississippi River Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="395" end="409" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437547" start="500" end="525" title="Illinois General Assembly" label="Illinois General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="583" end="600" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="622" end="635" title="Lake Michigan" label="Lake Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277161" start="738" end="753" title="extreme weather" label="extreme weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825322" start="880" end="919" title="Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago" label="Metropolitan Water Reclamation District"/>
<link wikidata="Q952760" start="936" end="963" title="Illinois and Michigan Canal" label="Illinois and Michigan Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353035" start="973" end="1004" title="Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal" label="Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q105731" start="1292" end="1302" title="canal lock" label="canal lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q466880" start="1532" end="1567" title="American Society of Civil Engineers" label="American Society of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402799" start="1619" end="1634" title="flag of Chicago" label="flag of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858428" start="1719" end="1735" title="Municipal device of Chicago" label="municipal device"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029883" start="1956" end="1966" title="Wolf Point (Chicago)" label="Wolf Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350983" start="2061" end="2073" title="baymouth bar" label="baymouth bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276131" start="2132" end="2146" title="Madison Street (Chicago)" label="Madison Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353035" start="2373" end="2404" title="Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal" label="Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7536171" start="2778" end="2790" title="Skokie River" label="Skokie River"/>
<link wikidata="Q575602" start="2858" end="2877" title="Park City, Illinois" label="Park City, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q578289" start="2905" end="2913" title="Waukegan, Illinois" label="Waukegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q576671" start="3065" end="3088" title="Highland Park, Illinois" label="Highland Park, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919730" start="3134" end="3157" title="Chicago Botanic Gardens" label="Chicago Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351209" start="3212" end="3226" title="Skokie Lagoons" label="Skokie Lagoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11169576" start="3271" end="3288" title="Rondout, Illinois" label="Rondout, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q575355" start="3318" end="3329" title="Lake Forest, Illinois" label="Lake Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q578301" start="3453" end="3461" title="Wilmette, Illinois" label="Wilmette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641893" start="3511" end="3523" title="Morton Grove, Illinois" label="Morton Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672260" start="3572" end="3579" title="Mettawa, Illinois" label="Mettawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671607" start="3618" end="3629" title="Bannockburn, Illinois" label="Bannockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q287895" start="3631" end="3640" title="Deerfield, Illinois" label="Deerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q570986" start="3646" end="3656" title="Northbrook, Illinois" label="Northbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287506" start="3730" end="3741" title="Ralph Frese" label="Ralph Frese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469080" start="3812" end="3836" title="Forest Preserve District of Cook County" label="forest preserve district"/>
<link wikidata="Q108418" start="3840" end="3861" title="Cook County, Illinois" label="Cook County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q601166" start="4075" end="4080" title="Niles, Illinois" label="Niles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861671" start="4136" end="4152" title="Milwaukee Avenue (Chicago)" label="Milwaukee Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267695" start="4157" end="4169" title="Devon Avenue (Chicago)" label="Devon Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077156" start="4215" end="4226" title="Forest Glen, Chicago" label="Forest Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q860582" start="4227" end="4241" title="Community areas in Chicago" label="community area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344273" start="4247" end="4259" title="Norwood Park, Chicago" label="Norwood Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176660" start="4264" end="4278" title="Jefferson Park, Chicago" label="Jefferson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469080" start="4379" end="4395" title="Cook County Forest Preserves" label="forest preserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473628" start="4413" end="4426" title="Foster Avenue (Chicago)" label="Foster Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830803" start="4503" end="4514" title="Albany Park, Chicago" label="Albany Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056668" start="4565" end="4584" title="North Shore Channel" label="North Shore Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q578301" start="4635" end="4643" title="Wilmette" label="Wilmette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353035" start="4777" end="4808" title="Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal" label="Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173348" start="5299" end="5325" title="Cortland Street Drawbridge" label="Cortland Street Drawbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q911663" start="5373" end="5402" title="bascule bridge" label="fixed-trunnion bascule bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q466880" start="5455" end="5459" title="American Society of Civil Engineers" label="ASCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573251" start="5460" end="5486" title="List of historic civil engineering landmarks" label="Civil Engineering Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q86557673" start="5493" end="5509" title="Chicago Landmark" label="Chicago Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054023" start="5515" end="5527" title="North Avenue (Chicago)" label="North Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054025" start="5542" end="5561" title="North Avenue Bridge" label="North Avenue Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584067" start="5659" end="5671" title="Goose Island (Chicago)" label="Goose Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092277" start="5907" end="5927" title="Cherry Avenue Bridge" label="Cherry Avenue Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071804" start="5986" end="6025" title="Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul Railway" label="Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029883" start="6219" end="6229" title="Wolf Point, Chicago" label="Wolf Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q24761490" start="6569" end="6588" title="Chicago Harbor Lock" label="Chicago Harbor Lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150041" start="6867" end="6888" title="Columbus Drive (Chicago)" label="Columbus Drive Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934412" start="6928" end="6941" title="Calumet River" label="Calumet River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111973" start="7212" end="7223" title="Outer Drive Bridge" label="Outer Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150041" start="7225" end="7239" title="Columbus Drive (Chicago)" label="Columbus Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928112" start="7241" end="7256" title="Michigan Avenue Bridge" label="Michigan Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958629" start="7258" end="7271" title="Wabash Avenue Bridge" label="Wabash Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q20486903" start="7273" end="7285" title="State Street Bridge (Chicago)" label="State Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246975" start="7287" end="7302" title="Dearborn Street Bridge" label="Dearborn Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127391" start="7304" end="7316" title="Clark Street Bridge" label="Clark Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465142" start="7318" end="7333" title="La Salle Street Bridge (Chicago, Illinois)" label="La Salle Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981703" start="7335" end="7347" title="Wells Street Bridge (Chicago)" label="Wells Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491875" start="7353" end="7368" title="Franklin Street Bridge" label="Franklin Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076298" start="7484" end="7503" title="Centennial Fountain" label="Centennial Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825322" start="7571" end="7629" title="Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago" label="Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196674" start="7818" end="7831" title="Pioneer Court" label="Pioneer Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q492555" start="7874" end="7902" title="Jean Baptiste Point du Sable" label="Jean Baptiste Point du Sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q305286" start="7994" end="8007" title="Fort Dearborn" label="Fort Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810949" start="8102" end="8111" title="NBC Tower" label="NBC Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143136" start="8117" end="8130" title="Tribune Tower" label="Tribune Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464592" start="8140" end="8156" title="Wrigley Building" label="Wrigley Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q546221" start="8255" end="8290" title="Trump International Hotel and Tower (Chicago)" label="Trump International Hotel and Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816312" start="8292" end="8306" title="35 East Wacker" label="35 East Wacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q225731" start="8312" end="8328" title="330 North Wabash" label="330 North Wabash"/>
<link wikidata="Q653584" start="8366" end="8377" title="Marina City" label="Marina City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309929" start="8383" end="8415" title="Reid, Murdoch &amp;amp; Co. Building" label="Reid, Murdoch &amp;amp; Co. Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921426" start="8421" end="8437" title="Merchandise Mart" label="Merchandise Mart"/>
<link wikidata="Q225835" start="8443" end="8459" title="333 Wacker Drive" label="333 Wacker Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095770" start="8544" end="8561" title="Chicago Riverwalk" label="Chicago Riverwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391127" start="8803" end="8815" title="Burnham Plan" label="Burnham Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095748" start="8950" end="8958" title="Chicago Portage" label="Mud Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="9512" end="9518" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1833594" start="9551" end="9568" title="Civic Opera House (Chicago)" label="Civic Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071967" start="9574" end="9601" title="Chicago Mercantile Exchange" label="Chicago Mercantile Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155989" start="9603" end="9616" title="Union Station (Chicago)" label="Union Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q29294" start="9621" end="9633" title="Willis Tower" label="Willis Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495246" start="9695" end="9722" title="St. Charles Air Line Bridge" label="St. Charles Air Line Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388707" start="9955" end="9977" title="Ping Tom Memorial Park" label="Ping Tom Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032518" start="10021" end="10049" title="Canal Street railroad bridge" label="Canal Street railroad bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034860" start="10103" end="10122" title="Dan Ryan Expressway" label="Dan Ryan Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q952760" start="10355" end="10382" title="Illinois and Michigan Canal" label="Illinois and Michigan Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982285" start="10750" end="10762" title="Bubbly Creek" label="Bubbly Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925167" start="10965" end="10975" title="Bridgeport, Chicago" label="Bridgeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353035" start="11029" end="11060" title="Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal" label="Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095748" start="11169" end="11184" title="Chicago Portage" label="Chicago Portage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8637" start="11458" end="11475" title="Des Plaines River" label="Des Plaines River"/>
<link wikidata="Q121943" start="11484" end="11494" title="Crest Hill, Illinois" label="Crest Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q575596" start="11511" end="11519" title="Lockport, Illinois" label="Lockport"/>
<link wikidata="Q40345" start="11581" end="11597" title="Joliet, Illinois" label="Joliet, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="11623" end="11637" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="11660" end="11691" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714893" start="12329" end="12334" title="Allium tricoccum" label="ramps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807269" start="12389" end="12393" title="leek" label="leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q506618" start="12522" end="12535" title="Louis Jolliet" label="Louis Jolliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q336630" start="12540" end="12557" title="Jacques Marquette" label="Jacques Marquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095748" start="12747" end="12762" title="Chicago Portage" label="Chicago Portage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8637" start="12874" end="12891" title="Des Plaines River" label="Des Plaines River"/>
<link wikidata="Q120638097" start="12892" end="12899" title="portage" label="portage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477039" start="12952" end="12960" title="Fox Wars" label="Fox Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029883" start="13173" end="13183" title="Wolf Point, Chicago" label="Wolf Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q492555" start="13374" end="13402" title="Jean Baptiste Point du Sable" label="Jean Baptiste Point du Sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775522" start="13694" end="13711" title="Antoine Ouilmette" label="Antoine Ouilmette"/>
<link wikidata="Q767317" start="13818" end="13838" title="Treaty of Greenville" label="Treaty of Greenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186402" start="13840" end="13863" title="Western Confederacy" label="an Indian confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28433158" start="14000" end="14024" title="Treaty of St. Louis (1816)" label="1816 Treaty of St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q928799" start="14029" end="14046" title="Treaty of Chicago" label="Treaty of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q305286" start="14106" end="14119" title="Fort Dearborn" label="Fort Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928112" start="14236" end="14258" title="Michigan Avenue Bridge" label="Michigan Avenue Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137441" start="14682" end="14686" title="yawl" label="yawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128617" start="14995" end="15006" title="James Allen (Army engineer)" label="James Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q952760" start="15536" end="15563" title="Illinois and Michigan canal" label="Illinois and Michigan canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8321" start="15588" end="15602" title="Illinois River" label="Illinois River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="15611" end="15629" title="Mississippi Valley" label="Mississippi Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095748" start="15641" end="15656" title="Chicago Portage" label="Chicago Portage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475314" start="15986" end="15998" title="Lake Chicago" label="Lake Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="16371" end="16384" title="Lake Michigan" label="Lake Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="16540" end="16553" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="16569" end="16582" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095748" start="16669" end="16684" title="Chicago Portage" label="Chicago Portage"/>
<link wikidata="Q952760" start="16694" end="16721" title="Illinois and Michigan Canal" label="Illinois and Michigan Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825322" start="16894" end="16922" title="Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago" label="Sanitary District of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16939" end="16957" title="William Boldenweck" label="William Boldenweck"/>
<link wikidata="Q105731" start="17053" end="17063" title="canal lock" label="canal lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353035" start="17167" end="17198" title="Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal" label="Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q466880" start="17297" end="17332" title="American Society of Civil Engineers" label="American Society of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966166" start="17490" end="17496" title="sewage" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q45701" start="17654" end="17661" title="waste" label="garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q539814" start="17778" end="17794" title="Richard M. Daley" label="Richard M. Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="17825" end="17867" title="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign" label="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383593" start="17964" end="17979" title="density current" label="density current"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599423" start="18253" end="18270" title="Great Lakes Basin" label="Great Lakes Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599435" start="18312" end="18334" title="Great Lakes Commission" label="Great Lakes Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="18393" end="18411" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732421" start="18661" end="18689" title="Alliance for the Great Lakes" label="Alliance for the Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="18811" end="18827" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278272" start="18882" end="18905" title="SS Eastland" label="SS &amp;quot;Eastland&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465142" start="19501" end="19523" title="La Salle Street Bridge (Chicago)" label="La Salle Street Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071999" start="19758" end="19780" title="Chicago Tunnel Company" label="Chicago Tunnel Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414483" start="19790" end="19819" title="Kinzie Street railroad bridge" label="Kinzie Street railroad bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q85728271" start="19849" end="19869" title="Dave Matthews Band bus incident" label="Kinzie Street Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q787417" start="20325" end="20340" title="moveable bridge" label="moveable bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q911663" start="20555" end="20571" title="bascule bridge" label="trunnion bascule"/>
<link wikidata="Q911663" start="20573" end="20594" title="Scherzer rolling lift bridge" label="Scherzer rolling lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q950431" start="20596" end="20608" title="swing bridge" label="swing bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898246" start="20615" end="20635" title="vertical-lift bridge" label="vertical-lift bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q755105" start="20882" end="20892" title="largemouth bass" label="largemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q536224" start="20897" end="20912" title="smallmouth bass" label="smallmouth bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093287" start="20914" end="20923" title="rock bass" label="rock bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063438" start="20925" end="20932" title="crappie" label="crappie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148148" start="20934" end="20942" title="bluegill" label="bluegill"/>
<link wikidata="Q59576" start="20944" end="20951" title="catfish" label="catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751223" start="20957" end="20961" title="carp" label="carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211742" start="21004" end="21012" title="crayfish" label="crayfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317397" start="21093" end="21110" title="Union Stock Yards" label="Union Stock Yards"/>
<link wikidata="Q955043" start="21119" end="21140" title="meat packing industry" label="meat packing industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982285" start="21187" end="21199" title="Bubbly Creek" label="Bubbly Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q211171" start="21276" end="21279" title="Polychlorinated biphenyl" label="PCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="21284" end="21291" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q76115" start="21410" end="21421" title="silver carp" label="silver carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q754164" start="21426" end="21438" title="bighead carp" label="bighead carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="21444" end="21460" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q8321" start="21484" end="21498" title="Illinois River" label="Illinois River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="21515" end="21526" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584067" start="21593" end="21605" title="Goose Island (Chicago)" label="Goose Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q127388542" start="21744" end="21756" title="Urban Rivers" label="Urban Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166515" start="21782" end="21796" title="Shedd Aquarium" label="Shedd Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978742" start="21951" end="21974" title="Clean Water Act of 1972" label="Clean Water Act of 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963322" start="22339" end="22360" title="Chicago Park District" label="Chicago Park District"/>
<link wikidata="Q181817" start="22641" end="22665" title="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q410922" start="22816" end="22827" title="fluorescein" label="fluorescein"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="22958" end="22989" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q13133" start="23733" end="23747" title="Michelle Obama" label="Michelle Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="23832" end="23843" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="23943" end="23955" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906838" start="23983" end="24000" title="2016 World Series" label="2016 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="24138" end="24155" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928112" start="24513" end="24527" title="DuSable Bridge" label="DuSable Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436138" start="24778" end="24797" title="Robert R. McCormick" label="Robert R. McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="24827" end="24842" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="25414" end="25429" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="25703" end="25729" title="US Army Corps of Engineers" label="US Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q264" start="26034" end="26049" title="Hurricane Sandy" label="Hurricane Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825322" start="26900" end="26958" title="Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago" label="Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982285" start="28341" end="28353" title="Bubbly Creek" label="Bubbly Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076298" start="28356" end="28375" title="Centennial Fountain" label="Centennial Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q110408572" start="28378" end="28388" title="Ogden Slip" label="Ogden Slip"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925114" start="28391" end="28428" title="Illinois Department of Transportation" label="Illinois Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608201" start="28431" end="28513" title="List of bridges documented by the Historic American Engineering Record in Illinois" label="List of bridges documented by the Historic American Engineering Record in Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246716" start="28516" end="28542" title="List of rivers of Illinois" label="List of rivers of Illinois"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41963" wikidata="Q159085" url="?curid=41963" title="Grant Park (Chicago)">
<text>Grant Park is a large urban park in the Loop community area of Chicago, Illinois. Located within the city&#x27;s central business district, the park&#x27;s features include Millennium Park, Buckingham Fountain, the Art Institute of Chicago, and the Museum Campus.

Originally known as Lake Park, and dating from the city&#x27;s founding, it was renamed in 1901 to honor U.S. President Ulysses S. Grant. The park&#x27;s area has been expanded several times through land reclamation, and was the focus of several disputes in the late 19th century and early 20th century over open space use. It is bordered on the north by Randolph Street, on the south by Roosevelt Road and McFetridge Drive, on the west by Michigan Avenue and on the east by Lake Michigan. The park contains performance venues, gardens, art work, sporting, and harbor facilities. It hosts public gatherings and several large annual events.

Grant Park is popularly referred to as &quot;Chicago&#x27;s front yard&quot;. It is governed by the Chicago Park District.

==History==
The original plans for the town of Chicago left the area east of Michigan Avenue unsubdivided and vacant, and purchasers of Michigan Avenue lots were promised that it would remain unoccupied. When the former Fort Dearborn Reserve became part of the townsite in 1839, the plan of the area east of Michigan Avenue south of Randolph was marked &quot;Public ground. Forever to remain vacant of buildings.&quot;

The city officially designated the land as a park on April 29, 1844, naming it Lake Park. When the Illinois Central Railroad was built into Chicago in 1852, it was permitted to lay track along the lakefront on a causeway built offshore from the park. The resulting lagoon became stagnant, and was largely filled in 1871 with debris from the Great Chicago Fire, increasing the parkland. In 1896, the city began extending the park into the lake with landfill, beyond the rail lines. On October 9, 1901, the park was renamed Grant Park in honor of American Civil War commanding General and United States President Ulysses S. Grant. At the 1868 Republican National Convention in Chicago, Grant had been nominated for his first presidential term.

The legal restrictions prohibiting any buildings in the park were ignored in the 19th century, as various civic buildings were sited there. At various times, a post office, exposition center, armory, and even an early home field of the baseball club now known as the Chicago Cubs were built in the park. A 1904 plan prepared by the Olmsted Brothers recommended locating the Field Museum as the park&#x27;s centerpiece, an idea integrated into Daniel Burnham and Edward H. Bennett&#x27;s 1909 &quot;Plan of Chicago&quot;. Chicago businessman Aaron Montgomery Ward ultimately fought four court battles, opposed by nearly every civic leader, to keep the park free of buildings. The one exception to which Ward consented was for the Art Institute of Chicago, constructed in 1892.

In the early 20th century, Grant Park was expanded with further landfill—much of it from the excavations of the Chicago Tunnel Company—and developed with a very formal landscape design by Edward Bennett. More land fill in the 1910s and 1920s provided sites for the Adler Planetarium, Field Museum of Natural History, and Shedd Aquarium, which were linked together as the Museum Campus in 1998. In 2004, a section of northern Grant Park, previously occupied by Illinois Central railyards and parking lots, was covered and redeveloped as Millennium Park.

==Events==
The park has been the site of many large civic events. It served as the staging ground for the city&#x27;s funeral procession for President Abraham Lincoln in 1865. In 1911, the park hosted the major Chicago International Aviation Meet. In 1913 the AAU held the USA Outdoor Track and Field Championships. In 1959, to celebrate the opening of the St. Lawrence Seaway and a related International Trade Fair, Queen Elizabeth II, disembarked here from the Royal Yacht &quot;Britannia&quot;, giving the park&#x27;s &quot;Queen&#x27;s Landing&quot; its name. The park was the scene of clashes between Chicago Police and demonstrators during the 1968 Democratic National Convention. Pope John Paul II celebrated an outdoor mass to a large crowd here in 1979. Championship celebrations were staged here for the Chicago Bulls during the 1990s, and the Chicago Blackhawks after winning the Stanley Cup in 2013. The park was the location for President Barack Obama&#x27;s Election Day victory speech on the night of November 4, 2008. In 2015, Grant Park hosted the first outdoor National Football League (NFL) draft and a related festival. The Chicago Cubs held their rally for their World Series Championship win on November 4, 2016 with an estimated 5 million people attending the parade and event.

The park annually hosts some of Chicago&#x27;s biggest festivals, including The Taste of Chicago—a large food and music festival held each summer; the Grant Park Music Festival; the Chicago Jazz Festival; the Chicago Blues Festival; and Lollapalooza, a festival of rock concerts. The park is also the site of the start and finish lines of the Chicago Marathon. The annual NASCAR Chicago street race is held every year at Grant Park.

==Features==
With between the downtown Chicago Loop and Lake Michigan, Grant Park offers many different attractions in its large open space. The park is generally flat. It is also crossed by large boulevards and even a bed of sunken railroad tracks. While bridges are used to span the tracks, and to connect with Millennium Park, the rest of the park must be reached by pedestrians at traffic crossings, except for a spacious underpass connection to the Museum Campus. There are also several parking garages under the park, along Michigan Avenue and east of Columbus Drive.

When the park was landscaped in the early 20th century in a formal beaux arts style, tall American Elms were planted in allées and rectangular patterns. While hundreds of these trees still exist, reaching tall, they were devastated in the late 1970s by Dutch elm disease. Hybrid elms have since been used to replace those lost.

===Millennium Park===
The northwestern corner of the park was renovated from 1998 to 2004 to become Millennium Park, a contiguous area with a variety of artistic features by architects and artists. Millennium Park features the Jay Pritzker Pavilion, the &quot;Cloud Gate&quot; (aka &quot;The Bean&quot;), the &quot;Crown Fountain&quot;, the Lurie Garden, and other attractions. The park is connected by the BP Pedestrian Bridge and the Nichols Bridgeway to other portions of Grant Park.

===Maggie Daley Park===
Across the BP Pedestrian Bridge from Millennium Park, the northeast corner of Grant Park hosts outdoor and indoor activities at what is now Maggie Daley Park, previously called Daley Bicentennial Plaza. Designed by landscape architect Michael Van Valkenburgh, attractions here include summer and winter skating rinks, an extensive playground, climbing walls, tennis and pickleball courts, and an activities building, which were redeveloped from 2012 to 2015.

===Art Institute of Chicago===
Built in 1893 on the western edge of Grant Park, the Art Institute of Chicago is one of the premier art museums and art schools in the US, known especially for the extensive collection of Impressionist and American art, such as &quot;A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte&quot;, and Grant Wood&#x27;s &quot;American Gothic&quot;. The School of the Art Institute of Chicago has facilities in the southeast corner of the museum&#x27;s Grant Park complex.

===Buckingham Fountain===
The center piece of Grant Park is Buckingham Fountain, one of the world&#x27;s largest fountains. In a rococo wedding cake style, the fountain was dedicated in 1927 as a gift to the city from Kate Sturges Buckingham in memory of her brother Clarence. The fountain operates from April to October with water displays every 20 minutes and a light and water display from 8:00 am to 11:00 pm.

===Museum Campus===
Chicago&#x27;s Museum Campus is a addition to Grant Park&#x27;s southeastern end. The Museum Campus is the site of three of the city&#x27;s most notable museums, all dedicated to the natural sciences: Adler Planetarium, Field Museum of Natural History, and Shedd Aquarium. A narrow isthmus along Solidarity Drive dominated by neoclassical sculptures of Kościuszko, Havliček and Nicolaus Copernicus connects to Northerly Island where the planetarium is located to the east of the Museum Campus situated on the mainland.

===Petrillo Music Shell===
Located at Jackson and Columbus Drives, the Petrillo Music Shell hosts music performances during the Chicago Jazz Festival, Chicago Blues Festival, Taste of Chicago, and Lollapalooza. The music shell&#x27;s seating area includes an area called Butler Field, the block bounded by Lake Shore Drive, Columbus Drive, Monroe Drive, and Jackson Drive. The previous Petrillo Bandshell structure faced Hutchinson Field at the south end of the park, near 1100 South Columbus Drive.

===Congress Plaza===
Congress Plaza is a ceremonial entrance located on the park&#x27;s western edge, at the Ida B. Wells Drive and Michigan Avenue intersection. Two semicircular plazas flanking Ida B. Wells Drive contain gardens, fountains, and artwork, including a pair of large bronze warrior statues, The Bowman and The Spearman that are positioned like gatekeepers to the park.

===Gardens===
There are several gardens and flower displays throughout the park. Millennium Park houses the Lurie Garden, known for its display of tall grass flowers, particularly lavender, and a decorative post-modern water stream. To the east, across the BP Pedestrian Bridge, Daley Park holds tall grass plantings. To the northeast in Daley Park, at 375 East Randolph Drive, is the Richard &amp; Annette Bloch Cancer Survivors Garden, marked by two huge doric columns from the demolished Chicago Federal Building and a wrought-iron pergola. The garden contains numerous walkways lined with planters and is one of several similar spaces created nationwide by R. A. Bloch Cancer Foundation.

Flanking the original Art Institute of Chicago Building are gardens in the north and south McCormick Courtyards; in the south courtyard is the bronze sculpture Fountain of the Great Lakes. To the south of the art museum, along Michigan Avenue, are a succession of gardens. Two of these are not far from to Orchestra Hall and honor former conductors of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra (Sir Georg Solti and Theodore Thomas).

To the southeast of the Art Institute, near the &quot;Court of Presidents&quot;, are demonstration gardens that flank Ida B. Wells Drive and surrounding Buckingham Fountain are a series of formal gardens, including the Tiffany Celebration Garden to the south.

===The Court of the Presidents===
The Court of the Presidents is located directly on the north and south side of E. Ida B. Wells Drive, west of S. Columbus Drive and east of S. Michigan Ave.  Manicured gardens and art work help define the Court of Presidents. South President&#x27;s Court, until recently, has primarily been gardens. However, within the past decade the city has decided to use the area to showcase art work by Chicagoans. While unique artwork has long been a tradition of Chicago&#x27;s parks, South President&#x27;s Court had the added benefit of showcasing &quot;in house&quot; art as its first newsworthy collection, entitled &quot;Artist and Automobiles.&quot; The collection, organized by the Public Art Program and the Chicago Department of Cultural Affairs, consisted of sculptures composed entirely of parts found on old automobiles.

===Hutchinson Field===
Much of the southern end of Grant Park is given over to Hutchinson Field, an open space for large events, with a dozen baseball or softball diamonds named for financier and long-time Art Institute President, Charles L. Hutchinson.

===Chicago Lakefront Trail===
A section of the Chicago Lakefront Trail, an 18-mile multi-use path along the city&#x27;s Lake Michigan shoreline, runs through the park&#x27;s eastern edge. The trail runs adjacent to Lake Shore Drive from Randolph Drive to Balbo Drive, then along the very edge of the seawall around the Shedd Aquarium. An underpass carries the trail under Solidarity Drive into Burnham Park.

===Marinas and harbors===
Two Lake Michigan marinas are accessed from Grant Park. Monroe Harbor provides 1000 mooring cans (served by tender service) and facilities in the expansive harbor east of the park. It is home to both the Chicago Yacht Club and the Columbia Yacht Club. &quot;Queen&#x27;s Landing,&quot; at the center of the harbor and park&#x27;s shoreline, is named for a 1959 visit there by Queen Elizabeth II aboard the Royal Yacht &quot;Britannia,&quot; in conjunction with the opening of the St. Lawrence Seaway. Du Sable Harbor, created in 1999 north of Randolph Drive, offers 420 boat docks and a harbor store.

===Skate Plaza===
The Grant Park Skate Plaza, designed by Chicago Landscape Architects Altamanu, was opened on December 6, 2014. The Plaza was initiated by Grant Park Conservancy President, Robert O&#x27;Neill. The new park occupies and has replaced the former skate area near the tennis courts. The Conservancy sought planning support from local skateboarders and BMX bikers who formed the Grant Park Conservancy &amp; Advisory Council Skate Committee. The Plaza is located in the southwest corner of the park near the former site of the 1893 Central Station and includes limestone pieces from the former railroad terminal. The plaza cost $2.65 Million to build. In 2014, the park hosted both the Mountain Dew Skate Tour for its first return to Chicago since 2010 and the Volcom Wild in the Parks Tour for its first appearance in Chicago.

===Dog park===
Grant Bark Park, located on the corner of Columbus Drive and 11th Street, is a place for dogs to get their exercise. It&#x27;s an off-leash park of . The park is made of asphalt and pea gravel. Members pay a monthly fee to attend the park that helps with the upkeep and maintains the cleanliness. A water fountain for both dogs and humans is provided. Membership fees and any donations go toward maintenance. The park hosts benefits and events related to dogs to raise money as well. Leashed dogs are permitted in most areas of the park, but not in Millennium Park.

===Other facilities===
The shaded walking paths in Grant Park cover several miles. A circuit of the park&#x27;s walking paths is estimated to take .

For other sporting activities, the park has 16 softball/baseball fields and 12 tennis courts, open to the general public.

==Public art==
The park holds a great deal of public art, much of it sculpture, in many areas including in Millennium Park, near Buckingham Fountain, the several gardens, and Congress Plaza. Four individual large installations, in other areas of the park, include:

===&quot;Abraham Lincoln Monument&quot;===
&quot;Abraham Lincoln: The Head of State&quot; is a statue by sculptor Augustus Saint-Gaudens set in a 150-foot wide exedra by architect Stanford White, honoring the Illinois resident and 16th President of the United States. The statue was cast in 1908 and was displayed at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and at the 1915 San Francisco World&#x27;s Fair, prior to being installed in the park in 1926. It is located in the &quot;Court of Presidents,&quot; north of Ida B. Wells Drive and west of Columbus Drive and is frequently called &quot;Seated Lincoln&quot; to avoid confusion with Saint-Gaudens&#x27; 1887 sculpture &quot;Abraham Lincoln: The Man&quot; in Lincoln Park.

===&quot;Agora&quot;===
&quot;Agora&quot; (from Greek, for urban meeting place) is an installation of 106 headless, armless sculptures designed by the Polish artist Magdalena Abakanowicz in southwestern Grant Park near Roosevelt Road. The piece was brought to the park in 2006. The figures are tall and weigh approximately . Each is made from a hollow, seamless piece of weathering or COR-TEN® steel, giving the pieces a reddish appearance and rough bark-like texture. The figures appear to be milling about in a crowd; some face each other, while others look away.

===&quot;Columbus Monument&quot;===
A bronze statue by Carlo (&quot;Charles&quot;, &quot;Carl&quot;) Brioschi was displayed on a monumental pedestal at the southern end of Grant Park. In 1933, Chicago celebrated its 100th anniversary with the Century of Progress World&#x27;s Fair. In conjunction with the fair, Chicago&#x27;s Italian-American community raised funds and donated the statue of the Genoese navigator and explorer, Christopher Columbus. It was removed on July 24, 2020 by order of Mayor Lori Lightfoot amid the George Floyd protests in Chicago and the deployment of federal forces to Chicago over Lightfoot&#x27;s objections.

===&quot;Logan Monument&quot;===
At Michigan Avenue and Ninth Street is the General John Logan Memorial, a large equestrian statue of John A. Logan, dedicated in 1897. Logan was a United States major general, who had resigned his congressional seat to serve in the U.S. Army during the Civil War. He led troops in many battles throughout the West and South. After the war, he was elected to the U.S. Senate from Illinois. The monument mound, with a statue by Augustus Saint-Gaudens and Alexander Phimister Proctor, was initially intended as a burial site for Logan, but his family declined to relocate the general&#x27;s grave.

==Additions==
===Children&#x27;s Museum===
The Chicago Children&#x27;s Museum announced plans in 2006 for a $100 million structure to replace its facilities at Navy Pier. The museum hoped to construct an underground building on the site of Daley Bicentennial Plaza, a plan that Mayor Richard M. Daley and council members approved in 2008. Some council members and area residents opposed the project and vowed to fight the proposal. After fundraising lagged, in January 2012, the Children&#x27;s Museum announced that it no longer would seek a Grant Park location.

==See also==

* Millennium Park
* Parks in Chicago

==References==
===Additional sources===
* 
* 

==External links==
* Grant Park: The Night Obama Won - image slideshow by &quot;Life magazine&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159085" start="0" end="10" title="Grant Park (Chicago)" label="Grant Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q22746" start="22" end="32" title="urban park" label="urban park"/>
<link wikidata="Q70626" start="40" end="44" title="Chicago Loop" label="Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q860582" start="45" end="59" title="Community areas in Chicago" label="community area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="63" end="70" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130516" start="173" end="188" title="Millennium Park" label="Millennium Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q158989" start="190" end="209" title="Buckingham Fountain" label="Buckingham Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q239303" start="215" end="239" title="Art Institute of Chicago" label="Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954441" start="249" end="262" title="Museum Campus" label="Museum Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159085" start="285" end="294" title="Grant Park (Chicago)" label="Lake Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="385" end="401" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="464" end="480" title="land reclamation" label="land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291867" start="620" end="635" title="Randolph Street (Chicago)" label="Randolph Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441902" start="653" end="667" title="Roosevelt Road" label="Roosevelt Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867529" start="705" end="720" title="Michigan Avenue (Chicago)" label="Michigan Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="740" end="753" title="Lake Michigan" label="Lake Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963322" start="1006" end="1027" title="Chicago Park District" label="Chicago Park District"/>
<link wikidata="Q305286" start="1250" end="1263" title="Fort Dearborn" label="Fort Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q22698" start="1495" end="1499" title="park" label="park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093332" start="1549" end="1574" title="Illinois Central Railroad" label="Illinois Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q70520" start="1791" end="1809" title="Great Chicago Fire" label="Great Chicago Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="1898" end="1906" title="Land reclamation" label="landfill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1995" end="2013" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="2037" end="2060" title="President of the United States" label="United States President"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555227" start="2086" end="2121" title="1868 Republican National Convention" label="1868 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645272" start="2405" end="2421" title="Union Base-Ball Grounds" label="early home field"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="2460" end="2472" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021081" start="2525" end="2541" title="Olmsted Brothers" label="Olmsted Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q316639" start="2636" end="2650" title="Daniel Burnham" label="Daniel Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343220" start="2655" end="2672" title="Edward H. Bennett" label="Edward H. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391127" start="2691" end="2706" title="Plan of Chicago" label="Plan of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662269" start="2734" end="2755" title="Aaron Montgomery Ward" label="Aaron Montgomery Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q239303" start="2922" end="2946" title="Art Institute of Chicago" label="Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071999" start="3082" end="3104" title="Chicago Tunnel Company" label="Chicago Tunnel Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="3179" end="3188" title="Land reclamation" label="land fill"/>
<link wikidata="Q358052" start="3235" end="3252" title="Adler Planetarium" label="Adler Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122595" start="3254" end="3285" title="Field Museum of Natural History" label="Field Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166515" start="3291" end="3305" title="Shedd Aquarium" label="Shedd Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954441" start="3341" end="3354" title="Museum Campus" label="Museum Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130516" start="3506" end="3521" title="Millennium Park" label="Millennium Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509119" start="3642" end="3660" title="Funeral and burial of Abraham Lincoln" label="funeral procession"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="3675" end="3690" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559310" start="3735" end="3770" title="1911 Chicago International Aviation Meet" label="Chicago International Aviation Meet"/>
<link wikidata="Q753288" start="3881" end="3900" title="St. Lawrence Seaway" label="St. Lawrence Seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="3947" end="3959" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529544" start="3987" end="4020" title="HMY Britannia" label="Royal Yacht &amp;quot;Britannia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q96419216" start="4051" end="4071" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Landing" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381720" start="4105" end="4121" title="1968 Democratic National Convention protest activity" label="scene of clashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340186" start="4130" end="4144" title="Chicago Police Department" label="Chicago Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q83516" start="4174" end="4209" title="1968 Democratic National Convention" label="1968 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="4211" end="4228" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="4338" end="4351" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="4378" end="4396" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="4415" end="4426" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858116" start="4466" end="4523" title="Barack Obama election victory speech, 2008" label="President Barack Obama&amp;#x27;s Election Day victory speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987467" start="4603" end="4662" title="2015 NFL Draft" label="National Football League (NFL) draft and a related festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="4668" end="4680" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687696" start="4906" end="4922" title="Taste of Chicago" label="Taste of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435951" start="4931" end="4935" title="food festival" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115407" start="4977" end="5002" title="Grant Park Music Festival" label="Grant Park Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q642761" start="5008" end="5029" title="Chicago Jazz Festival" label="Chicago Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071835" start="5035" end="5057" title="Chicago Blues Festival" label="Chicago Blues Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="5063" end="5075" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071822" start="5169" end="5185" title="Chicago Marathon" label="Chicago Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="5198" end="5204" title="NASCAR Cup Series" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q113428164" start="5205" end="5224" title="Chicago Street Course" label="Chicago street race"/>
<link wikidata="Q70626" start="5299" end="5311" title="Chicago Loop" label="Chicago Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="5316" end="5329" title="Lake Michigan" label="Lake Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268134" start="5902" end="5912" title="Beaux-Arts architecture" label="beaux arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q469382" start="5925" end="5938" title="Ulmus americana" label="American Elms"/>
<link wikidata="Q845598" start="6088" end="6105" title="Dutch elm disease" label="Dutch elm disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130516" start="6264" end="6279" title="Millennium Park" label="Millennium Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180096" start="6391" end="6412" title="Jay Pritzker Pavilion" label="Jay Pritzker Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q589099" start="6424" end="6434" title="Cloud Gate" label="Cloud Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005469" start="6479" end="6493" title="Crown Fountain" label="Crown Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267751" start="6505" end="6517" title="Lurie Garden" label="Lurie Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002163" start="6571" end="6591" title="BP Pedestrian Bridge" label="BP Pedestrian Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026554" start="6600" end="6617" title="Nichols Bridgeway" label="Nichols Bridgeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002163" start="6687" end="6707" title="BP Pedestrian Bridge" label="BP Pedestrian Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080119" start="6816" end="6833" title="Maggie Daley Park" label="Maggie Daley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835054" start="6911" end="6934" title="Michael Van Valkenburgh" label="Michael Van Valkenburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q866224" start="7046" end="7056" title="pickleball" label="pickleball"/>
<link wikidata="Q239303" start="7220" end="7244" title="Art Institute of Chicago" label="Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="7355" end="7368" title="Impressionist" label="Impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044742" start="7401" end="7452" title="A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte" label="A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q217434" start="7464" end="7474" title="Grant Wood" label="Grant Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q464782" start="7488" end="7503" title="American Gothic" label="American Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432601" start="7515" end="7553" title="School of the Art Institute of Chicago" label="School of the Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q158989" start="7695" end="7714" title="Buckingham Fountain" label="Buckingham Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q483453" start="7748" end="7756" title="fountain" label="fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="7764" end="7770" title="rococo" label="rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55418871" start="7853" end="7876" title="Kate Sturges Buckingham" label="Kate Sturges Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954441" start="8085" end="8098" title="Museum Campus" label="Museum Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="8253" end="8268" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q358052" start="8271" end="8288" title="Adler Planetarium" label="Adler Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122595" start="8290" end="8321" title="Field Museum of Natural History" label="Field Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166515" start="8327" end="8341" title="Shedd Aquarium" label="Shedd Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="8396" end="8418" title="neoclassical sculpture" label="neoclassical sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q191479" start="8423" end="8433" title="Tadeusz Kościuszko" label="Kościuszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q452084" start="8435" end="8443" title="Karel Havlíček Borovský" label="Havliček"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="8448" end="8467" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344205" start="8480" end="8496" title="Northerly Island" label="Northerly Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178815" start="8661" end="8681" title="Petrillo Music Shell" label="Petrillo Music Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216467" start="8896" end="8912" title="Lake Shore Drive" label="Lake Shore Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160813" start="9200" end="9218" title="Congress Parkway" label="Ida B. Wells Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867529" start="9223" end="9238" title="Michigan Avenue (Chicago)" label="Michigan Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719555" start="9396" end="9423" title="The Bowman and The Spearman" label="The Bowman and The Spearman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267751" start="9583" end="9595" title="Lurie Garden" label="Lurie Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q171892" start="9655" end="9663" title="lavender" label="lavender"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002163" start="9732" end="9752" title="BP Pedestrian Bridge" label="BP Pedestrian Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q771682" start="9966" end="9990" title="Chicago Federal Building" label="Chicago Federal Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796889" start="10190" end="10223" title="Art Institute of Chicago Building" label="Art Institute of Chicago Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q787883" start="10328" end="10355" title="Fountain of the Great Lakes" label="Fountain of the Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154167" start="10474" end="10488" title="Orchestra Hall, Chicago" label="Orchestra Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050470" start="10524" end="10550" title="Chicago Symphony Orchestra" label="Chicago Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q128085" start="10552" end="10567" title="Georg Solti" label="Sir Georg Solti"/>
<link wikidata="Q62613" start="10572" end="10587" title="Theodore Thomas (conductor)" label="Theodore Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23614086" start="11943" end="11964" title="Charles L. Hutchinson" label="Charles L. Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095674" start="12014" end="12037" title="Chicago Lakefront Trail" label="Chicago Lakefront Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q65054925" start="12050" end="12064" title="multi-use path" label="multi-use path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="12087" end="12100" title="Lake Michigan" label="Lake Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216467" start="12182" end="12198" title="Lake Shore Drive" label="Lake Shore Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="12784" end="12796" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601071" start="12808" end="12819" title="Royal Yacht" label="Royal Yacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529544" start="12826" end="12835" title="HMY Britannia" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q753288" start="12882" end="12901" title="St. Lawrence Seaway" label="St. Lawrence Seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047881" start="13548" end="13563" title="Central Station (Chicago terminal)" label="Central Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130516" start="14409" end="14424" title="Millennium Park" label="Millennium Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q171038" start="14624" end="14632" title="softball" label="softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="14633" end="14641" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="14656" end="14662" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15015" end="15049" title="Abraham Lincoln: The Head of State" label="Abraham Lincoln: The Head of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q770625" start="15080" end="15102" title="Augustus Saint-Gaudens" label="Augustus Saint-Gaudens"/>
<link wikidata="Q594648" start="15126" end="15132" title="exedra" label="exedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q572735" start="15146" end="15160" title="Stanford White" label="Stanford White"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="15287" end="15313" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062247" start="15330" end="15361" title="San Francisco World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="San Francisco World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15635" end="15659" title="Abraham Lincoln: The Man" label="Abraham Lincoln: The Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693570" start="15714" end="15719" title="Agora (sculpture)" label="Agora"/>
<link wikidata="Q158080" start="15849" end="15870" title="Magdalena Abakanowicz" label="Magdalena Abakanowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441902" start="15903" end="15917" title="Roosevelt Road" label="Roosevelt Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024124" start="16055" end="16083" title="Weathering steel" label="weathering or COR-TEN® steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112138" start="16289" end="16302" title="Statue of Christopher Columbus (Chicago)" label="bronze statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q300347" start="16494" end="16513" title="Century of Progress" label="Century of Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="16578" end="16594" title="Italian-American" label="Italian-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="16648" end="16655" title="Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q96107631" start="16705" end="16716" title="List of monuments and memorials removed during the George Floyd protests" label="was removed"/>
<link wikidata="Q56486914" start="16752" end="16766" title="Lori Lightfoot" label="Lori Lightfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q95988195" start="16776" end="16808" title="George Floyd protests in Chicago" label="George Floyd protests in Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q97516262" start="16813" end="16845" title="2020 deployment of federal forces in the United States" label="the deployment of federal forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q29600648" start="16968" end="16995" title="General John Logan Memorial" label="General John Logan Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q659396" start="17005" end="17022" title="equestrian statue" label="equestrian statue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17026" end="17039" title="John A. Logan#Legacy" label="John A. Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q770625" start="17351" end="17373" title="Augustus Saint-Gaudens" label="Augustus Saint-Gaudens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719845" start="17378" end="17405" title="Alexander Phimister Proctor" label="Alexander Phimister Proctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963300" start="17568" end="17598" title="Chicago Children&amp;#x27;s Museum" label="Chicago Children&amp;#x27;s Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337338" start="17681" end="17690" title="Navy Pier" label="Navy Pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q539814" start="17805" end="17821" title="Richard M. Daley" label="Richard M. Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130516" start="18102" end="18117" title="Millennium Park" label="Millennium Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364904" start="18120" end="18136" title="Parks in Chicago" label="Parks in Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="18265" end="18278" title="Life magazine" label="Life magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41964" wikidata="Q7432601" url="?curid=41964" title="School of the Art Institute of Chicago">
<text>The School of the Art Institute of Chicago (SAIC) is a private art school associated with the Art Institute of Chicago (AIC) in Chicago, Illinois. Tracing its history to an art students&#x27; cooperative founded in 1866, which grew into the museum and school, SAIC has been accredited since 1936 by the Higher Learning Commission and by the National Association of Schools of Art and Design since 1944 (charter member). It has been a member of the Association of Independent Colleges of Art and Design (AICAD) since the association&#x27;s founding in 1991 and is also accredited by the National Architectural Accrediting Board.

Its downtown Chicago campus consists of seven buildings located in the immediate vicinity of the AIC building. SAIC is in an equal partnership with the AIC and shares many administrative resources such as design, construction, and human resources. The campus, located in the Loop, comprises chiefly five main buildings: the McLean Center (112 S Michigan Ave), the Michigan building (116 S Michigan Ave), the Sharp (36 S Wabash Ave), Sullivan Center (37 S Wabash Ave), and the Columbus (280 S Columbus Dr). SAIC also holds classes in the Spertus building at 610 S Michigan Ave. SAIC owns additional buildings throughout Chicago that are used as student galleries or investments. There are three dormitory facilities: The Buckingham, Jones Hall, and 162 N State Street residencies.

== History ==
The institute has its roots in the 1866 founding of the Chicago Academy of Design, which local artists established in rented rooms on Clark Street. It was financed by member dues and patron donations. Four years later, the school moved into its own Adams Street building, which was destroyed in the Great Chicago Fire of 1871.

Because of the school&#x27;s financial and managerial problems after this loss, business leaders in 1878 formed a board of trustees and founded the Chicago Academy of Fine Arts. They expanded its mission beyond education and exhibitions to include collecting. In 1882, the academy was renamed the Art Institute of Chicago. The banker Charles L. Hutchinson served as its elected president until his death in 1924. The school grew to become among the &quot;most influential&quot; art schools in the United States.

Walter E. Massey served as president, from 2010 until July 2016. He was succeeded by Elissa Tenny, who formerly served as the school&#x27;s provost. In 2024, Tenny was succeeded by Jiseon Lee Isbara, a fiber artist and academic administrator.

== Academics ==

SAIC offers classes in art and technology; arts administration; art history, theory, and criticism; art education and art therapy; ceramics; fashion design; filmmaking; historic preservation; architecture; interior architecture; designed objects; journalism; painting and drawing; performance; photography; printmaking; sculpture; sound; new media; video; visual communication; visual and critical studies; animation; illustration; fiber; and writing.

SAIC also offers an interdisciplinary Low-Residency MFA for students wishing to study the fine arts and/or writing.

In 2024, the school reported a six-year graduation rate of 68%.

==Chicago Architects Oral History Project==
In 1983, the Department of Architecture began the &quot;Chicago Architects Oral History Project.&quot; More than 78 architects have contributed.&lt;ref name=&quot;artic.edu/caohp&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

==Demographics==
As of fall 2024, the school enrolled 2,806 undergraduate and 589 graduate students. 76% of them were female and 29% were from outside of the United States. 7.5% of students were from Chicago. 

==Activities==
===Visiting Artists Program===
Founded in 1868, the Visiting Artists Program (VAP) is one of the oldest public programs of the School of the Art Institute of Chicago. Formalized in 1951 by Flora Mayer Witkowsky&#x27;s endowment of a supporting fund, the Visiting Artists Program hosts public presentations by artists, designers, and scholars each year in lectures, symposia, performances, and screenings. It showcases work in all media, including sound, video, performance, poetry, painting, and independent film; in addition to significant curators, critics, and art historians.

Recent visiting artists have included Raven Chacon, Stephanie Dinkins, and Guadalupe Maravilla (2023-24 school year). Visiting artists for the 2022-23 school year included Torkwase Dyson and Wu Tsang, 2021-22 included Shirin Neshat, Hito Steyerl and Katie Paterson, and 2020-21 included Meg Onli and Fred Wilson. 

Other visiting artists have included Catherine Opie, Andi Zeisler, Aaron Koblin, Jean Shin, Sam Lipsyte, Ben Marcus, Marilyn Minter, Pearl Fryar, Tehching Hsieh, Homi K. Bhabha, Bill Fontana, Wolfgang Laib, Suzanne Lee, and Amar Kanwar among others.

Additionally, the Distinguished Alumni Series brings alumni back to the community to present their work and reflect on how their experiences at SAIC have shaped them. Alumni speakers have included Tania Bruguera, Jenni Sorkin, Kori Newkirk, Saya Woolfalk, Jun Nguyen-Hatsushiba, Trevor Paglen, and Sanford Biggers.

===Galleries===
*SAIC Galleries – Located at 33 E. Washington Street, SAIC Galleries occupies four floors and offers 26,000 square feet of exhibition space for annual student and faculty shows, as well as special exhibitions featuring national and international artists.
*Sullivan Galleries – Located to the 7th floor of the Sullivan Center at 33 S. State Street. With shows and projects often led by faculty or student curators, it is a teaching gallery. In the spring of 2020, SAIC announced it would relocate its galleries and Department of Exhibitions &amp; Exhibition Studies from 33 S. State Street to 33 E. Washington Street after ten years of operation.
*SITE Galleries (formerly Student Union Galleries) – Founded in 1994, SITE, once known as the Student Union Galleries (SUGs), is a student-run organization at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago (SAIC) for the exhibition of student work. They have two locations: The SITE Sharp of the 37 South Wabash Avenue building; and SITE Columbus of the 280 South Columbus Drive building. The two locations allow the galleries to cycle two shows simultaneously.

===Student organizations===

==== ExTV ====
ExTV is a student-run time-arts platform that broadcasts online and on campus. Its broadcasts are available via monitors located throughout the 112 S. Michigan building, the 37 S Wabash building, and the 280 S. Columbus building.

====&quot;F Newsmagazine&quot;====
&quot;F Newsmagazine&quot; is SAIC&#x27;s student-run newspaper. The magazine is a monthly publication with a run of 12,000 copies. Copies are distributed throughout the city, mainly at locations frequented by students such as popular diners and movie theaters.

====Free Radio SAIC====
Free Radio SAIC is the student-run Internet radio station of The School of the Art Institute of Chicago. Free Radio uses an open programming format and encourage its DJs to explore and experiment with the medium of live radio. Program content and style vary but generally include music from all genres, sound art, narratives, live performances, current events and interviews.

Featured bands and guests on Free Radio SAIC include Nü Sensae, The Black Belles, Thomas Comerford, Kevin Michael Richardson, Jeff Bennett, Carolyn Lawrence, and much more.

====Student government====
The student government of SAIC, as required by its constitution, has four officers holding equal power and responsibility. Elections are held every year. There are no campaign requirements. Any group of four students may run for office, but there must always be four students.

The student government is responsible for hosting a school-wide student meeting once a month. At these meetings students discuss school concerns of any nature. The predominant topic is funding for the various student organizations. Organizations which desire funding must present a proposal at the meeting by which the students vote whether they should receive monies or not. The student government cannot participate in the vote: only oversee it.

== Rankings ==
In a 2002 survey conducted by the National Arts Journalism Program at Columbia University, SAIC was named the &quot;most influential art school&quot; by art critics at general interest news publications from across the United States.

In January 2013, the Global Language Monitor ranked SAIC as the #5 college in the U.S., the highest ever for an art or design school in a general college ranking.

As of 2025, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranks SAIC as the second best overall graduate program for fine arts in the U.S. tied with the Yale School of Art and behind the UCLA School of the Arts and Architecture. In their previous rankings done in 2016, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; college rankings ranked SAIC the fourth best overall graduate program for fine arts in the U.S. tying with the Rhode Island School of Design (RISD), and behind Yale, UCLA, and Virginia Commonwealth University School of the Arts. In 2021, the university was ranked the seventh globally according to the QS World University Rankings by the subject Art and Design.

==Notable people==

Notable professors at SAIC include Nick Cave, James Elkins, Lisa Wainwright, Stephanie Brooks, Mary Jane Jacob, Frank Piatek, Edra Soto, Michelle Grabner, Jefferson Pinder, Adrian Wong, and Candida Alvarez.

Notable alumni include Ivan Albright, Thomas Hart Benton, Sanford Biggers, Sonya Clark, Amanda Crowe, Megan Elizabeth Euker, Richard Hunt, Rashid Johnson, Jeff Koons, Joan Mitchell, Georgia O&#x27;Keefe, Trevor Paglen, Sterling Ruby, Dread Scott, Belle Silveira, Charles W. White, and Grant Wood.

== Controversy ==

=== &quot;Mirth &amp; Girth&quot; ===

On May 11, 1988, a student painting depicting Harold Washington, the first black mayor of Chicago, was taken down by three of the city&#x27;s African-American aldermen based on its content. The painting by David Nelson, &quot;Mirth &amp; Girth&quot;, was of Washington clad only in women&#x27;s underwear.&quot;&quot;

Police Superintendent LeRoy Martin ordered the removal of the painting, which was returned the following day. The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) filed a lawsuit against the Chicago Police Department and the aldermen on the grounds that they had violated Nelson&#x27;s First, Fourth, and Fourteenth Amendment rights. In 1992, a federal court affirmed his constitutional rights had been violated. In 1994, the city agreed to a settlement: the money would go toward attorneys&#x27; fees for the ACLU. The three aldermen agreed not to appeal the 1992 ruling, and the police department established procedures over seizure of materials protected by the First Amendment.

=== &quot;What Is the Proper Way to Display a U.S. Flag?&quot; ===

In February 1989, as part of a piece entitled &quot;What Is the Proper Way to Display a U.S. Flag?&quot;, student &quot;Dread&quot; Scott Tyler spread a Flag of the United States on the floor of the institute. The piece consisted of a podium, set upon the flag, and containing a notebook for viewers to express how they felt about the exhibit. In order for viewers to write in the notebook, they would have to walk on the flag, which is a violation of customary practice and code. While the exhibit faced protests from veterans and bomb threats, the school stood by the student&#x27;s art. That year, the school&#x27;s state funding was cut from $70,000 to $1, and the piece was publicly condemned by President George H. W. Bush. Scott would go on to be one of the defendants in &quot;United States v. Eichman&quot;, a Supreme Court case in which it was eventually decided that federal laws banning flag desecration were unconstitutional.

=== Racial slur and art studies ===
In 2018, then Dean of Faculty Martin Berger, an art historian, gave an academic lecture on the civil rights movement in which he read a quote that employed the n-word. This part of his presentation caused controversy among faculty and staff, some thought it appropriate in the academic setting in which it was used, while others did not.

===Title IX controversy===
In 2017, a controversy arose after Michael Bonesteel, an adjunct professor specializing in outsider art, and comics, resigned after actions taken by the institute following two Title IX complaints by transgender students being filed against him in which each criticized his comments and class discussion. The institute initiated an investigation and took certain actions. Bonesteel described the SAIC investigation as a &quot;Kafkaesque trial&quot;, in which he was never shown copies of the complaints. He claimed he was assumed to be &quot;guilty until proven innocent&quot; and that SAIC &quot;feels more like a police state than a place where academic freedom and the open exchange of ideas is valued&quot;.

Laura Kipnis, author of a book on Title IX cases in which she argues that universities follow reckless and capricious approaches, argued that SAIC was displaying &quot;jawdropping cowardice&quot;. She said, &quot;The idea that students are trying to censor or curb a professor&#x27;s opinions or thinking is appalling&quot;. The school said the claims made against it were &quot;problematic&quot; and &quot;misleading&quot;, and that it supports academic freedom.

== Property ==
This is a list of property in order of acquisition:
* 280 Building: 280 South Columbus (classrooms, departmental offices, studios, Betty Rymer Gallery)
*Sharp Building/LeRoy Neiman Center: 37 South Wabash (classrooms, main administrative offices, Flaxman Library)
*MacLean Center: 112 South Michigan (classrooms, departmental offices, studios, ballroom)
*Jones Hall: 7 West Madison (student residences)
*162 Residences: 162 North State (student residences)
*Gene Siskel Film Center: 164 North State Street 
*Lakeview Building: 116 South Michigan

SAIC also owns these properties outside of the immediate vicinity of the Chicago Loop:
*The Roger Brown Study Collection: 1926 North Halsted

SAIC leases:
*Sullivan Center: 36 South Wabash, leasing the 12th floor (administrative offices, Architecture and Interior Architecture Design Center)
*Sullivan Center: 36 South Wabash, leasing the 7th floor (Fashion Design department, Gallery 2)
*Sullivan Center: 36 South Wabash, leasing offices on the 14th floor (administrative offices)
*Sullivan Center: 36 South Wabash, leasing offices on the 15th floor (administrative offices)
*33 Building/ SAIC Galleries: 33 East Washington, leasing the lower four stories (gallery space, administrative offices, and graduate studios)
*The Buckingham: 59 East Van Buren (student residences)

== Academic partnerships ==
* Glasgow School of Art (United Kingdom)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7432601" start="4" end="42" title="School of the Art Institute of Chicago" label="School of the Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432601" start="44" end="48" title="School of the Art Institute of Chicago" label="SAIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="55" end="62" title="Private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q383092" start="63" end="73" title="art school" label="art school"/>
<link wikidata="Q239303" start="94" end="118" title="Art Institute of Chicago" label="Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="128" end="135" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="137" end="145" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="241" end="247" title="museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758323" start="274" end="284" title="Higher education accreditation in the United States" label="accredited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739633" start="303" end="329" title="Higher Learning Commission" label="Higher Learning Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970749" start="341" end="390" title="National Association of Schools of Art and Design" label="National Association of Schools of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809846" start="448" end="501" title="Association of Independent Colleges of Art and Design" label="Association of Independent Colleges of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091169" start="586" end="626" title="National Architectural Accrediting Board" label="National Architectural Accrediting Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796889" start="726" end="738" title="Art Institute of Chicago Building" label="AIC building"/>
<link wikidata="Q70626" start="900" end="908" title="Chicago Loop" label="the Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896792" start="1166" end="1173" title="Spertus Institute for Jewish Learning and Leadership" label="Spertus"/>
<link wikidata="Q70520" start="1723" end="1749" title="Great Chicago Fire of 1871" label="Great Chicago Fire of 1871"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="1866" end="1883" title="Board of directors" label="board of trustees"/>
<link wikidata="Q23614086" start="2086" end="2107" title="Charles L. Hutchinson" label="Charles L. Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964724" start="2265" end="2281" title="Walter E. Massey" label="Walter E. Massey"/>
<link wikidata="Q32534268" start="2350" end="2362" title="Elissa Tenny" label="Elissa Tenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446356" start="2467" end="2479" title="fiber artist" label="fiber artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q928865" start="2644" end="2655" title="art therapy" label="art therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296393" start="4252" end="4264" title="Raven Chacon" label="Raven Chacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28869335" start="4266" end="4283" title="Stephanie Dinkins" label="Stephanie Dinkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q107436373" start="4289" end="4308" title="Guadalupe Maravilla" label="Guadalupe Maravilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q50345522" start="4386" end="4400" title="Torkwase Dyson" label="Torkwase Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17581477" start="4405" end="4413" title="Wu Tsang" label="Wu Tsang"/>
<link wikidata="Q262413" start="4432" end="4445" title="Shirin Neshat" label="Shirin Neshat"/>
<link wikidata="Q98366" start="4447" end="4459" title="Hito Steyerl" label="Hito Steyerl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734263" start="4464" end="4478" title="Katie Paterson" label="Katie Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q69995455" start="4501" end="4509" title="Meg Onli" label="Meg Onli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496574" start="4514" end="4525" title="Fred Wilson (artist)" label="Fred Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q50049" start="4566" end="4580" title="Catherine Opie" label="Catherine Opie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754440" start="4582" end="4594" title="Andi Zeisler" label="Andi Zeisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662151" start="4596" end="4608" title="Aaron Koblin" label="Aaron Koblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171512" start="4610" end="4619" title="Jean Shin" label="Jean Shin"/>
<link wikidata="Q598494" start="4621" end="4632" title="Sam Lipsyte" label="Sam Lipsyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q816553" start="4634" end="4644" title="Ben Marcus" label="Ben Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847976" start="4646" end="4660" title="Marilyn Minter" label="Marilyn Minter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158079" start="4662" end="4673" title="Pearl Fryar" label="Pearl Fryar"/>
<link wikidata="Q554030" start="4675" end="4689" title="Tehching Hsieh" label="Tehching Hsieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q325741" start="4691" end="4705" title="Homi K. Bhabha" label="Homi K. Bhabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903211" start="4707" end="4719" title="Bill Fontana" label="Bill Fontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q600456" start="4721" end="4734" title="Wolfgang Laib" label="Wolfgang Laib"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650902" start="4736" end="4747" title="Suzanne Lee" label="Suzanne Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q454717" start="4753" end="4764" title="Amar Kanwar" label="Amar Kanwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q547372" start="4977" end="4991" title="Tania Bruguera" label="Tania Bruguera"/>
<link wikidata="Q25936135" start="4993" end="5005" title="Jenni Sorkin" label="Jenni Sorkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21073949" start="5007" end="5019" title="Kori Newkirk" label="Kori Newkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429078" start="5021" end="5034" title="Saya Woolfalk" label="Saya Woolfalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311529" start="5036" end="5057" title="Jun Nguyen-Hatsushiba" label="Jun Nguyen-Hatsushiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839361" start="5059" end="5072" title="Trevor Paglen" label="Trevor Paglen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417607" start="5078" end="5093" title="Sanford Biggers" label="Sanford Biggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071538" start="7244" end="7253" title="Nü Sensae" label="Nü Sensae"/>
<link wikidata="Q891671" start="7255" end="7271" title="The Black Belles" label="The Black Belles"/>
<link wikidata="Q488335" start="7291" end="7315" title="Kevin Michael Richardson" label="Kevin Michael Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q311103" start="7317" end="7329" title="Jeff Bennett" label="Jeff Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q454102" start="7331" end="7347" title="Carolyn Lawrence" label="Carolyn Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q889368" start="8390" end="8413" title="Global Language Monitor" label="Global Language Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="8551" end="8579" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047422" start="8681" end="8699" title="Yale School of Art" label="Yale School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864047" start="8715" end="8755" title="UCLA School of the Arts and Architecture" label="UCLA School of the Arts and Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q49208" start="8950" end="8979" title="Rhode Island School of Design" label="Rhode Island School of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906673" start="9015" end="9066" title="Virginia Commonwealth University School of the Arts" label="Virginia Commonwealth University School of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="9141" end="9169" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q24218" start="9257" end="9266" title="Nick Cave (artist)" label="Nick Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q10305071" start="9268" end="9280" title="James Elkins (art historian)" label="James Elkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588377" start="9282" end="9297" title="Lisa Wainwright" label="Lisa Wainwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q63032670" start="9299" end="9315" title="Stephanie Brooks" label="Stephanie Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730120" start="9317" end="9332" title="Mary Jane Jacob" label="Mary Jane Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q21809590" start="9334" end="9346" title="Frank Piatek" label="Frank Piatek"/>
<link wikidata="Q47552004" start="9348" end="9357" title="Edra Soto" label="Edra Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837055" start="9359" end="9375" title="Michelle Grabner" label="Michelle Grabner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18631751" start="9377" end="9393" title="Jefferson Pinder" label="Jefferson Pinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685442" start="9395" end="9406" title="Adrian Wong (artist)" label="Adrian Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19609556" start="9412" end="9427" title="Candida Alvarez" label="Candida Alvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392676" start="9453" end="9466" title="Ivan Albright" label="Ivan Albright"/>
<link wikidata="Q471764" start="9468" end="9486" title="Thomas Hart Benton (painter)" label="Thomas Hart Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417607" start="9488" end="9503" title="Sanford Biggers" label="Sanford Biggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562570" start="9505" end="9516" title="Sonya Clark" label="Sonya Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822317" start="9518" end="9530" title="Amanda Crowe" label="Amanda Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q120493365" start="9532" end="9553" title="Megan Elizabeth Euker" label="Megan Elizabeth Euker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326615" start="9555" end="9567" title="Richard Hunt (sculptor)" label="Richard Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294901" start="9569" end="9583" title="Rashid Johnson" label="Rashid Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q297525" start="9585" end="9595" title="Jeff Koons" label="Jeff Koons"/>
<link wikidata="Q469934" start="9597" end="9610" title="Joan Mitchell" label="Joan Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q46408" start="9612" end="9632" title="Georgia O&amp;#x27;Keeffe" label="Georgia O&amp;#x27;Keefe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839361" start="9634" end="9647" title="Trevor Paglen" label="Trevor Paglen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231971" start="9649" end="9662" title="Sterling Ruby" label="Sterling Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q26899216" start="9664" end="9675" title="Dread Scott" label="Dread Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q106411095" start="9677" end="9691" title="Belle Silveira" label="Belle Silveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083521" start="9693" end="9709" title="Charles W. White" label="Charles W. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q217434" start="9715" end="9725" title="Grant Wood" label="Grant Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q295584" start="9832" end="9849" title="Harold Washington" label="Harold Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963301" start="9945" end="9953" title="Chicago City Council" label="aldermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993260" start="10127" end="10139" title="LeRoy Martin" label="LeRoy Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="10219" end="10249" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340186" start="10285" end="10310" title="Chicago Police Department" label="Chicago Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="10380" end="10385" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q231304" start="10387" end="10393" title="Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="10399" end="10419" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q26899216" start="10959" end="10988" title="Dread Scott" label="&amp;quot;Dread&amp;quot; Scott Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="10998" end="11023" title="Flag of the United States" label="Flag of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="11556" end="11573" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228369" start="11630" end="11654" title="United States v. Eichman" label="United States v. Eichman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="11664" end="11677" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q723682" start="11835" end="11839" title="Dean (education)" label="Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455718" start="11981" end="11987" title="n-word" label="n-word"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12244" end="12261" title="Professors in the United States#Adjunct professor" label="adjunct professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q594150" start="12278" end="12290" title="outsider art" label="outsider art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133007" start="12364" end="12372" title="Title IX" label="Title IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="12387" end="12398" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q905" start="12613" end="12623" title="Kafkaesque" label="Kafkaesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q217405" start="12802" end="12814" title="police state" label="police state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827795" start="12900" end="12912" title="Laura Kipnis" label="Laura Kipnis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12924" end="12930" title="Unwanted Advances: Sexual Paranoia Comes to Campus" label="a book"/>
<link wikidata="Q414706" start="13346" end="13362" title="academic freedom" label="academic freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531450" start="13838" end="13861" title="Gene Siskel Film Center" label="Gene Siskel Film Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q748106" start="14733" end="14754" title="Glasgow School of Art" label="Glasgow School of Art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41967" wikidata="Q6424" url="?curid=41967" title="Werra">
<text>The Werra (), a river in central Germany, is the right-bank headwater of the Weser. &quot;Weser&quot; is a synonym in an old dialect of German. The Werra has its source near Eisfeld in southern Thuringia. After the Werra joins the river Fulda in the town of Hann. Münden, forming the Weser. If the Werra is included as part of the Weser, the Weser is the longest river entirely within German territory at .

Its valley, the , has many tributaries and is a relative lull between the Rhön Mountains and the Thuringian Forest.

Its attractions include Eiben Forest near Dermbach, an unusual sandstone cave at Walldorf, the deepest lake in Germany formed by subsidence (near Bernshausen), and Krayenburg, the ruins of a castle.

The towns and main settlements along the Werra are Hildburghausen, Meiningen, Bad Salzungen, Tiefenort, Merkers-Kieselbach, Vacha, Heringen, Philippsthal, Gerstungen, Wanfried, Eschwege, Bad Sooden-Allendorf, Witzenhausen and Hannoversch Münden.

==Gallery==
==See also==
*Werra Viaduct, Hedemünden
*List of rivers of Thuringia
*List of rivers of Hesse
*List of rivers of Lower Saxony

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6424" start="4" end="9" title="Werra" label="Werra"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="33" end="40" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897058" start="49" end="59" title="Bank (geography)" label="right-bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="60" end="69" title="headwater" label="headwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650" start="77" end="82" title="Weser" label="Weser"/>
<link wikidata="Q486795" start="174" end="181" title="Eisfeld" label="Eisfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205" start="194" end="203" title="Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434" start="237" end="242" title="Fulda (river)" label="Fulda"/>
<link wikidata="Q165380" start="258" end="270" title="Hann. Münden" label="Hann. Münden"/>
<link wikidata="Q148988" start="482" end="496" title="Rhön Mountains" label="Rhön Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210" start="505" end="522" title="Thuringian Forest" label="Thuringian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q659018" start="567" end="575" title="Dermbach" label="Dermbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q22872" start="606" end="614" title="Walldorf" label="Walldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="654" end="664" title="subsidence" label="subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q826774" start="671" end="682" title="Bernshausen" label="Bernshausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786967" start="689" end="699" title="Krayenburg" label="Krayenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q504348" start="776" end="790" title="Hildburghausen" label="Hildburghausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q487278" start="792" end="801" title="Meiningen" label="Meiningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q502662" start="803" end="816" title="Bad Salzungen" label="Bad Salzungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q631922" start="818" end="827" title="Tiefenort" label="Tiefenort"/>
<link wikidata="Q635010" start="829" end="847" title="Merkers-Kieselbach" label="Merkers-Kieselbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q551954" start="849" end="854" title="Vacha, Germany" label="Vacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q570334" start="856" end="864" title="Heringen" label="Heringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q279508" start="866" end="878" title="Philippsthal (Werra)" label="Philippsthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q675672" start="880" end="890" title="Gerstungen" label="Gerstungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432" start="892" end="900" title="Wanfried" label="Wanfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468" start="902" end="910" title="Eschwege" label="Eschwege"/>
<link wikidata="Q564821" start="912" end="932" title="Bad Sooden-Allendorf" label="Bad Sooden-Allendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q564827" start="934" end="946" title="Witzenhausen" label="Witzenhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q945504" start="998" end="1023" title="Werra Viaduct, Hedemünden" label="Werra Viaduct, Hedemünden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11155458" start="1025" end="1052" title="List of rivers of Thuringia" label="List of rivers of Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636636" start="1054" end="1077" title="List of rivers of Hesse" label="List of rivers of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637610" start="1079" end="1109" title="List of rivers of Lower Saxony" label="List of rivers of Lower Saxony"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41968" wikidata="Q854659" url="?curid=41968" title="Gain (electronics)">
<text>In electronics, gain is a measure of the ability of a two-port circuit (often an amplifier) to increase the power or amplitude of a signal from the input to the output port by adding energy converted from some power supply to the signal. It is usually defined as the mean ratio of the signal amplitude or power at the output port to the amplitude or power at the input port. It is often expressed using the logarithmic decibel (dB) units (&quot;dB gain&quot;). A gain greater than one (greater than zero dB), that is, amplification, is the defining property of an active device or circuit, while a passive circuit will have a gain of less than one.

The term &quot;gain&quot; alone is ambiguous, and can refer to the ratio of output to input voltage (&quot;voltage gain&quot;), current (&quot;current gain&quot;) or electric power (&quot;power gain&quot;). In the field of audio and general purpose amplifiers, especially operational amplifiers, the term usually refers to voltage gain, but in radio frequency amplifiers it usually refers to power gain. Furthermore, the term gain is also applied in systems such as sensors where the input and output have different units; in such cases the gain units must be specified, as in &quot;5 microvolts per photon&quot; for the responsivity of a photosensor. The &quot;gain&quot; of a bipolar transistor normally refers to forward current transfer ratio, either &quot;h&quot;FE (&quot;beta&quot;, the static ratio of &quot;I&quot;&quot;c&quot; divided by &quot;I&quot;b at some operating point), or sometimes &quot;h&quot;fe (the small-signal current gain, the slope of the graph of &quot;I&quot;&quot;c&quot; against &quot;I&quot;&quot;b&quot; at a point).

The gain of an electronic device or circuit generally varies with the frequency of the applied signal. Unless otherwise stated, the term refers to the gain for frequencies in the passband, the intended operating frequency range of the equipment. 
The term &quot;gain&quot; has a different meaning in antenna design; antenna gain is the ratio of radiation intensity from a directional antenna to formula_1 (mean radiation intensity from a lossless antenna).

==Logarithmic units and decibels==

===Power gain===
Power gain, in decibels (dB), is defined as follows:

:formula_2

where formula_3 is the power applied to the input, formula_4 is the power from the output.

A similar calculation can be done using a natural logarithm instead of a decimal logarithm, resulting in nepers instead of decibels:

:formula_5

===Voltage gain===
The power gain can be calculated using voltage instead of power using Joule&#x27;s first law formula_6; the formula is:

:formula_7

In many cases, the input impedance formula_8 and output impedance formula_9 are equal, so the above equation can be simplified to:

:formula_10

:formula_11

This simplified formula, the 20 log rule, is used to calculate a voltage gain in decibels and is equivalent to a power gain if and only if the impedances at input and output are equal.

===Current gain===
In the same way, when power gain is calculated using current instead of power, making the substitution formula_12, the formula is:

:formula_13

In many cases, the input and output impedances are equal, so the above equation can be simplified to:

:formula_14

:formula_15

This simplified formula is used to calculate a current gain in decibels and is equivalent to the voltage gain if and only if the impedances at input and output are equal.

The &quot;current gain&quot; of a bipolar transistor, formula_16 or formula_17, is normally given as a dimensionless number, the ratio of formula_18 to formula_19 (or slope of the formula_18-versus-formula_19 graph, for formula_17).

In the cases above, gain will be a dimensionless quantity, as it is the ratio of like units (decibels are not used as units, but rather as a method of indicating a logarithmic relationship). In the bipolar transistor example, it is the ratio of the output current to the input current, both measured in amperes. In the case of other devices, the gain will have a value in SI units. Such is the case with the operational transconductance amplifier, which has an open-loop gain (transconductance) in siemens (mhos), because the gain is a ratio of the output current to the input voltage.

===Example===
Q. An amplifier has an input impedance of 50 ohms and drives a load of 50 ohms. When its input (formula_23) is 1 volt, its output (formula_24) is 10 volts. What is its voltage and power gain?

A. Voltage gain is simply:

:formula_25

The units V/V are optional but make it clear that this figure is a voltage gain and not a power gain.
Using the expression for power, &quot;P&quot; = &quot;V&quot;2/&quot;R&quot;, the power gain is:

:formula_26

Again, the units W/W are optional. Power gain is more usually expressed in decibels, thus:

:formula_27

=== Unity gain ===
A gain of factor 1 (equivalent to 0 dB) where both input and output are at the same voltage level and impedance is also known as &quot;unity gain&quot;.

==See also==

* Active laser medium
* Antenna gain
* Aperture-to-medium coupling loss
* Automatic gain control
* Attenuation
* Complex gain
* DC offset
* Effective radiated power
* Gain before feedback
* Insertion gain
* Loop gain
* Open-loop gain
* Net gain
* Power gain
* Process gain
* Transmitter power output
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="3" end="14" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q854659" start="16" end="20" title="Gain (electronics)" label="gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q243745" start="54" end="62" title="two-port" label="two-port"/>
<link wikidata="Q132629" start="63" end="70" title="electrical network" label="circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="81" end="90" title="amplifier" label="amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q27137" start="108" end="113" title="Electric power" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q159190" start="117" end="126" title="amplitude" label="amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="132" end="138" title="signal" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q204157" start="210" end="222" title="power supply" label="power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481047" start="272" end="277" title="ratio" label="ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="285" end="291" title="signal" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443617" start="325" end="329" title="port (circuit theory)" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="407" end="416" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="419" end="426" title="decibel" label="decibel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11653" start="564" end="577" title="active device" label="active device"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="742" end="749" title="voltage" label="voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="778" end="785" title="Electric current" label="current"/>
<link wikidata="Q178947" start="922" end="943" title="operational amplifier" label="operational amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="994" end="1009" title="radio frequency" label="radio frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q167676" start="1116" end="1122" title="sensor" label="sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316011" start="1271" end="1283" title="responsivity" label="responsivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q210765" start="1289" end="1300" title="photosensor" label="photosensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188946" start="1328" end="1346" title="bipolar transistor" label="bipolar transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="1772" end="1781" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q254758" start="1881" end="1889" title="passband" label="passband"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="2002" end="2009" title="antenna (radio)" label="antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q251537" start="2018" end="2030" title="antenna gain" label="antenna gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253365" start="2047" end="2066" title="radiation intensity" label="radiation intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236514" start="2213" end="2223" title="Power gain" label="Power gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="2228" end="2235" title="decibel" label="decibel"/>
<link wikidata="Q204037" start="2413" end="2430" title="natural logarithm" label="natural logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q50094" start="2476" end="2481" title="neper" label="neper"/>
<link wikidata="Q21014200" start="2606" end="2628" title="Joule&amp;#x27;s first law" label="Joule&amp;#x27;s first law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="2856" end="2867" title="20 log rule" label="20 log rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q179043" start="2970" end="2980" title="Electrical impedance" label="impedances"/>
<link wikidata="Q179043" start="3435" end="3445" title="Electrical impedance" label="impedances"/>
<link wikidata="Q188946" start="3512" end="3530" title="bipolar transistor" label="bipolar transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25272" start="4015" end="4021" title="ampere" label="ampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="4084" end="4086" title="SI" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239595" start="4120" end="4158" title="operational transconductance amplifier" label="operational transconductance amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632964" start="4189" end="4205" title="transconductance" label="transconductance"/>
<link wikidata="Q169893" start="4210" end="4217" title="siemens (unit)" label="siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q169893" start="4219" end="4222" title="mho" label="mho"/>
<link wikidata="Q199" start="5019" end="5024" title="1 (number)" label="unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806565" start="5054" end="5073" title="Active laser medium" label="Active laser medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q251537" start="5076" end="5088" title="Antenna gain" label="Antenna gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779383" start="5091" end="5123" title="Aperture-to-medium coupling loss" label="Aperture-to-medium coupling loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q782524" start="5126" end="5148" title="Automatic gain control" label="Automatic gain control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357982" start="5151" end="5162" title="Attenuation" label="Attenuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156579" start="5165" end="5177" title="Complex gain" label="Complex gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907415" start="5180" end="5189" title="DC offset" label="DC offset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295986" start="5192" end="5216" title="Effective radiated power" label="Effective radiated power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517213" start="5219" end="5239" title="Gain before feedback" label="Gain before feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037390" start="5242" end="5256" title="Insertion gain" label="Insertion gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271153" start="5259" end="5268" title="Loop gain" label="Loop gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932986" start="5271" end="5285" title="Open-loop gain" label="Open-loop gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6998464" start="5288" end="5296" title="Net gain (telecommunications)" label="Net gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236514" start="5299" end="5309" title="Power gain" label="Power gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4075141" start="5312" end="5324" title="Process gain" label="Process gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q358527" start="5327" end="5351" title="Transmitter power output" label="Transmitter power output"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41969" wikidata="Q1692143" url="?curid=41969" title="Loss">
<text>Loss may refer to:

*Economic loss
*Grief, an emotional response to loss
**Animal loss, grief over the loss of an animal

==Mathematics, science, and technology==
*Angular misalignment loss, power loss caused by the deviation from optimum angular alignment
*Bridging loss, the loss that results when an impedance is connected across a transmission line
*Coupling loss, the loss that occurs when energy is transferred from one circuit, optical device, or medium to another
*Insertion loss, the decrease in transmitted signal power resulting from the insertion of a device in a transmission line or optical fiber
*Dielectric loss, a dielectric material&#x27;s inherent dissipation of electromagnetic energy
*Loss function, in statistics, a function representing the cost associated with an event
*Path loss, the attenuation undergone by an electromagnetic wave in transit from a transmitter to a receiver
**Free-space path loss, the loss in signal strength that would result if all influences were sufficiently removed having no effect on its propagation
*Return loss, the ratio of the amplitude of the reflected wave to the amplitude of the incident wave
*Round-trip loss in laser physics refers to energy lost due to scattering or absorption
*, power loss incured due to circuit switching
*Lick Observatory Supernova Search (LOSS) program

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
===Music===
====Albums====
*&quot;Loss&quot; (Bass Communion album) (2006)
*&quot;Loss&quot; (Mull Historical Society album) (2001)

====Songs====
*&quot;Losses&quot; (Lil Tjay song) (2020)
*&quot;Loss&quot;, a song by God Is an Astronaut from their self-titled album (2008)
*&quot;Loss&quot;, a song by Madder Mortem from &quot;Mercury&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Losses&quot;, a song by Drake from &quot;Dark Lane Demo Tapes&quot; (2020)
*&quot;Losses&quot;, a song by Polo G from &quot;Hall of Fame&quot; (2021)

===Other uses in arts, entertainment, and media===
*&quot;Loss&quot; (&quot;Ctrl+Alt+Del&quot;), a webcomic strip and internet meme
*&quot;Loss&quot; (film), a 2008 film by Maris Martinsons
*Lord Loss (character), a character from Darren Shan&#x27;s &quot;The Demonata&quot;
*&quot;The Loss&quot;, a 1990 episode of &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot;

==Other uses==
*Joe Loss (1909–1990), founder of The Joe Loss Orchestra
*Loss (baseball), a pitching statistic in baseball
*League of Secessionist States (LoSS), an intermicronational organisation

== See also ==

*Attenuation, a reduction in amplitude and intensity of a signal
*Lose (disambiguation)
*Lost (disambiguation)
*Losing (disambiguation)
*Stop loss (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1692143" start="0" end="4" title="Loss" label="Loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261147" start="21" end="34" title="Economic loss" label="Economic loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026040" start="36" end="41" title="Grief" label="Grief"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764951" start="75" end="86" title="Animal loss" label="Animal loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764024" start="164" end="189" title="Angular misalignment loss" label="Angular misalignment loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966885" start="258" end="271" title="Bridging loss" label="Bridging loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178039" start="354" end="367" title="Coupling loss" label="Coupling loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q947396" start="473" end="487" title="Insertion loss" label="Insertion loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417868" start="612" end="627" title="Dielectric loss" label="Dielectric loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036748" start="706" end="719" title="Loss function" label="Loss function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478845" start="795" end="804" title="Path loss" label="Path loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q477992" start="905" end="925" title="Free-space path loss" label="Free-space path loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933836" start="1054" end="1065" title="Return loss" label="Return loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370968" start="1155" end="1170" title="Round-trip loss" label="Round-trip loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q461613" start="1290" end="1323" title="Lick Observatory Supernova Search" label="Lick Observatory Supernova Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683707" start="1403" end="1442" title="Loss (Bass Communion album)" label="&amp;quot;Loss&amp;quot; (Bass Communion album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683713" start="1451" end="1499" title="Loss (Mull Historical Society album)" label="&amp;quot;Loss&amp;quot; (Mull Historical Society album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110823499" start="1523" end="1557" title="Losses (Lil Tjay song)" label="&amp;quot;Losses&amp;quot; (Lil Tjay song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039541" start="1619" end="1642" title="God Is an Astronaut (album)" label="their self-titled album"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818579" start="1704" end="1711" title="Mercury (Madder Mortem album)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q92724466" start="1773" end="1793" title="Dark Lane Demo Tapes" label="Dark Lane Demo Tapes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1856" end="1868" title="Hall of Fame (Polo G album)" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q56152168" start="1935" end="1978" title="Loss (Ctrl+Alt+Del)" label="&amp;quot;Loss&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Ctrl+Alt+Del&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683716" start="2016" end="2039" title="Loss (film)" label="&amp;quot;Loss&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275374" start="2074" end="2095" title="Lord Loss (character)" label="Lord Loss (character)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748511" start="2165" end="2173" title="The Loss" label="The Loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q203440" start="2259" end="2267" title="Joe Loss" label="Joe Loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q105076364" start="2316" end="2331" title="Loss (baseball)" label="Loss (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q116635816" start="2367" end="2396" title="League of Secessionist States" label="League of Secessionist States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357982" start="2458" end="2469" title="Attenuation" label="Attenuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16218076" start="2523" end="2544" title="Lose (disambiguation)" label="Lose (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q232244" start="2546" end="2567" title="Lost (disambiguation)" label="Lost (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683617" start="2569" end="2592" title="Losing (disambiguation)" label="Losing (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351795" start="2594" end="2620" title="Stop loss (disambiguation)" label="Stop loss (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41971" wikidata="Q2793" url="?curid=41971" title="Brothers Grimm">
<text>The Brothers Grimm ( or ), Jacob (1785–1863) and Wilhelm (1786–1859), were German academics who together collected and published folklore. The brothers are among the best-known storytellers of folktales, popularizing stories such as &quot;Cinderella&quot; (&quot;), &quot;The Frog Prince&quot; (&quot;&quot;), &quot;Hansel and Gretel&quot; (&quot;), &quot;Town Musicians of Bremen&quot; (&quot;&quot;), &quot;Little Red Riding Hood&quot; (&quot;&quot;), &quot;Rapunzel&quot;, &quot;Rumpelstiltskin&quot; (&quot;&quot;), &quot;Sleeping Beauty&quot; (&quot;&quot;), and &quot;Snow White&quot; (&quot;&quot;). Their first collection of folktales, &quot;Children&#x27;s and Household Tales&quot; (), was first published in 1812.

The Brothers Grimm spent their formative years in the town of Hanau in the Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel. Their father&#x27;s death in 1796 (when Jacob was 11 and Wilhelm 10) caused great poverty for the family and affected the brothers many years after. Both brothers attended the University of Marburg, where they developed a curiosity about German folklore, which grew into a lifelong dedication to collecting German folktales.

The rise of Romanticism in 19th-century Europe revived interest in traditional folk stories, which to the Brothers Grimm represented a pure form of national literature and culture. With the goal of researching a scholarly treatise on folktales, they established a methodology for collecting and recording folk stories that became the basis for folklore studies. Between 1812 and 1857 their first collection was revised and republished many times, growing from 86 stories to more than 200. In addition to writing and modifying folktales, the brothers wrote collections of well-respected Germanic and Scandinavian mythologies, and in 1838 they began writing a definitive German dictionary (), which they were unable to finish.

The popularity of the Grimms&#x27; collected folktales has endured. They are available in more than 100 translations and have been adapted by renowned filmmakers, including Lotte Reiniger and Walt Disney, in films such as &quot;Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs&quot;. In the mid-20th century, Nazi Germany weaponized the tales for propaganda; later in the 20th century, psychologists such as Bruno Bettelheim reaffirmed the work&#x27;s value despite the sexuality, cruelty, and violence in some of the tales&#x27; original versions, which were eventually censored by the Grimms themselves.

== Biography ==

=== Early lives ===
Jacob Ludwig Karl Grimm and Wilhelm Carl Grimm were born on 4 January 1785 and 24 February 1786, respectively, in Hanau in the Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel, within the Holy Roman Empire (present-day Germany), to Philipp Wilhelm Grimm, a jurist, and Dorothea Grimm (née Zimmer), daughter of a Kassel city councilman. They were the second- and third-eldest surviving siblings in a family of nine children, three of whom died in infancy. In 1791 the family moved to the countryside town of Steinau during Philipp&#x27;s employment there as a district magistrate (). The family became prominent members of the community, residing in a large home surrounded by fields. Biographer Jack Zipes writes that the brothers were happy in Steinau and &quot;clearly fond of country life&quot;. The children were educated at home by private tutors, receiving strict instruction as Lutherans, which instilled in both a lifelong religious faith. Later, they attended local schools.

In 1796 Philipp Grimm died of pneumonia, causing great poverty for the large family. Dorothea was forced to relinquish the brothers&#x27; servants and large house, depending on financial support from her father and sister, who was then the first lady-in-waiting at the court of William I, Elector of Hesse. Jacob was the eldest living son, forced at age 11 to assume adult responsibilities (shared with Wilhelm) for the next two years. The two brothers then followed the advice of their grandfather, who continually exhorted them to be industrious.

The brothers left Steinau and their family in 1798 to attend the in Kassel, which had been arranged and paid for by their aunt. By then they were without a male provider (their grandfather died that year), forcing them to rely entirely on each other and become exceptionally close. The two brothers differed in temperament—Jacob was introspective and Wilhelm was outgoing (although he often suffered from ill health)—but shared a strong work ethic and excelled in their studies. In Kassel they became acutely aware of their inferior social status relative to &quot;high-born&quot; students who received more attention. Each brother graduated at the head of his class, Jacob in 1803 and Wilhelm in 1804 (he missed a year of school due to scarlet fever).

=== Marburg ===
After graduation from the , the brothers attended the University of Marburg. The university was small with about 200 students, and there they became painfully aware that students of lower social status were not treated equally. They were disqualified from admission because of their social standing and had to request a dispensation to study law. Wealthier students received stipends, but the brothers were excluded even from tuition aid. Their poverty kept them from student activities or university social life, but their outsider status worked in their favor and they pursued their studies with extra vigor.

Inspired by their law professor, Friedrich von Savigny, who awakened in them an interest in history and philology, the brothers studied medieval German literature. They shared Savigny&#x27;s desire to see the unification of the 200 German principalities into a single state. Through Savigny and his circle of friends—German romantics such as Clemens Brentano and Ludwig Achim von Arnim—the Grimms were introduced to the ideas of Johann Gottfried Herder, who thought that German literature should revert to simpler forms, which he defined as (natural poetry)—as opposed to (artistic poetry). The brothers dedicated themselves with great enthusiasm to their studies, of which Wilhelm wrote in his autobiography, &quot;the ardor with which we studied Old German helped us overcome the spiritual depression of those days.&quot;

Jacob was still financially responsible for his mother, brother, and younger siblings in 1805, so he accepted a post in Paris as Savigny&#x27;s research assistant. On his return to Marburg he was forced to abandon his studies to support the family, whose poverty was so extreme that food was often scarce, and take a job with the Hessian War Commission. In a letter to his aunt from this time, Wilhelm wrote of their circumstances: &quot;We five people eat only three portions and only once a day&quot;.

=== Kassel ===
Jacob found full-time employment in 1808 when he was appointed court librarian to the King of Westphalia and went on to become a librarian in Kassel. After their mother&#x27;s death that year, he became fully responsible for his younger siblings. He arranged and paid for his brother Ludwig&#x27;s studies at art school and for Wilhelm&#x27;s extended visit to Halle to seek treatment for heart and respiratory ailments, after which Wilhelm joined Jacob as librarian in Kassel At Brentano&#x27;s request, the brothers had begun collecting folk tales in a cursory manner in 1807. According to Zipes, at this point &quot;the Grimms were unable to devote all their energies to their research and did not have a clear idea about the significance of collecting folk tales in this initial phase.&quot;

During their employment as librarians—which paid little but afforded them ample time for research—the brothers experienced a productive period of scholarship, publishing books between 1812 and 1830. In 1812 they published their first volume of 86 folk tales, , followed quickly by two volumes of German legends and a volume of early literary history. They went on to publish works about Danish and Irish folk tales (and also Norse mythology), while continuing to edit the German folk tale collection. These works became so widely recognized that the brothers received honorary doctorates from universities in Marburg, Berlin, and Breslau (now Wrocław).

=== Göttingen ===

On 15 May 1825 Wilhelm married Henriette Dorothea Dortchen Wild, a pharmacist&#x27;s daughter and childhood friend who had given the brothers several tales. Jacob never married but continued to live in the household with Wilhelm and Dortchen. In 1830 both brothers were overlooked when the post of chief librarian came available, which disappointed them greatly. They moved the household to Göttingen in the Kingdom of Hanover, where they took employment at the University of Göttingen—Jacob as a professor and head librarian and Wilhelm as a professor.

For the next seven years the brothers continued to research, write, and publish. In 1835 Jacob published the well-regarded &quot;German Mythology&quot; (); Wilhelm continued to edit and prepare the third edition of for publication. The two brothers taught German studies at the university, becoming well-respected in the newly established discipline.

In 1837 the brothers lost their university posts after joining the rest of the Göttingen Seven in protest. The 1830s were a period of political upheaval and peasant revolt in Germany, leading to the movement for democratic reform known as Young Germany. The brothers were not directly aligned with the Young Germans, but they and five of their colleagues reacted against the demands of Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover, who in 1837 dissolved the parliament of Hanover and demanded oaths of allegiance from civil servants—including professors at the University of Göttingen. For refusing to sign the oath, the seven professors were dismissed and three were deported from Hanover—including Jacob, who went to Kassel. He was later joined there by Wilhelm, Dortchen, and their four children.

The brothers were without income and again in extreme financial difficulty in 1838, so they began what would become a lifelong project—the writing of a definitive dictionary, the &quot;German Dictionary&quot; ()—whose first volume was not published until 1854. The brothers again depended on friends and supporters for financial assistance and influence in finding employment.

=== Berlin and later years ===

In 1840, Savigny and Bettina von Arnim appealed successfully to Frederick William IV of Prussia on behalf of the brothers, who were offered posts at the University of Berlin. In addition to teaching posts, the Academy of Sciences offered them stipends to continue their research. Once they had established their household in Berlin they directed their efforts towards the work on the German dictionary and continued to publish their research. Jacob turned his attention to researching German legal traditions and the history of the German language, which was published in the late 1840s and early 1850s; Wilhelm began researching medieval literature while editing new editions of .

After the revolutions of 1848 in the German states the brothers were elected to the civil parliament. Jacob became a prominent member of the National Assembly at Mainz. But their political activities were short-lived, as their hope for a unified Germany dwindled and their disenchantment grew. In the late 1840s Jacob resigned his university position and published &quot;The History of the German Language&quot; (). Wilhelm continued at his university post until 1852. After retiring from teaching, the brothers devoted themselves to the &quot;German Dictionary&quot; for the rest of their lives. Wilhelm died of an infection in Berlin on 16 December 1859, and Jacob, deeply upset by his death, became increasingly reclusive. He continued working on the dictionary until his own death on 20 September 1863. Zipes writes of the Grimms&#x27; dictionary, and of their very large body of work: &quot;Symbolically the last word was (fruit).&quot;

== &quot;Children&#x27;s and Household Tales&quot; ==
=== Background ===
The rise of romanticism, romantic nationalism, and trends in valuing popular culture in the early 19th century revived interest in fairy tales, which had declined since their late 17th-century peak. Johann Karl August Musäus published a popular collection of tales called between 1782 and 1787; the Grimms aided the revival with their folklore collection, built on the conviction that a national identity could be found in popular culture and with the common folk (). They collected and published their tales as a reflection of German cultural identity. In the first collection, though, they included Charles Perrault&#x27;s tales, published in Paris in 1697 and written for the literary salons of an aristocratic French audience. Scholar Lydie Jean says that Perrault created a myth that his tales came from the common people and reflected existing folklore to justify including them—even though many of them were original.

The brothers were directly influenced by Brentano and von Arnim, who edited and adapted the folk songs of (&quot;The Boy&#x27;s Magic Horn&quot; or cornucopia). They began the collection with the purpose of creating a scholarly treatise of traditional stories, and of preserving the stories as they had been handed from generation to generation—a practice threatened by increased industrialization. Maria Tatar, professor of German studies at Harvard University, argues that it is precisely the handing from generation to generation and the genesis in the oral tradition that gives folk tales important mutability. Versions of tales differ from region to region, &quot;picking up bits and pieces of local culture and lore, drawing a turn of phrase from a song or another story, and fleshing out characters with features taken from the audience witnessing their performance.&quot;

But Tatar argues that the Grimms appropriated as uniquely German stories, such as &quot;Little Red Riding Hood&quot;, that had existed in many versions and regions throughout Europe, because they believed that such stories reflected Germanic culture. Furthermore, the brothers saw fragments of old religions and faiths reflected in the stories, which they thought continued to exist and survive through the telling of stories.
=== Methodology ===
When Jacob returned to Marburg from Paris in 1806, their friend Brentano sought the brothers&#x27; help in adding to his collection of folk tales, at which time the brothers began to gather tales in an organized fashion. By 1810 they had produced a manuscript collection of several dozen tales, written after inviting storytellers to their home and transcribing what they heard. These tales were heavily modified in transcription; many had roots in previously written sources. At Brentano&#x27;s request, they printed and sent him copies of the 53 tales that they collected for inclusion in his third volume of . Brentano either ignored or forgot about the tales, leaving the copies in a church in Alsace where they were found in 1920 and became known as the Ölenberg manuscript. It is the earliest extant version of the Grimms&#x27; collection and has become a valuable source to scholars studying the development of the Grimms&#x27; collection from the time of its inception. The manuscript was published in 1927 and again in 1975.

The brothers gained a reputation for collecting tales from peasants, although many tales came from middle-class or aristocratic acquaintances. Wilhelm&#x27;s wife, Henriette Dorothea (Dortchen) Wild, and her family, with their nursery maid, told the brothers some of the more well-known tales, such as &quot;Hansel and Gretel&quot; and &quot;Sleeping Beauty&quot;. Wilhelm collected some tales after befriending August von Haxthausen, whom he visited in 1811 in Westphalia where he heard stories from von Haxthausen&#x27;s circle of friends. Several of the storytellers were of Huguenot ancestry, telling tales of French origin such as those told to the Grimms by Marie Hassenpflug, an educated woman of French Huguenot ancestry, and it is probable that these informants were familiar with Perrault&#x27;s (&quot;Stories from Past Times&quot;). Other tales were collected from Dorothea Viehmann, the wife of a middle-class tailor and also of French descent. Despite her middle-class background, in the first English translation she was characterized as a peasant and given the name . At least one tale, &quot;Gevatter Tod (Grim Reaper&quot;), was provided by composer Wilhelmine Schwertzell, with whom Wilhelm had a long correspondence.

According to scholars such as Tatar and Ruth Bottigheimer, some of the tales probably originated in written form during the medieval period with writers such as Straparola and Boccaccio, but were modified in the 17th century and again rewritten by the Grimms. Moreover, Tatar writes that the brothers&#x27; goal of preserving and shaping the tales as something uniquely German at a time of French occupation was a form of &quot;intellectual resistance&quot;, and in so doing they established a methodology for collecting and preserving folklore that set the model followed later by writers throughout Europe during periods of occupation.

=== Writing ===
From 1807 onward, the brothers added to the collection. Jacob established the framework, maintained through many iterations; from 1815 until his death, Wilhelm assumed sole responsibility for editing and rewriting the tales. He made the tales stylistically similar, added dialogue, removed pieces &quot;that might detract from a rustic tone&quot;, improved the plots, and incorporated psychological motifs. Ronald Murphy writes in &quot;The Owl, the Raven, and the Dove&quot; that the brothers, particularly Wilhelm, also added religious and spiritual motifs to the tales. He believes that Wilhelm &quot;gleaned&quot; bits from old Germanic faiths, Norse mythology, Roman and Greek mythology, and biblical stories that he reshaped.

Over the years, Wilhelm worked extensively on the prose; he expanded and added detail to the stories to the point that many of them grew to twice the length they had in the earliest published editions. In the later editions Wilhelm polished the language to make it more enticing to a bourgeois audience, eliminated sexual elements, and added Christian elements. After 1819 he began writing original tales for children (children were not initially considered the primary audience) and adding didactic elements to existing tales.

Some changes were made in light of unfavorable reviews, particularly from those who objected that not all the tales were suitable for children because of scenes of violence and sexuality. He worked to modify plots for many of the stories; for example, &quot;Rapunzel&quot; in the first edition of clearly shows a sexual relationship between the prince and the girl in the tower, which he edited out in subsequent editions. Tatar writes that morals were added (in the second edition a king&#x27;s regret was added to the scene in which his wife is to be burned at the stake) and often the characters in the tale were amended to appear more German: &quot;every fairy (), prince () and princess ()—all words of French origin—was transformed into a more Teutonic-sounding enchantress () or wise woman (), king&#x27;s son (), king&#x27;s daughter ().&quot;

=== Themes and analysis ===
The Grimms&#x27; legacy contains legends, novellas, and folk stories, the vast majority of which were not intended as children&#x27;s tales. Von Arnim was concerned about the content of some of the tales—such as those that showed children being eaten—and suggested adding a subtitle to warn parents of the content. Instead the brothers added an introduction with cautionary advice that parents steer children toward age-appropriate stories. Despite von Arnim&#x27;s unease, none of the tales were eliminated from the collection; the brothers believed that all the tales were of value and reflected inherent cultural qualities. Furthermore, the stories were didactic in nature at a time when discipline relied on fear, according to scholar Linda Dégh, who explains that tales such as &quot;Little Red Riding Hood&quot; and &quot;Hansel and Gretel&quot; were written as &quot;warning tales&quot; for children.

The stories in include scenes of violence that have since been sanitized. For example, in the Grimms&#x27; original version of &quot;Snow White&quot;, the Queen is Little Snow White&#x27;s mother, not her stepmother, but still orders her Huntsman to kill Snow White (her biological daughter) and bring home the child&#x27;s lungs and liver so that she can eat them; the story ends with the Queen dancing at Snow White&#x27;s wedding, wearing a pair of red-hot iron shoes that kill her. Another story, &quot;The Goose Girl&quot;, has a servant stripped naked and pushed into a barrel &quot;studded with sharp nails&quot; pointing inward and then rolled down the street. The Grimms&#x27; version of &quot;The Frog Prince&quot; describes the princess throwing the frog against a wall instead of kissing him. To some extent the cruelty and violence may reflected the medieval culture from which the tales originated, such as scenes of witches burning, as described in &quot;The Six Swans&quot;.

Tales with a spinning motif are broadly represented in the collection. In her essay &quot;Tale Spinners: Submerged Voices in Grimms&#x27; Fairy Tales&quot;, Bottigheimer argues that these stories reflect the degree to which spinning was crucial in the life of women in the 19th century and earlier. Spinning, particularly of flax, was commonly performed in the home by women. Many stories begin by describing the occupation of their main character, as in &quot;There once was a miller&quot;, yet spinning is never mentioned as an occupation; this appears to be because the brothers did not consider it an occupation. Instead, spinning was a communal activity, frequently performed in a (spinning room), a place where women most likely kept the oral traditions alive by telling stories while engaged in tedious work. In the stories, a woman&#x27;s personality is often represented by her attitude toward spinning; a wise woman might be a spinster and Bottigheimer writes that the spindle was the symbol of a &quot;diligent, well-ordered womanhood&quot;. In some stories, such as &quot;Rumpelstiltskin&quot;, spinning is associated with a threat; in others, spinning might be avoided by a character who is either too lazy or not accustomed to spinning because of her high social status.

The Grimms&#x27; work have been subjected to feminist critique. For example, Emma Tennant writes:
The tales were also criticized for being insufficiently German, which influenced the tales that the brothers included and their use of language. But scholars such as Heinz Rölleke say that the stories are an accurate depiction of German culture, showing &quot;rustic simplicity [and] sexual modesty&quot;. German culture is deeply rooted in the forest (), a dark dangerous place to be avoided, most particularly the old forests with large oak trees, and yet a place where Little Red Riding Hood&#x27;s mother sent her daughter to deliver food to her grandmother&#x27;s house.

Some critics, such as Alistair Hauke, use Jungian analysis to say that the deaths of the brothers&#x27; father and grandfather are the reason for the Grimms&#x27; tendency to idealize and excuse fathers, as well as the predominance of female villains in the tales, such as the wicked stepmother and stepsisters in &quot;Cinderella&quot;. However, this disregards the fact that they were collectors, not authors of the tales. Another possible influence is found in stories such as &quot;The Twelve Brothers&quot;, which mirrors the brothers&#x27; family structure of several brothers facing and overcoming opposition. Some of the tales have autobiographical elements, and according to Zipes the work may have been a &quot;quest&quot; to replace the family life lost after their father died. The collection includes 41 tales about siblings, which Zipes says are representative of Jacob and Wilhelm. Many of the sibling stories follow a simple plot where the characters lose a home, work industriously at a specific task, and in the end find a new home.

=== Editions ===
Between 1812 and 1864, was published 17 times: seven of the &quot;Large edition&quot; () and ten of the &quot;Small edition&quot; (). The Large editions contained all the tales collected to date, extensive annotations, and scholarly notes written by the brothers; the Small editions had only 50 tales and were intended for children. Emil Grimm, Jacob and Wilhelm&#x27;s younger brother, illustrated the Small editions, adding Christian symbolism to the drawings, such as depicting Cinderella&#x27;s mother as an angel and adding a Bible to the bedside table of Little Red Riding Hood&#x27;s grandmother.


The first volume was published in 1812 with 86 folk tales, and a second volume with 70 additional tales was published late in 1814 (dated 1815 on the title page); together the two volumes and their 156 tales are considered the first of the (annotated) Large editions. A second expanded edition with 170 tales was published in 1819, followed in 1822 by a volume of scholarly commentary and annotations. Five more Large editions were published in 1837, 1840, 1843, 1850, and 1857. The seventh and final edition of 1857 contained 211 tales—200 numbered folk tales and 11 legends.

In Germany , commonly &quot;Grimms&#x27; Fairy Tales&quot; in English, was also released in a &quot;popular poster-sized (broadsides)&quot; format and in single-story formats for the more popular tales such as &quot;Hansel and Gretel&quot;. The stories were often added to collections by other authors without respect to copyright as the tales became a focus of interest for children&#x27;s book illustrators, with well-known artists such as Arthur Rackham, Walter Crane, and Edmund Dulac illustrating. Another popular edition released in the mid-19th century included elaborate etchings by George Cruikshank. Upon the brothers&#x27; deaths, the copyright went to Wilhelm&#x27;s son Hermann Grimm, who continued the practice of printing the volumes in expensive and complete editions, but after 1893, when copyright lapsed, various publishers began to print the stories in many formats and editions. In the 21st century, is a universally recognized text. Jacob&#x27;s and Wilhelm&#x27;s collection of stories has been translated to more than 160 languages; 120 different editions of the text are available for sale in the US alone.

== Philology ==

While at the University of Marburg, the brothers came to see culture as tied to language and regarded the purest cultural expression in the grammar of a language. They moved away from Brentano&#x27;s practice—and that of the other romanticists—who frequently changed original oral styles of folk tale to a more literary style, which the brothers considered artificial. They thought that the style of the people (the ) reflected a natural and divinely inspired poetry ()—as opposed to the (art poetry), which they saw as artificially constructed. As literary historians and scholars they delved into the origins of stories and attempted to retrieve them from the oral tradition without loss of the original traits of oral language.

The brothers strongly believed that the dream of national unity and independence relied on a full knowledge of the cultural past that was reflected in folklore. They worked to discover and crystallize a kind of Germanness in the stories they collected in the belief that folklore contained kernels of mythologies and legends crucial to understanding the essence of German culture. In examining culture from a philological point of view they sought to establish connections between German law, culture, and local beliefs.

The Grimms considered the tales to have origins in traditional Germanic folklore, which they thought had been &quot;contaminated&quot; by later literary tradition. In the shift from the oral tradition to the printed book, tales were translated from regional dialects to Standard German ( or High German). But over the course of the many modifications and revisions, the Grimms sought to reintroduce regionalisms, dialects, and Low German to the tales—to reintroduce the language of the original form of the oral tale.

As early as 1812 they published (&quot;The Two Oldest German Poems of the Eighth Century: The Song of Hildebrand and Hadubrand and the Wessobrunn Prayer&quot;); the &quot;Wessobrunn Prayer&quot; is a ninth-century German prayer, while the &quot;Song of Hildebrand and Hadubrand&quot; is the earliest-known German heroic song.

Between 1816 and 1818 the brothers published a two-volume work, (&quot;German Legends&quot;), consisting of 585 German legends. Jacob undertook most of the work of collecting and editing the legends, which he organized according to region and historical (ancient) legends and were about real people or events. The brothers meant it as a scholarly work, but the historical legends were often taken from secondary sources, interpreted, modified, and rewritten—resulting in works &quot;that were regarded as trademarks&quot;. Some scholars criticized the Grimms&#x27; methodology in collecting and rewriting the legends, yet conceptually they set an example for legend collections that was followed by others throughout Europe. Unlike the collection of folk tales, sold poorly, but Zipes says that the collection, translated to French and Danish in the 19th century but not to English until 1981, is a &quot;vital source for folklorists and critics alike&quot;.

Less well known in the English-speaking world is the Grimms&#x27; pioneering scholarly work on a German dictionary, the , which they began in 1838. Not until 1852 did they begin publishing the dictionary in installments. The work on the dictionary was not finished in their lifetimes, because in it they gave a history and analysis of each word.

== Reception and legacy ==

 was not an immediate bestseller, but its popularity grew with each edition. The early editions received lukewarm critical reviews, generally on the basis that the stories did not appeal to children. The brothers responded with modifications and rewrites to increase the book&#x27;s market appeal to that demographic. By the 1870s the tales had increased greatly in popularity to the point that they were added to the teaching curriculum in Prussia. In the 20th century the work was second only to the Bible as the most popular book in Germany. Its sales generated a mini-industry of critiques, which analyzed the tales&#x27; folkloric content in the context of literary history, socialism, and psychological elements often along Freudian and Jungian lines.

In their research, the brothers made a science of the study of folklore (see folkloristics), generating a model of research that &quot;launched general fieldwork in most European countries&quot;, and setting standards for research and analysis of stories and legends that made them pioneers in the field of folklore in the 19th century.

In Nazi Germany the Grimms&#x27; stories were used to foster nationalism as well as to promote antisemitic sentiments in an increasingly hostile time for Jewish people. Some examples of notable antisemitic works in the Grimms&#x27; bibliography are &quot;The Girl Who Was Killed by Jews&quot;, &quot;The Jews&#x27; Stone&quot;, &quot;The Jew Among Thorns&quot; and &quot;The Good Bargain&quot;. &quot;The Girl Who Was Killed by Jews&quot; and &quot;The Jews&#x27; Stone&quot; tell stories of blood libel by Jews against innocent children. In both stories the children are violently killed and mutilated. The myth of blood libel was widely propagated during the Middle Ages and is still used to vilify Jews today. The children in these two stories are acquired in exchange for large sums of money; Jewish wealth and greed are also common antisemitic tropes. These tropes appear in &quot;The Jew Among Thorns&quot; and &quot;The Good Bargain&quot;. In both stories a Jewish man is depicted as deceitful for the sake of money. In the former the man admits to stealing money and is executed instead of the protagonist. In the latter, the Jewish man is found to be deceitful in order to be rewarded with a sum of money. The specific deceit is irrelevant and here too the protagonist triumphs over the Jew. All these stories paint Jews as antagonists whether through murderous rites, deceit, or greed. Antisemitism in folklore has contributed to the popularization of antisemitic tropes and misconceptions about the Jewish faith, but the Nazi Party was particularly devoted to the Grimms&#x27; collected stories. According to author Elizabeth Dalton, &quot;Nazi ideologues enshrined the &quot;Kinder- und Hausmärchen&quot; as virtually a sacred text&quot;. The Nazi Party decreed that every household should own a copy of ; later, officials of Allied-occupied Germany banned the book for a period.

Blood libel tales accused Jews of stealing Christian children to perform religious rituals on them, and most notably, turn their blood into matzah. According to Robert Weinberg, Professor of Jewish History at Swarthmore College, “the accusation that Jews murder Christians, particularly young boys and girls, for ritual purposes has a long and lurid lineage that dates back to the Middle Ages. The accusation of ritual murder emerged in England in the mid-twelfth century with the charge that Jews had killed a Christian youth in order to mock the Passion of Christ. By the middle of the thirteenth century the belief that Jews killed Christians had spread to the European continent, where gentiles now accused Jews of desecrating the Host and using gentile blood for religious purposes, including consuming it in matzo. The concept of cruentation was also extremely prevalent in the Middle Ages. Cruentation described the phenomenon of a corpse spontaneously bleeding in the presence of its murderer. At this time, European Jews were often hunted down and murdered when a Christian child went missing and stories abounded that the victims, when found, would bleed in the presence of their Jewish killers.

In the United States the 1937 release of Walt Disney&#x27;s &quot;Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs&quot; shows the triumph of good over evil, innocence over oppression, according to Zipes. The Grimms&#x27; tales have provided much of the early foundation on which Disney built an empire. In film, the Cinderella motif, the story of a poor girl finding love and success, has been repeated in movies such as &quot;Pretty Woman&quot;, &quot;Ever After&quot;, &quot;Maid in Manhattan&quot;, and &quot;Ella Enchanted&quot;. Not only have the Grimms’ tales provided an empire for Disney to build, but oftentimes, in stories written by the Brothers Grimm, Disney’s villains are depicted as Jewish caricatures. The stepmother in Cinderella is the antagonist of the story and appears Jewish, with a big nose and dark features. Even more blatantly, Maleficent in Sleeping Beauty has devil horns, just as Christians would paint Jews as devils or demons in the Middle Ages. “Images began to portray Jews as hooknosed caricatures of evil” at this time. 
20th-century educators debated the value and influence of teaching stories that include brutality and violence, and some of the more gruesome details were sanitized. Dégh writes that some educators, in the belief that children should be shielded from cruelty of any form, believe that stories with a happy ending are fine to teach, whereas those that are darker, particularly the legends, might pose more harm. On the other hand, some educators and psychologists believe that children easily discern the difference between what is a story and what is not and that the tales continue to have value for children. The publication of Bruno Bettelheim&#x27;s 1976 &quot;The Uses of Enchantment&quot; brought a new wave of interest in the stories as children&#x27;s literature, with an emphasis on the &quot;therapeutic value for children&quot;. More popular stories, such as &quot;Hansel and Gretel&quot; and &quot;Little Red Riding Hood&quot;, have become staples of modern childhood, presented in coloring books, puppet shows, and cartoons. Other stories have been considered too gruesome and have not made a popular transition.

Regardless, the Grimms&#x27; stories continue to be popular around the world, although a recent study in England appears to suggest that parents consider the stories overly violent and inappropriate for young children.

Nevertheless, children remain enamored of the Grimms&#x27; fairy tales with the brothers themselves embraced as the creators of the stories and even as part of the stories themselves. The film &quot;The Brothers Grimm&quot; imagines them as con artists exploiting superstitious German peasants until they are asked to confront a genuine fairy-tale curse that calls them to finally be heroes. The movie &quot;Ever After&quot; shows the Grimms in their role as collectors of fairy tales, though they learn to their surprise that at least one of their stories (Cinderella) is true. &quot;Grimm&quot; follows a detective who discovers that he is a Grimm, the latest in a line of guardians who are sworn to keep the balance between humanity and mythological creatures. &quot;Ever After High&quot; imagines Grimm Brothers (here called Milton and Giles) as the headmasters of the Ever After High boarding school, where they train the children of the previous generation of fairy tales to follow in their parents&#x27; footsteps. In the &quot;10th Kingdom&quot; miniseries, the brothers are trapped for years in the fairy-tale world on the 9 Kingdoms, where they witnessed the events that they would record as stories upon finally making it back to the real world. The &quot;Sisters Grimm&quot; book series follows their descendants, Sabrina and Daphne Grimm, as they adapt to life in Ferryport Landing, a town in upstate New York populated by fairy-tale people. Separate from the previous series is the &quot;Land of Stories&quot; book series which also features the idea of &quot;Sisters Grimm.&quot; In &quot;The Land of Stories&quot;, the Grimm Brothers&#x27; female descendants are a self-described coven determined to track down and document creatures from the fairy-tale world that cross over to the real world. Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm were, in fact, chosen by Mother Goose and others to tell fairy tales so that they might give hope to the human race.

The university library at the Humboldt University of Berlin is housed in the Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm Center (); among its collections is a large portion of the Grimms&#x27; private library.

== Collaborative works ==
* , (&quot;The Two Oldest German Poems of the Eighth Century: The Song of Hildebrand and Hadubrand and the Wessobrunn Prayer&quot;)—ninth century heroic song, published 1812
* (&quot;Children&#x27;s and Household Tales&quot;)—seven editions, between 1812 and 1857
* (&quot;Old German Forests&quot;)—three volumes between 1813 and 1816
* (&quot;Poor Heinrich by Hartmann von der Aue&quot;)—1815
* (&quot;Songs from the Elder Edda&quot;)—1815
* (&quot;German Sagas&quot;)—published in two parts between 1816 and 1818
* —Grimms&#x27; translation of Thomas Crofton Croker&#x27;s &quot;Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland&quot;, 1826
* (&quot;German Dictionary&quot;)—32 volumes published between 1852 and 1960

== Popular adaptations ==
The below includes adaptations from the work of the Brothers Grimm:

* &quot;Avengers Grimm&quot;, 2015 American film
* &quot;Grimm,&quot; 2011 fantasy crime television series about a Grimm descendant
* &quot;Once Upon a Time&quot;, American television series
* &quot;The 10th Kingdom&quot;, 2000 American television miniseries
* &quot;The Brothers Grimm,&quot; 2005 film starring Matt Damon and Heath Ledger
* &quot;Grimm&#x27;s Fairy Tale Classics,&quot; 1989 Japanese anime anthology series by Nippon Animation
* &quot;The Wonderful World of the Brothers Grimm,&quot; 1962 film starring Lawrence Harvey and Karlheinz Böhm as the Brothers Grimm
* &quot;Simsala Grimm&quot;, children television series
* &quot;A Tale Dark &amp; Grimm&quot;, children&#x27;s book by Adam Gidwitz
* The &quot;Family Guy&quot; episode entitled &quot;Grimm Job&quot; (Season 12, Episode 10), sees the show&#x27;s characters take on roles in three Grimm Brothers fairy tales: &quot;Jack and the Beanstalk&quot;, &quot;Cinderella&quot;, and &quot;Little Red Riding Hood&quot;.
* &quot;The Grimm Variations&quot;, 2024 Netflix anime series featuring retellings of six of the Grimm Brothers tales.

== See also ==
* Grimm Family Tree
* Hans Christian Andersen
* Alexander Afanasyev
* Charles Perrault
* Giambattista Basile
* Norwegian Folktales
* Russian fairy tale

==Notes==
== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* Norberg, Jakob. &quot;The Brothers Grimm and the Making of German Nationalism.&quot; Cambridge University Press, 2022.
* 

== External links ==
*
*“The Brothers Grimm Were Dark for a Reason” by Jennifer Wilson. A review of Ann Schmiesing’s &quot;The Brothers Grimm: A Biography&quot;, published in &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, Nov. 4, 2024.
* Translated by Edgar Taylor and Marian Edwardes.
* . Translated by Margaret Raine Hunt.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2793" start="4" end="18" title="Brothers Grimm" label="Brothers Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701" start="27" end="32" title="Jacob Grimm" label="Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714" start="49" end="56" title="Wilhelm Grimm" label="Wilhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="75" end="81" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="129" end="137" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="193" end="201" title="Oral tradition" label="folktale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11841" start="239" end="249" title="Cinderella" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q11850" start="272" end="287" title="The Frog Prince (story)" label="The Frog Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829" start="316" end="333" title="Hansel and Gretel" label="Hansel and Gretel"/>
<link wikidata="Q112015" start="356" end="380" title="Town Musicians of Bremen" label="Town Musicians of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838" start="409" end="431" title="Little Red Riding Hood" label="Little Red Riding Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q273585" start="460" end="468" title="Rapunzel" label="Rapunzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q322188" start="482" end="497" title="Rumpelstiltskin" label="Rumpelstiltskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11824" start="526" end="541" title="Sleeping Beauty" label="Sleeping Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11831" start="574" end="584" title="Snow White" label="Snow White"/>
<link wikidata="Q163027" start="650" end="685" title="Grimms&amp;#x27; Fairy Tales" label="Children&amp;#x27;s and Household Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802" start="788" end="793" title="Hanau" label="Hanau"/>
<link wikidata="Q168651" start="801" end="829" title="Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel" label="Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q155354" start="1007" end="1028" title="University of Marburg" label="University of Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q858157" start="1069" end="1084" title="German folklore" label="German folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="1169" end="1180" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1184" end="1203" title="History of Europe#From revolution to imperialism (1789–1914)" label="19th-century Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q132116" start="1501" end="1517" title="folkloristics" label="folklore studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551960" start="1743" end="1751" title="Germanic mythology" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="1756" end="1768" title="Norse mythology" label="Scandinavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="1769" end="1780" title="Mythology" label="mythologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q444011" start="2056" end="2070" title="Lotte Reiniger" label="Lotte Reiniger"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="2075" end="2086" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q134430" start="2111" end="2142" title="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film)" label="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="2175" end="2187" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q705157" start="2213" end="2223" title="Propaganda in Nazi Germany" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q84386" start="2274" end="2290" title="Bruno Bettelheim" label="Bruno Bettelheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701" start="2510" end="2533" title="Jacob Grimm" label="Jacob Ludwig Karl Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714" start="2538" end="2556" title="Wilhelm Grimm" label="Wilhelm Carl Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802" start="2624" end="2629" title="Hanau" label="Hanau"/>
<link wikidata="Q168651" start="2637" end="2665" title="Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel" label="Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="2678" end="2695" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q103317" start="2722" end="2743" title="Philipp Grimm" label="Philipp Wilhelm Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q185351" start="2747" end="2753" title="jurist" label="jurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q63485297" start="2759" end="2773" title="Dorothea Grimm" label="Dorothea Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865" start="2802" end="2808" title="Kassel" label="Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q263974" start="2997" end="3004" title="Steinau an der Straße" label="Steinau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594605" start="3058" end="3068" title="magistrate" label="magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q165578" start="3185" end="3195" title="Jack Zipes" label="Jack Zipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="3375" end="3384" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q715222" start="3721" end="3736" title="lady-in-waiting" label="lady-in-waiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q506216" start="3753" end="3780" title="William I, Elector of Hesse" label="William I, Elector of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865" start="4093" end="4099" title="Kassel" label="Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180266" start="4762" end="4775" title="scarlet fever" label="scarlet fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q155354" start="4849" end="4870" title="University of Marburg" label="University of Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q76892" start="5440" end="5461" title="Friedrich Carl von Savigny" label="Friedrich von Savigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="5511" end="5520" title="philology" label="philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203434" start="5543" end="5569" title="Middle High German literature" label="medieval German literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q208500" start="5646" end="5660" title="Principality" label="principalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477112" start="5724" end="5740" title="German Romanticism" label="German romantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q57235" start="5749" end="5765" title="Clemens Brentano" label="Clemens Brentano"/>
<link wikidata="Q70988" start="5770" end="5792" title="Ludwig Achim von Arnim" label="Ludwig Achim von Arnim"/>
<link wikidata="Q155547" start="5836" end="5859" title="Johann Gottfried Herder" label="Johann Gottfried Herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q151087" start="6838" end="6856" title="Jérôme Bonaparte" label="King of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q558766" start="7036" end="7042" title="Ludwig Emil Grimm" label="Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q225774" start="7113" end="7118" title="Halle (Westfalen)" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219833" start="7936" end="7942" title="Danish folklore" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471505" start="7947" end="7952" title="Irish mythology" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="7974" end="7989" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869" start="8158" end="8165" title="Marburg" label="Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="8167" end="8173" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="8192" end="8199" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033" start="8613" end="8622" title="Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q164079" start="8630" end="8648" title="Kingdom of Hanover" label="Kingdom of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="8684" end="8707" title="University of Göttingen" label="University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q166153" start="9033" end="9047" title="German studies" label="German studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q632130" start="9208" end="9223" title="Göttingen Seven" label="Göttingen Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713406" start="9368" end="9381" title="Young Germany" label="Young Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q162302" start="9515" end="9547" title="Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover" label="Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="9589" end="9596" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q57180" start="10392" end="10423" title="Frederick William IV of Prussia" label="Frederick William IV of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="10481" end="10501" title="Humboldt University of Berlin" label="University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49738" start="10538" end="10557" title="German Academy of Sciences at Berlin" label="Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q963619" start="10958" end="10977" title="medieval literature" label="medieval literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699" start="11021" end="11061" title="revolutions of 1848 in the German states" label="revolutions of 1848 in the German states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="11173" end="11178" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="12039" end="12050" title="romanticism" label="romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="12052" end="12072" title="romantic nationalism" label="romantic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q213974" start="12226" end="12251" title="Johann Karl August Musäus" label="Johann Karl August Musäus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128460" start="12628" end="12644" title="Charles Perrault" label="Charles Perrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q576342" start="12706" end="12721" title="salon (gathering)" label="literary salons"/>
<link wikidata="Q332682" start="13101" end="13111" title="cornucopia" label="cornucopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291062" start="13352" end="13363" title="Maria Tatar" label="Maria Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="13396" end="13414" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="13509" end="13523" title="oral tradition" label="oral tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838" start="13922" end="13944" title="Little Red Riding Hood" label="Little Red Riding Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="14979" end="14985" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q11824" start="15658" end="15673" title="Sleeping Beauty" label="Sleeping Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q77015" start="15728" end="15749" title="August von Haxthausen" label="August von Haxthausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8614" start="15778" end="15788" title="Westphalia" label="Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="15894" end="15902" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q24248351" start="15980" end="15997" title="Marie Hassenpflug" label="Marie Hassenpflug"/>
<link wikidata="Q77926" start="16193" end="16210" title="Dorothea Viehmann" label="Dorothea Viehmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q83798547" start="16484" end="16506" title="Wilhelmine Schwertzell" label="Wilhelmine Schwertzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="16678" end="16693" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q387199" start="16715" end="16725" title="Giovanni Francesco Straparola" label="Straparola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402" start="16730" end="16739" title="Boccaccio" label="Boccaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783439" start="16944" end="16961" title="Convention of Artlenburg" label="French occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122452" start="17837" end="17856" title="Germanic paganism" label="old Germanic faiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="17885" end="17900" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q273585" start="18729" end="18737" title="Rapunzel" label="Rapunzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="19130" end="19135" title="fairy" label="fairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="19394" end="19401" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825849" start="20091" end="20101" title="Linda Dégh" label="Linda Dégh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838" start="20141" end="20163" title="Little Red Riding Hood" label="Little Red Riding Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11831" start="20394" end="20404" title="Snow White" label="Snow White"/>
<link wikidata="Q542305" start="20768" end="20782" title="The Goose Girl" label="The Goose Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11850" start="20964" end="20979" title="The Frog Prince (story)" label="The Frog Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q875786" start="21231" end="21244" title="The Six Swans" label="The Six Swans"/>
<link wikidata="Q19062048" start="21275" end="21280" title="motif (folkloristics)" label="motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="21578" end="21582" title="flax" label="flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q213761" start="22232" end="22239" title="Spindle (textiles)" label="spindle"/>
<link wikidata="Q322188" start="22337" end="22352" title="Rumpelstiltskin" label="Rumpelstiltskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372973" start="22616" end="22628" title="Emma Tennant" label="Emma Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q245179" start="23256" end="23272" title="Analytical psychology" label="Jungian analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15384699" start="23491" end="23508" title="wicked stepmother" label="wicked stepmother"/>
<link wikidata="Q466226" start="23700" end="23719" title="The Twelve Brothers" label="The Twelve Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q558766" start="24616" end="24626" title="Ludwig Emil Grimm" label="Emil Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q314938" start="25909" end="25923" title="Arthur Rackham" label="Arthur Rackham"/>
<link wikidata="Q660917" start="25925" end="25937" title="Walter Crane" label="Walter Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q27032" start="25943" end="25955" title="Edmund Dulac" label="Edmund Dulac"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="26046" end="26053" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q360466" start="26058" end="26075" title="George Cruikshank" label="George Cruikshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q155354" start="26630" end="26651" title="University of Marburg" label="University of Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="26757" end="26764" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="28141" end="28156" title="Standard German" label="Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="28298" end="28308" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q259529" start="28561" end="28578" title="Wessobrunn Prayer" label="Wessobrunn Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q263158" start="28635" end="28667" title="Lay of Hildebrand" label="Song of Hildebrand and Hadubrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="30493" end="30500" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="30782" end="30790" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Freudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="30795" end="30802" title="Carl Jung" label="Jungian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132116" start="30888" end="30901" title="folkloristics" label="folkloristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="31152" end="31164" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31404" end="31435" title="The Girl Who Was Killed by Jews" label="The Girl Who Was Killed by Jews"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31449" end="31469" title="The Jews&amp;#x27; Stone" label="The Jews&amp;#x27; Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q473776" start="31483" end="31503" title="The Jew Among Thorns" label="The Jew Among Thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198884" start="31520" end="31536" title="The Good Bargain" label="The Good Bargain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061047" start="31641" end="31652" title="blood libel" label="blood libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="32681" end="32691" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="32987" end="33010" title="Allied-occupied Germany" label="Allied-occupied Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="34290" end="34301" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q134430" start="34315" end="34346" title="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film)" label="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19062048" start="34560" end="34565" title="motif (folkloristics)" label="motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q207954" start="34660" end="34672" title="Pretty Woman" label="Pretty Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q619374" start="34686" end="34696" title="Ever After" label="Ever After"/>
<link wikidata="Q749661" start="34710" end="34727" title="Maid in Manhattan" label="Maid in Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q939325" start="34745" end="34759" title="Ella Enchanted (film)" label="Ella Enchanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q84386" start="35919" end="35935" title="Bruno Bettelheim" label="Bruno Bettelheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410027" start="35954" end="35977" title="The Uses of Enchantment" label="The Uses of Enchantment"/>
<link wikidata="Q707880" start="36835" end="36853" title="The Brothers Grimm (film)" label="The Brothers Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="36877" end="36888" title="con artists" label="con artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q619374" start="37044" end="37054" title="Ever After" label="Ever After"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748" start="37221" end="37226" title="Grimm (TV series)" label="Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710247" start="37406" end="37421" title="Ever After High" label="Ever After High"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056391" start="37490" end="37501" title="headmaster" label="headmasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="37525" end="37540" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q890343" start="37671" end="37683" title="The 10th Kingdom" label="10th Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235680" start="37903" end="37916" title="Sisters Grimm" label="Sisters Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745401" start="38138" end="38153" title="Land of Stories" label="Land of Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q29710" start="38332" end="38337" title="coven" label="coven"/>
<link wikidata="Q142305" start="38496" end="38508" title="Mother Goose" label="Mother Goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="38619" end="38648" title="Humboldt University of Berlin" label="Humboldt University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q263158" start="38872" end="38904" title="Hildebrandslied" label="Song of Hildebrand and Hadubrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q259529" start="38913" end="38930" title="Wessobrunn Prayer" label="Wessobrunn Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="39224" end="39234" title="Poetic Edda" label="Elder Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266294" start="39256" end="39268" title="German Sagas" label="German Sagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q370589" start="39352" end="39373" title="Thomas Crofton Croker" label="Thomas Crofton Croker"/>
<link wikidata="Q20183740" start="39633" end="39647" title="Avengers Grimm" label="Avengers Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748" start="39682" end="39687" title="Grimm (TV series)" label="Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q23673" start="39765" end="39781" title="Once Upon a Time (TV series)" label="Once Upon a Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q890343" start="39824" end="39840" title="The 10th Kingdom" label="The 10th Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q707880" start="39892" end="39910" title="The Brothers Grimm (film)" label="The Brothers Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q175535" start="39937" end="39947" title="Matt Damon" label="Matt Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40572" start="39952" end="39964" title="Heath Ledger" label="Heath Ledger"/>
<link wikidata="Q573892" start="39973" end="40005" title="Grimm&amp;#x27;s Fairy Tale Classics" label="Grimm&amp;#x27;s Fairy Tale Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217650" start="40078" end="40119" title="The Wonderful World of the Brothers Grimm" label="The Wonderful World of the Brothers Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q374045" start="40146" end="40161" title="Laurence Harvey" label="Lawrence Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q78928" start="40166" end="40180" title="Karlheinz Böhm" label="Karlheinz Böhm"/>
<link wikidata="Q693918" start="40211" end="40224" title="Simsala Grimm" label="Simsala Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q108839882" start="40267" end="40290" title="A Tale Dark &amp;amp; Grimm" label="A Tale Dark &amp;amp; Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="40347" end="40357" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455839" start="40517" end="40539" title="Jack and the Beanstalk" label="Jack and the Beanstalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11841" start="40553" end="40563" title="Cinderella" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q125029848" start="40619" end="40639" title="The Grimm Variations" label="The Grimm Variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="40652" end="40659" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="" start="40748" end="40765" title=":de:Ludwig Emil Grimm#Nachfahrenliste der Familie Grimm" label="Grimm Family Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673" start="40768" end="40791" title="Hans Christian Andersen" label="Hans Christian Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q325004" start="40794" end="40813" title="Alexander Afanasyev" label="Alexander Afanasyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q128460" start="40816" end="40832" title="Charles Perrault" label="Charles Perrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q555291" start="40835" end="40854" title="Giambattista Basile" label="Giambattista Basile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026385" start="40857" end="40876" title="Norwegian Folktales" label="Norwegian Folktales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534220" start="40879" end="40897" title="Russian fairy tale" label="Russian fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q16214276" start="41355" end="41367" title="Edgar Taylor (author)" label="Edgar Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759824" start="41407" end="41426" title="Margaret Raine Hunt" label="Margaret Raine Hunt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41973" wikidata="Q6714" url="?curid=41973" title="Wilhelm Grimm">
<text>Wilhelm Carl Grimm (also Karl; 24 February 178616 December 1859) was a German author, philologist and anthropologist. He was the younger brother of Jacob Grimm, of the literary duo the Brothers Grimm.

==Life and work==
Wilhelm was born in February 1786 in Hanau, in Hesse-Kassel. In 1803, he started studying law at the University of Marburg, one year after his brother Jacob started there. The two brothers spent their entire lives close together. In their school days, they had one bed and one table in common; as students, they had two beds and two tables in the same room. They always lived under one roof and had their books and property in common.

In 1825, 39-year-old Wilhelm married pharmacist&#x27;s daughter Henriette Dorothea Wild, also known as Dortchen. Wilhelm&#x27;s marriage did not change the harmony of the brothers. Richard Cleasby visited the brothers and observed, &quot;they both live in the same house, and in such harmony and community that one might almost imagine the children were common property.&quot;

Wilhelm&#x27;s character was a complete contrast to that of his brother. As a boy, he was strong and healthy, but while growing up he suffered a long and severe illness which left him weak the rest of his life. He had a less comprehensive and energetic mind than his brother, and he had less of the spirit of investigation, preferring to confine himself to some limited and definitely bounded field of work. He utilized everything that bore directly on his own studies and ignored the rest. These studies were almost always of a literary nature.

Wilhelm took great delight in music, for which his brother had but a moderate liking, and he had a remarkable gift of story-telling. Cleasby relates that &quot;Wilhelm read a sort of farce written in the Frankfort dialect, depicting the &#x27;malheurs&#x27; of a rich Frankfort tradesman on a holiday jaunt on Sunday. It was very droll, and he read it admirably.&quot; Cleasby describes him as &quot;an uncommonly animated, jovial fellow.&quot; He was, accordingly, much sought in society, which he frequented much more than his brother.

A collection of fairy tales was first published in 1812 by the Grimm brothers, known in English as Grimms&#x27; Fairy Tales.

From 1837 to 1841, the Grimm brothers joined five of their colleague professors at the University of Göttingen to form a group known as the &quot;Göttinger Sieben&quot; (&quot;The Göttingen Seven&quot;). They protested against Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover, whom they accused of violating the constitution. All seven were fired by the king.

Wilhelm Grimm died in Berlin of an infection at the age of 73 on 16 December 1859.

==Children==
Wilhelm and Henriette had four children together:
* Jacob (3 April 182615 December 1826)
* Herman Friedrich (6 January 182816 June 1901), also a noted writer
* Rudolf Georg (31 March 183013 November 1889)
* Barbara Auguste Luise Pauline Marie (21 August 18329 February 1919)

==Notes==
==References==
== External links ==
* 
* Grimm Brothers&#x27; Home Page
* 
* 
* Household Tales by the Brothers Grimm, translated by Margaret Hunt (This site is the only one to feature all of the Grimms&#x27; notes translated in English along with the tales from Hunt&#x27;s original edition. Andrew Lang&#x27;s introduction is also included.)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6714" start="0" end="18" title="Wilhelm Grimm" label="Wilhelm Carl Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714" start="25" end="29" title="Wilhelm Grimm" label="Karl"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="86" end="97" title="philology" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="102" end="116" title="anthropology" label="anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701" start="148" end="159" title="Jacob Grimm" label="Jacob Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793" start="185" end="199" title="Brothers Grimm" label="Brothers Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802" start="257" end="262" title="Hanau" label="Hanau"/>
<link wikidata="Q168651" start="267" end="279" title="Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel" label="Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="310" end="313" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q155354" start="321" end="342" title="University of Marburg" label="University of Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="720" end="743" title="Henriette Dorothea Wild" label="Henriette Dorothea Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934784" start="837" end="852" title="Richard Cleasby" label="Richard Cleasby"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="2136" end="2146" title="fairy tale" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q163027" start="2219" end="2243" title="Grimms&amp;#x27; Fairy Tales" label="Grimms&amp;#x27; Fairy Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="2333" end="2356" title="University of Göttingen" label="University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q632130" start="2392" end="2408" title="Göttinger Sieben" label="Göttinger Sieben"/>
<link wikidata="Q162302" start="2473" end="2505" title="Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover" label="Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="2542" end="2554" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="2584" end="2588" title="monarch" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q65292" start="2779" end="2795" title="Herman Grimm" label="Herman Friedrich"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41976" wikidata="Q1249138" url="?curid=41976" title="Franco Rasetti">
<text>Franco Dino Rasetti (August 10, 1901 – December 5, 2001) was an Italian (later naturalized American) physicist, paleontologist and botanist. Together with Enrico Fermi, he discovered key processes leading to nuclear fission. Rasetti refused to work on the Manhattan Project on moral grounds.

==Life and career==
Rasetti was born in Castiglione del Lago, Italy. He earned a &quot;Laurea&quot; in physics at the University of Pisa in 1923, and Fermi invited him to join his research group at the University of Rome.

In 1928-1929 during a stay at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech), he carried out experiments on the Raman effect. He measured a spectrum of dinitrogen in 1929 which provided the first experimental evidence that the atomic nucleus is not composed of protons and electrons, as was incorrectly believed at the time.

In 1930, he was appointed to the chair in spectroscopy at the Physics Institute of the University of Rome, at that time still located in Via Panisperna. His colleagues included Oscar D&#x27;Agostino, Emilio Segrè, Edoardo Amaldi, Ettore Majorana and Enrico Fermi, as well as the institute&#x27;s director Orso Mario Corbino. Rasetti remained in this position until 1938.

Rasetti was one of Fermi&#x27;s main collaborators in the study of neutrons and neutron-induced radioactivity. In 1934, he participated in the discovery of the artificial radioactivity of fluorine and aluminium which would be critical in the development of the atomic bomb.

In 1939 the advance of fascism and the deteriorating Italian political situation led him to leave Italy, following the example of his colleagues Fermi, Segré and Bruno Pontecorvo. With Fermi he had discovered the key to nuclear fission, but unlike many of his colleagues, he refused for moral reasons to work on the Manhattan project.

From 1939 to 1947, he taught at Laval University in Quebec City (Canada), where he was founding chairman of the physics department.

In 1947, he moved to the United States where he became a naturalized citizen in 1952. Until 1967, he held a chair in physics at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.

From the 1950s onward, he gradually shifted his commitment to naturalistic studies, which had been his great interest outside of physics already as a child. He devoted himself to geology, paleontology, entomology, and botany, becoming one of the most authoritative scholars of the Cambrian geological era.

He died in Waremme, Belgium at the age of 100. The &quot;Nature&quot; obituary noted that Rasetti was one of the &quot;most prolific generalists&quot; whose &quot;work and writing are noted for the elegance, simplicity and beauty&quot;.

==Raman spectroscopy and the model of the atomic nucleus==
After the discovery of Raman scattering by organic liquids, Rasetti decided to study the same phenomenon in gases at high pressure during his stay at Caltech in 1928–29. The spectra showed vibrational transitions with rotational fine structure. In the homonuclear diatomic molecules H2, N2 and O2, Rasetti found an alternation of strong and weak lines. This alternation was explained by Gerhard Herzberg and Walter Heitler as a consequence of nuclear spin isomerism.

For dihydrogen, each nucleus is a proton of spin 1/2, so that it can be shown using quantum mechanics and the Pauli exclusion principle that the odd rotational levels are more populated than the even levels. The transitions originating from odd levels are therefore more intense as observed by Rasetti. In dinitrogen, however, Rasetti observed that the lines originating from even levels are more intense. This implies by a similar analysis that the nuclear spin of nitrogen is an integer.

This result was difficult to understand at the time, however, because the neutron had not yet been discovered, and it was thought that the 14N nucleus contains 14 protons and 7 electrons, or an odd number (21) of particles in total which would correspond to a half-integral spin. The Raman spectrum observed by Rasetti provided the first experimental evidence that this proton-electron model of the nucleus is inadequate, because the predicted half-integral spin has as a consequence that transitions from odd rotational levels would be more intense than those from even levels, due to nuclear spin isomerism as shown by Herzberg and Heitler for dihydrogen. After the discovery of the neutron in 1932, Werner Heisenberg proposed that the nucleus contains protons and neutrons, and the 14N nucleus contains 7 protons and 7 neutrons. The even total number (14) of particles corresponds to an integral spin in agreement with Rasetti&#x27;s spectrum.

He is also credited with the first example of electronic (as opposed to vibronic) Raman scattering in nitric oxide.

==Awards==
*In 1952 he was awarded the Charles Doolittle Walcott Medal by the National Academy of Sciences for his contributions to Cambrian paleontology.

==References==
==External links==
*Franco Dino Rasetti Papers from the Smithsonian Institution Archives</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1249138" start="0" end="19" title="Franco Rasetti" label="Franco Dino Rasetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q8753" start="155" end="167" title="Enrico Fermi" label="Enrico Fermi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11429" start="208" end="223" title="nuclear fission" label="nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="256" end="273" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q20390" start="333" end="353" title="Castiglione del Lago" label="Castiglione del Lago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054679" start="380" end="386" title="Laurea" label="Laurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q645663" start="411" end="429" title="University of Pisa" label="University of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q209344" start="495" end="513" title="Sapienza University of Rome" label="University of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="550" end="584" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q466824" start="630" end="642" title="Raman effect" label="Raman effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="670" end="680" title="dinitrogen" label="dinitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="745" end="759" title="atomic nucleus" label="atomic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="886" end="898" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209344" start="931" end="949" title="Sapienza University of Rome" label="University of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356969" start="1021" end="1042" title="Oscar D&amp;#x27;Agostino" label="Oscar D&amp;#x27;Agostino"/>
<link wikidata="Q173028" start="1044" end="1056" title="Emilio Segrè" label="Emilio Segrè"/>
<link wikidata="Q559815" start="1058" end="1072" title="Edoardo Amaldi" label="Edoardo Amaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q367196" start="1074" end="1089" title="Ettore Majorana" label="Ettore Majorana"/>
<link wikidata="Q511418" start="1149" end="1167" title="Orso Mario Corbino" label="Orso Mario Corbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="1283" end="1290" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="1312" end="1325" title="radioactivity" label="radioactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="1477" end="1488" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q453557" start="1653" end="1669" title="Bruno Pontecorvo" label="Bruno Pontecorvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11429" start="1711" end="1726" title="nuclear fission" label="nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="1807" end="1824" title="Manhattan project" label="Manhattan project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067935" start="1859" end="1875" title="Laval University" label="Laval University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="1879" end="1890" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="2017" end="2036" title="naturalized citizen" label="naturalized citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="2088" end="2112" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="2116" end="2125" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q711474" start="2446" end="2453" title="Waremme" label="Waremme"/>
<link wikidata="Q466824" start="2755" end="2771" title="Raman scattering" label="Raman scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q76602" start="3119" end="3135" title="Gerhard Herzberg" label="Gerhard Herzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q60287" start="3140" end="3154" title="Walter Heitler" label="Walter Heitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q385696" start="3175" end="3197" title="Spin isomers of hydrogen" label="nuclear spin isomerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="3284" end="3301" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q131594" start="3310" end="3335" title="Pauli exclusion principle" label="Pauli exclusion principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q904380" start="3349" end="3366" title="rotational spectroscopy" label="rotational levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879445" start="3650" end="3662" title="nuclear spin" label="nuclear spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="3765" end="3772" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q19720529" start="4359" end="4383" title="discovery of the neutron" label="discovery of the neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="4393" end="4410" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Werner Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="4741" end="4753" title="nitric oxide" label="nitric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064147" start="4795" end="4826" title="Charles Doolittle Walcott Medal" label="Charles Doolittle Walcott Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="4834" end="4862" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609326" start="4983" end="5015" title="Smithsonian Institution Archives" label="Smithsonian Institution Archives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41977" wikidata="Q201568" url="?curid=41977" title="The Buggles">
<text>The Buggles are an English new wave band formed in London in 1977 by singer and bassist Trevor Horn and keyboardist Geoff Downes. They are best known for their 1979 debut single &quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot;, which topped the UK singles chart and reached number one in 15 other countries and was chosen as the song to launch MTV in 1981.

The duo released their first album, &quot;The Age of Plastic&quot;, in January 1980. On 7 September 1979 &quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot; was released, being the lead single of the album. Soon after the album&#x27;s release, Horn and Downes joined the progressive rock band Yes, recording and releasing &quot;Drama&quot; in the process. Following a tour to promote the album, Yes disbanded in 1981. That same year, on 1 August, the music video for &quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot; became the first ever shown on MTV in the United States. The following year, the Buggles released a second album, &quot;Adventures in Modern Recording&quot;. Its lack of commercial success led to the breakup of the group.

Since 1998, Horn and Downes have occasionally performed the Buggles&#x27; songs. The band had its debut tour in 2023 in a lineup with Horn, but without Downes.

==History==
===1977–1979: Formation===
Downes claimed the group&#x27;s name derived as a pun on the rock band the Beatles, saying: &quot;It was originally called the Bugs ... studio insects—imaginary creatures who lived in recording studios creating havoc. Then somebody said as a joke that the Bugs would never be as big as the Beatles. So we changed it to the Buggles.&quot; Horn later spoke of its name: &quot;I know the name&#x27;s awful, but at the time it was the era of the great punk thing. I&#x27;d got fed up of producing people who were generally idiots but called themselves all sorts of clever names like the Unwanted, the Unwashed, the Unheard ... when it came to choosing our name I thought I&#x27;d pick the most disgusting name possible. In retrospect I have frequently regretted calling myself Buggles, but in those days I never really thought much about packaging or selling myself, all that really concerned me was the record.&quot;

Horn began his career producing jingles and punk rock groups. Downes was a keyboardist in She&#x27;s French and graduated from Leeds College of Music in 1975, after which he moved to London looking for keyboard work. The two first met in 1976 at auditions for Tina Charles&#x27; backing band and worked with her producer, Biddu, whose backing tracks had an influence on their early work as the Buggles. Horn met musician Bruce Woolley while playing the bass guitar in the house band at the Hammersmith Odeon. Both expressed an interest in Kraftwerk and Daniel Miller, leading them to read &quot;Crash&quot; by J. G. Ballard. Said Horn, &quot;We had this idea that at some future point there&#x27;d be a record label that didn&#x27;t really have any artists—just a computer in the basement and some mad Vincent Price-like figure making the records ... One of the groups this computer would make would be the Buggles, which was obviously a corruption of the Beatles, who would just be this inconsequential bunch of people with a hit song that the computer had written ... and would never be seen.&quot;

In 1977, Horn, Downes and Woolley got together and began recording a selection of demos in a small room above a stonemason shop in Wimbledon, southwest London, including &quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot;, &quot;Clean, Clean&quot; and &quot;On TV&quot;. Though unsure about what they wished to do with the demos, Downes remembered that &quot;we knew even then ... there was some distant goal that had to be reached&quot;, and proceeded to re-record the songs at a 16-track recording studio in north London. Initial searches for the right record label to record and release an album failed, but Horn, having begun a relationship with Jill Sinclair, a co-founder of Sarm East Studios, managed to secure plans for a potential deal. However, the demo version of &quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot; caught the attention of producer Chris Blackwell of Island Records and, on the day on which Horn and Downes were due to sign with Sarm East, Blackwell offered them a more lucrative deal, which they accepted. Downes claimed Island rejected them three times before a final deal was agreed upon.

===1979–1980: &quot;The Age of Plastic&quot;===

With the Island recording contract having been secured, the Buggles recorded their debut studio album, &quot;The Age of Plastic&quot;, through 1979. Initially, the demo of &quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot; featured vocals by Tina Charles, who also helped fund the project. Although the song was primarily a Woolley composition, he ended his association with Horn and Downes to form the Camera Club before the song&#x27;s release as a single. Making &quot;The Age of Plastic&quot; involved several months of tiresome and intense experimentation with studio equipment and techniques, struggling to capture the &quot;magic&quot; of the original demos. Debi Doss and Linda Jardim-Allan, the female voices on &quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot;, contributed their vocals to other songs on the album as well.

&quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot;, the album&#x27;s lead single, was released first in September 1979 to considerable commercial success, topping the chart in 16 countries. Its music video, directed by Russell Mulcahy, was the first video aired on MTV in the United States on 1 August 1981. Film composer Hans Zimmer makes a brief appearance in the video. &quot;The Age of Plastic&quot; was released in January 1980 and reached No. 27 on the UK Albums Chart. Three subsequent singles were released: &quot;Living in the Plastic Age&quot;, &quot;Clean, Clean&quot; and &quot;Elstree&quot;, all of which charted in the United Kingdom.

===1980–1981: Collaboration with Yes===

In early 1980, Horn and Downes began work on a second Buggles album in London, working in a studio next door to that of the progressive rock band Yes, who had lost vocalist Jon Anderson and keyboardist Rick Wakeman following failed recording sessions for a potential new album. In particular, Horn had been a long-standing fan of Yes. The Buggles offered a song to Yes, &quot;We Can Fly from Here&quot;, but at the suggestion of Brian Lane, manager of both bands, Yes&#x27; bassist Chris Squire invited them to actually replace Anderson and Wakeman as members of Yes. Horn and Downes accepted the offer and joined Squire, Steve Howe and Alan White to record &quot;Drama&quot;.

The absorption of the Buggles into Yes met with mixed reactions; the band was sometimes booed in the United Kingdom despite its chart position, but not in the United States. Horn admitted that he did not have Anderson&#x27;s vocal range or style, which many fans missed, but most were still willing to give the new incarnation of Yes a chance. However, some press critics and fans were far less forgiving, especially in the United Kingdom. The US tour was much less financially successful than expected, and Yes disbanded in December 1980 after the &quot;Drama&quot; tour ended.

===1981–1982: &quot;Adventures in Modern Recording&quot;===

In early 1981, following the disbanding of Yes, Downes and Horn reconvened at Sarm East Studios to record the Buggles&#x27; second studio album, &quot;Adventures in Modern Recording&quot;. However, Downes left the group on the day that the recording was to begin to help form Asia with Howe, citing musical differences. Horn was angry that Island Records renegotiated publishing terms for Downes to join Asia, but never did for Horn since, in his words, he was &quot;washed up, career-wise.&quot; To fix this problem, Jill Sinclair made a deal with the French label Carrere, whose leader Claude Carrere, whom Horn described as a &quot;very nice man&quot;, helped fund the album. Horn was now left to complete much of the album with several additional personnel.

Released in November 1981, &quot;Adventures in Modern Recording&quot; involved Horn&#x27;s experimentation with numerous production techniques, especially with the heavy use of sampling with the Fairlight CMI, with instruments from the computer such as the drums on &quot;Inner City&quot; and the big band jazz sounds on &quot;Vermillion Sands&quot;. These same sampling techniques would later be used in records that he produced, such as &quot;Slave to the Rhythm&quot; by Grace Jones, &quot;90125&quot; by Yes, &quot;The Seduction of Claude Debussy&quot; by Art of Noise, and &quot;Welcome to the Pleasuredome&quot; by Frankie Goes to Hollywood. While the album garnered little attention in the United Kingdom, Horn recalled in 2010 that it was a commercial success in France, and in the United States the album peaked at number 161 on the American &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. By the time of the album&#x27;s release, when Horn was also producing the album &quot;The Lexicon of Love&quot; by ABC, he decided to take Sinclair&#x27;s advice that he was always meant to be a producer rather than a performer or songwriter; thus the performance of &quot;Lenny&quot; on a Dutch television show, with ABC as the backing band, marked the end of the Buggles. As Horn recalled when he was interviewed after the show:
===1998–present: Reunion performances===
Being largely a studio creation, the Buggles never toured. There were some &quot;Top of the Pops&quot; playback appearances, and later some performances for promotional purposes in support of the second album, but the first live outing by the original duo came in a low-key appearance on 3 December 1998 at a showcase for new bands on Horn&#x27;s ZTT Records label at Mean Fiddler in northwest London. During this appearance, the Buggles played only &quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot;, backed by singer Tessa Niles and one of the other groups on the bill, the Marbles.

On 11 November 2004, the Buggles reunited with Doss, Jardim-Allan and Woolley at Wembley Arena to perform &quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot; and &quot;The Plastic Age&quot; as part of a The Prince&#x27;s Trust charity concert celebrating Horn&#x27;s career as a producer.

On 28 September 2010, the Buggles performed their first actual concert, billed as &quot;The Lost Gig&quot;, at Supperclub in Notting Hill, west London, as a fundraiser for the Royal Hospital for Neuro-disability. Following an opening performance by Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark, the Buggles&#x27; set included &quot;The Age of Plastic&quot; performed in its entirety, including Woolley singing with Horn on &quot;Clean, Clean&quot;. Also featured were Lol Creme, Chris Braide, Alison Moyet, Gary Barlow, Richard O&#x27;Brien and Claudia Brücken.

On 25 October 2011, the Buggles reunited to play at the British Music Experience at the O2 Arena. The gig included the first live performance of &quot;I Am a Camera&quot; and covers of &quot;Space Oddity&quot; by David Bowie and &quot;Check It Out&quot; by Nicki Minaj and will.i.am, which utilised samples from &quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot;. Kirsten Joy, Holly Petrie and Kate Westall provided backing vocals.

In 2013, Downes spoke of the chance of another reunion: &quot;It&#x27;s always a challenge working on new stuff, and I&#x27;d love to collaborate with Trevor again ... it&#x27;s not impossibility, just a matter of making the planets align so that one day we can hopefully make it happen.&quot; In March 2015, Downes joined the Trevor Horn Band on stage at the Shepherd&#x27;s Bush Empire to play &quot;The Plastic Age&quot; and &quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot;. Horn and Downes reunited in the studio in early 2016 for more Buggles activity.

During April–June 2023, the Buggles were the support act for Seal during his 30th anniversary tour, on which Horn was the musical director and bassist. This marked the group&#x27;s first tour. The line up was the same as Seal&#x27;s backing band, led by Horn. Geoff Downes was not involved. The set list included songs from both the band&#x27;s albums and material by Frankie Goes to Hollywood and Yes.

==Artistry and reception==
Many of the lyrics Trevor Horn wrote were inspired by sci-fi works by writers such as J. G. Ballard. According to Geoff Downes;

Downes claims to have used George Shearing&#x27;s &quot;technique of doubling melody lines in block chords (using the 5th note)... quite extensively on some of the Buggles&#x27; recordings&quot;.

Both of the Buggles&#x27; albums have received positive reception from music critics. The Trouser Press called both albums &quot;technically stunning, reasonably catchy and crashingly hollow,&quot; while AllMusic&#x27;s Jeri Montesano said that, compared to 1990s pop music, they &quot;still sound fresh&quot;.

==Legacy==
After leaving the Buggles, Downes joined his former Yes bandmate Steve Howe in forming the aforementioned supergroup Asia, together with John Wetton (formerly of King Crimson) and Carl Palmer (formerly of Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer), which made its name with the 1982 hit single &quot;Heat of the Moment&quot;. Downes remains a member of Asia today. Parallel to Asia, he also worked on other projects, including several solo albums and production of acts such as GTR. In 2011, Downes rejoined Yes as their keyboardist, working once again alongside Horn on the album &quot;Fly from Here&quot; and accompanying tour.

Horn embarked on a highly successful career as a record producer, achieving success with the bands ABC, Dollar, Frankie Goes to Hollywood, Art of Noise, and even the albums &quot;90125&quot; and &quot;Big Generator&quot; from a re-formed Yes, with Jon Anderson back on vocals. In 1985, Horn won the Best Producer BRIT Award. More than twenty years on, he is still active, producing with Seal, Tina Turner, Paul McCartney, Tom Jones, Cher, Simple Minds, Belle and Sebastian, t.A.T.u., Charlotte Church, Captain, Pet Shop Boys and Robbie Williams among his many credits. He is currently working with his new band, the Producers, who released the album &quot;Made in Basing Street&quot; (2012).

Both Asia and Producers have played &quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot; as part of their live set in tribute to their members&#x27; origins in the Buggles.

In 2009, Horn produced the album &quot;Reality Killed the Video Star&quot; for British singer Robbie Williams. The album title pays homage to the trademark Buggles song, and Horn performed the song with Williams (Horn on bass and Williams on vocals) at the BBC Electric Proms on 20 October 2009.

Following 2010 discussions with Chris Squire, Horn produced the Yes album &quot;Fly from Here&quot; (2011), the bulk of whose forty-seven-minute duration comprises unused or incomplete Buggles material from the early 1980s (particularly &quot;We Can Fly from Here&quot;), reminiscent of the use of the Buggles&#x27; &quot;I am a Camera&quot; for &quot;Into the Lens&quot; on &quot;Drama&quot; during their first stint in 1980. Horn brought in Downes to play keyboards on the album (replacing Oliver Wakeman, son of Rick Wakeman) and Horn himself also performed some parts and sang backing vocals on the album. The album&#x27;s group photograph prominently features Horn standing centre, signifying that to all intents he was considered the sixth band member for the recording. &quot;The Fly From Here&quot; tour did not feature Horn. At the suggestion of Yes drummer Alan White, the band subsequently released a new version of the album entitled &quot;Fly from Here – Return Trip&quot;, with Horn recording new lead vocals (replacing Benoit David).

In February 2017, Bruce Woolley and his band the Radio Science Orchestra, released a new, dark ambient version of &quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot; with singer Polly Scattergood on vocals. The single was released on Gramophone Records, along with a music video featuring musician and producer Thomas Dolby and Wolfgang Wild of &quot;Retronaut&quot; fame.

===&quot;The Robot Sings&quot;===
On 8 March 2017, Horn posted an announcement on his official Facebook page, linking to an article on theatre website &quot;Broadway World&quot; that Horn, Downes and Woolley were working together on a musical provisionally entitled &quot;The Robot Sings&quot;. Based on &quot;The Tempest&quot; by William Shakespeare, and taking influence from sci-fi authors such as J. G. Ballard, Brian Aldiss and Isaac Asimov, the stage show was to tell the story of a boy called Jay trying to save his robot companion. The musical was to feature &quot;Video Killed the Radio Star&quot; as well as new compositions by Downes, and the script was to be written by Jack Woolley.

==Members==

=== Current members ===
* Trevor Horn – lead vocals, bass, guitar, sound effects (1977–1982, 1998, 2004, 2010, 2011, 2023–present)

=== Former members ===
* Geoff Downes – piano, keyboards, synthesizers, drums, percussion, backing vocals (1977–1981, 1998, 2004, 2010, 2011)
* Bruce Woolley – lead and backing vocals, guitar (1977–1979, 2004, 2010)

=== Touring members ===

* Debi Doss – backing vocals (1979, 2004)
* Linda Jardim-Allen – backing vocals (1979, 2004; died 2015)
* Earl Harvin – drums (2023)
* Mat Dauzat – guitar (2023)
* Jamie Muhoberac – keyboards (2023)
* La Tanya Hall – backing vocals (2023)
* Everett Bradley – backing vocals, percussion (2023)

==Discography==
;Studio albums
* &quot;The Age of Plastic&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Adventures in Modern Recording&quot; (1981)

==See also==
* List of one-hit wonders in the United States

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* Gregory, Andy (2002). &quot;International Who&#x27;s Who in Popular Music 2002&quot;. Routledge, , .

==External links==

* Buggles discography on The Art of Noise Online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q201568" start="0" end="11" title="The Buggles" label="The Buggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="27" end="35" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="51" end="57" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q313092" start="88" end="99" title="Trevor Horn" label="Trevor Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q346822" start="116" end="128" title="Geoff Downes" label="Geoff Downes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164811" start="184" end="211" title="Video Killed the Radio Star" label="Video Killed the Radio Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="236" end="252" title="UK singles chart" label="UK singles chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="335" end="338" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704236" start="391" end="409" title="The Age of Plastic" label="The Age of Plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="608" end="624" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="630" end="633" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q636474" start="665" end="670" title="Drama (Yes album)" label="Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="875" end="878" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825401" start="964" end="994" title="Adventures in Modern Recording" label="Adventures in Modern Recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="1338" end="1349" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="2226" end="2235" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q286216" start="2309" end="2331" title="Leeds College of Music" label="Leeds College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q261365" start="2442" end="2454" title="Tina Charles (singer)" label="Tina Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904074" start="2504" end="2509" title="Biddu" label="Biddu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978501" start="2603" end="2616" title="Bruce Woolley" label="Bruce Woolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337772" start="2672" end="2689" title="Hammersmith Odeon" label="Hammersmith Odeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44892" start="2721" end="2730" title="Kraftwerk" label="Kraftwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q390019" start="2735" end="2748" title="Daniel Miller (music producer)" label="Daniel Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093988" start="2777" end="2782" title="Crash (J. G. Ballard novel)" label="Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q140201" start="2792" end="2805" title="J. G. Ballard" label="J. G. Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="2984" end="2997" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q736742" start="3415" end="3424" title="Wimbledon, London" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164811" start="3460" end="3487" title="Video Killed the Radio Star" label="Video Killed the Radio Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130434" start="3501" end="3513" title="Clean, Clean" label="Clean, Clean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825401" start="3530" end="3535" title="On TV (song)" label="On TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="3753" end="3771" title="Multitrack recording" label="16-track recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q22004596" start="3922" end="3935" title="Jill Sinclair" label="Jill Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256786" start="3953" end="3970" title="Sarm East Studios" label="Sarm East Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q861129" start="4120" end="4135" title="Chris Blackwell" label="Chris Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="4139" end="4153" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704236" start="4539" end="4557" title="The Age of Plastic" label="The Age of Plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q261365" start="4661" end="4673" title="Tina Charles (singer)" label="Tina Charles"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4818" end="4833" title="Bruce Woolley#1976-1980: The Camera Club" label="the Camera Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248074" start="5085" end="5094" title="Debi Doss" label="Debi Doss"/>
<link wikidata="Q436829" start="5452" end="5467" title="Russell Mulcahy" label="Russell Mulcahy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="5498" end="5501" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q76364" start="5555" end="5566" title="Hans Zimmer" label="Hans Zimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="5692" end="5707" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659480" start="5755" end="5780" title="Living in the Plastic Age" label="Living in the Plastic Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130434" start="5794" end="5806" title="Clean, Clean" label="Clean, Clean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367764" start="5823" end="5830" title="Elstree (song)" label="Elstree"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="6048" end="6064" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="6070" end="6073" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q313749" start="6097" end="6109" title="Jon Anderson" label="Jon Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q312053" start="6126" end="6138" title="Rick Wakeman" label="Rick Wakeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q31355" start="6307" end="6320" title="Fly from Here" label="Fly from Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q304885" start="6406" end="6418" title="Chris Squire" label="Chris Squire"/>
<link wikidata="Q312691" start="6546" end="6556" title="Steve Howe (guitarist)" label="Steve Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q355669" start="6561" end="6571" title="Alan White (Yes drummer)" label="Alan White"/>
<link wikidata="Q636474" start="6588" end="6593" title="Drama (Yes album)" label="Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825401" start="7394" end="7424" title="Adventures in Modern Recording" label="Adventures in Modern Recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q726891" start="7519" end="7523" title="Asia (band)" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q512222" start="8201" end="8214" title="Fairlight CMI" label="Fairlight CMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289447" start="8451" end="8470" title="Slave to the Rhythm (album)" label="Slave to the Rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q450429" start="8480" end="8491" title="Grace Jones" label="Grace Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q276033" start="8499" end="8504" title="90125" label="90125"/>
<link wikidata="Q184386" start="8514" end="8517" title="Yes (band)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763210" start="8525" end="8556" title="The Seduction of Claude Debussy" label="The Seduction of Claude Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q502967" start="8566" end="8578" title="Art of Noise" label="Art of Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q966700" start="8590" end="8617" title="Welcome to the Pleasuredome" label="Welcome to the Pleasuredome"/>
<link wikidata="Q73597" start="8627" end="8652" title="Frankie Goes to Hollywood" label="Frankie Goes to Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="8857" end="8882" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188724" start="8970" end="8989" title="The Lexicon of Love" label="The Lexicon of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q287078" start="8999" end="9002" title="ABC (band)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="9437" end="9452" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q136485" start="9703" end="9714" title="ZTT Records" label="ZTT Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627594" start="9724" end="9736" title="Mean Fiddler" label="Mean Fiddler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705613" start="9864" end="9875" title="Tessa Niles" label="Tessa Niles"/>
<link wikidata="Q815571" start="10012" end="10025" title="Wembley Arena" label="Wembley Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758242" start="10122" end="10145" title="The Prince&amp;#x27;s Trust" label="The Prince&amp;#x27;s Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q215354" start="10334" end="10346" title="Notting Hill" label="Notting Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374301" start="10385" end="10420" title="Royal Hospital for Neuro-disability" label="Royal Hospital for Neuro-disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q956500" start="10458" end="10491" title="Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark" label="Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346568" start="10666" end="10675" title="Lol Creme" label="Lol Creme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105955" start="10677" end="10689" title="Chris Braide" label="Chris Braide"/>
<link wikidata="Q237820" start="10691" end="10703" title="Alison Moyet" label="Alison Moyet"/>
<link wikidata="Q328753" start="10705" end="10716" title="Gary Barlow" label="Gary Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q982182" start="10718" end="10738" title="Richard O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Richard O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q441317" start="10743" end="10758" title="Claudia Brücken" label="Claudia Brücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970375" start="10817" end="10841" title="British Music Experience" label="British Music Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121950" start="10849" end="10857" title="The O2" label="O2 Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q581952" start="10952" end="10964" title="Space Oddity" label="Space Oddity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="10974" end="10985" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711490" start="10996" end="11008" title="Check It Out (will.i.am and Nicki Minaj song)" label="Check It Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q162202" start="11018" end="11029" title="Nicki Minaj" label="Nicki Minaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q185610" start="11034" end="11043" title="will.i.am" label="will.i.am"/>
<link wikidata="Q11250835" start="11506" end="11526" title="the Trevor Horn Band" label="the Trevor Horn Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778511" start="11543" end="11570" title="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s Bush Empire" label="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s Bush Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q218091" start="11794" end="11798" title="Seal (musician)" label="Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q73597" start="12101" end="12126" title="Frankie Goes to Hollywood" label="Frankie Goes to Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q313092" start="12183" end="12194" title="Trevor Horn" label="Trevor Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="12218" end="12224" title="sci-fi" label="sci-fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q140201" start="12250" end="12263" title="J. G. Ballard" label="J. G. Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q349346" start="12320" end="12335" title="George Shearing" label="George Shearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q976486" start="12580" end="12593" title="Trouser Press" label="Trouser Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="12694" end="12702" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="12754" end="12763" title="pop music" label="pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q312691" start="12878" end="12888" title="Steve Howe (guitarist)" label="Steve Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q215048" start="12919" end="12929" title="supergroup (music)" label="supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q366747" start="12950" end="12961" title="John Wetton" label="John Wetton"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="12975" end="12987" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q348277" start="12993" end="13004" title="Carl Palmer" label="Carl Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q273171" start="13018" end="13044" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294126" start="13098" end="13116" title="Heat of the Moment (Asia song)" label="Heat of the Moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q747084" start="13276" end="13279" title="GTR (band)" label="GTR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13422" end="13426" title="Yes (band)#Tours" label="tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q287078" start="13528" end="13531" title="ABC (band)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289199" start="13533" end="13539" title="Dollar (group)" label="Dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q73597" start="13541" end="13566" title="Frankie Goes to Hollywood" label="Frankie Goes to Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q502967" start="13568" end="13580" title="Art of Noise" label="Art of Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q276033" start="13608" end="13613" title="90125" label="90125"/>
<link wikidata="Q794719" start="13630" end="13643" title="Big Generator" label="Big Generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632219" start="13742" end="13752" title="1985 Brit Awards" label="BRIT Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q218091" start="13816" end="13820" title="Seal (musician)" label="Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131814" start="13822" end="13833" title="Tina Turner" label="Tina Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="13835" end="13849" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q180850" start="13851" end="13860" title="Tom Jones (singer)" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="13862" end="13866" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q748836" start="13868" end="13880" title="Simple Minds" label="Simple Minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q691568" start="13882" end="13901" title="Belle and Sebastian" label="Belle and Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q161723" start="13903" end="13911" title="t.A.T.u." label="t.A.T.u."/>
<link wikidata="Q231207" start="13913" end="13929" title="Charlotte Church" label="Charlotte Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q921312" start="13931" end="13938" title="Captain (band)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="13940" end="13953" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q47875" start="13958" end="13973" title="Robbie Williams" label="Robbie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11250835" start="14041" end="14054" title="The Trevor Horn Band" label="the Producers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726711" start="14085" end="14106" title="Made in Basing Street" label="Made in Basing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q420871" start="14322" end="14351" title="Reality Killed the Video Star" label="Reality Killed the Video Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q47875" start="14377" end="14392" title="Robbie Williams" label="Robbie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834905" start="14540" end="14558" title="BBC Electric Proms" label="BBC Electric Proms"/>
<link wikidata="Q31355" start="14660" end="14673" title="Fly from Here" label="Fly from Here"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15363" end="15380" title="List of Yes concert tours (2000s–10s)#Rite of Spring and Fly From Here Tours 2011-2012" label="The Fly From Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978501" start="15648" end="15661" title="Bruce Woolley" label="Bruce Woolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q756956" start="15720" end="15732" title="dark ambient" label="dark ambient"/>
<link wikidata="Q456681" start="15796" end="15813" title="Polly Scattergood" label="Polly Scattergood"/>
<link wikidata="Q553790" start="15929" end="15941" title="Thomas Dolby" label="Thomas Dolby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108472" start="15946" end="15959" title="Wolfgang Wild (curator)" label="Wolfgang Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="16087" end="16095" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="16227" end="16234" title="musical theatre" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q86440" start="16302" end="16313" title="The Tempest" label="The Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="16323" end="16342" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="16370" end="16376" title="Science fiction" label="sci-fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q140201" start="16393" end="16406" title="J. G. Ballard" label="J. G. Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q238702" start="16408" end="16420" title="Brian Aldiss" label="Brian Aldiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="16425" end="16437" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q313092" start="16728" end="16739" title="Trevor Horn" label="Trevor Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q346822" start="16859" end="16871" title="Geoff Downes" label="Geoff Downes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978501" start="16978" end="16991" title="Bruce Woolley" label="Bruce Woolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248074" start="17078" end="17087" title="Debi Doss" label="Debi Doss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325909" start="17182" end="17193" title="Earl Harvin" label="Earl Harvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147272" start="17240" end="17255" title="Jamie Muhoberac" label="Jamie Muhoberac"/>
<link wikidata="Q28007168" start="17317" end="17332" title="Everett Bradley (musician)" label="Everett Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704236" start="17409" end="17427" title="The Age of Plastic" label="The Age of Plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825401" start="17449" end="17479" title="Adventures in Modern Recording" label="Adventures in Modern Recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631663" start="17509" end="17553" title="List of one-hit wonders in the United States" label="List of one-hit wonders in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41980" wikidata="Q42299" url="?curid=41980" title="Bernhard Riemann">
<text>Georg Friedrich Bernhard Riemann (; ; 17 September 1826 – 20 July 1866) was a German mathematician who made profound contributions to analysis, number theory, and differential geometry. In the field of real analysis, he is mostly known for the first rigorous formulation of the integral, the Riemann integral, and his work on Fourier series. His contributions to complex analysis include most notably the introduction of Riemann surfaces, breaking new ground in a natural, geometric treatment of complex analysis. His 1859 paper on the prime-counting function, containing the original statement of the Riemann hypothesis, is regarded as a foundational paper of analytic number theory. Through his pioneering contributions to differential geometry, Riemann laid the foundations of the mathematics of general relativity. He is considered by many to be one of the greatest mathematicians of all time.

==Early years==
Riemann was born on 17 September 1826 in Breselenz, a village near Dannenberg in the Kingdom of Hanover. His father, Friedrich Bernhard Riemann, was a poor Lutheran pastor in Breselenz who fought in the Napoleonic Wars. His mother, Charlotte Ebell, died in 1846. Riemann was the second of six children. Riemann exhibited exceptional mathematical talent, such as calculation abilities, from an early age but suffered from timidity and a fear of speaking in public, and had frail health.

==Education==
During 1840, Riemann went to Hanover to live with his grandmother and attend lyceum (middle school years), because such a type of school was not accessible from his home village. After the death of his grandmother in 1842, he transferred to the Johanneum Lüneburg, a high school in Lüneburg. There, Riemann studied the Bible intensively, but he was often distracted by mathematics. His teachers were amazed by his ability to perform complicated mathematical operations, in which he often outstripped his instructor&#x27;s knowledge. In 1846, at the age of 19, he started studying philology and Christian theology in order to become a pastor and help with his family&#x27;s finances.

During the spring of 1846, his father, after gathering enough money, sent Riemann to the University of Göttingen, where he planned to study towards a degree in theology. However, once there, he began studying mathematics under Carl Friedrich Gauss (specifically his lectures on the method of least squares). Gauss recommended that Riemann give up his theological work and enter the mathematical field; after getting his father&#x27;s approval, Riemann transferred to the University of Berlin in 1847. During his time of study, Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi, Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet, Jakob Steiner, and Gotthold Eisenstein were teaching. He stayed in Berlin for two years and returned to Göttingen in 1849.

==Academia==
Riemann held his first lectures in 1854, which founded the field of Riemannian geometry and thereby set the stage for Albert Einstein&#x27;s general theory of relativity. In 1857, there was an attempt to promote Riemann to extraordinary professor status at the University of Göttingen. Although this attempt failed, it did result in Riemann finally being granted a regular salary. In 1859, following the death of Dirichlet (who held Gauss&#x27;s chair at the University of Göttingen), he was promoted to head the mathematics department at the University of Göttingen. He was also the first to suggest using dimensions higher than merely three or four in order to describe physical reality.

In 1862 he married Elise Koch; they had a daughter.

==Protestant family and death in Italy==
Riemann fled Göttingen when the armies of Hanover and Prussia clashed there in 1866. He died of tuberculosis during his third journey to Italy in Selasca (now a hamlet of Verbania on Lake Maggiore), where he was buried in the cemetery in Biganzolo (Verbania).
Riemann was a dedicated Christian, the son of a Protestant minister, and saw his life as a mathematician as another way to serve God. During his life, he held closely to his Christian faith and considered it to be the most important aspect of his life. At the time of his death, he was reciting the Lord&#x27;s Prayer with his wife and died before they finished saying the prayer. Meanwhile, in Göttingen his housekeeper discarded some of the papers in his office, including much unpublished work. Riemann refused to publish incomplete work, and some deep insights may have been lost.

== Riemannian geometry ==
Riemann&#x27;s published works opened up research areas combining analysis with geometry. These would subsequently become major parts of the theories of Riemannian geometry, algebraic geometry, and complex manifold theory. The theory of Riemann surfaces was elaborated by Felix Klein and particularly Adolf Hurwitz. This area of mathematics is part of the foundation of topology and is still being applied in novel ways to mathematical physics.

In 1853, Gauss asked Riemann, his student, to prepare a &quot;Habilitationsschrift&quot; on the foundations of geometry. Over many months, Riemann developed his theory of higher dimensions and delivered his lecture at Göttingen on 10 June 1854, entitled &quot;Ueber die Hypothesen, welche der Geometrie zu Grunde liegen&quot;. It was not published until twelve years later in 1868 by Dedekind, two years after his death. Its early reception appears to have been slow, but it is now recognized as one of the most important works in geometry.

The subject founded by this work is Riemannian geometry. Riemann found the correct way to extend into &quot;n&quot; dimensions the differential geometry of surfaces, which Gauss himself proved in his &quot;theorema egregium&quot;. The fundamental objects are called the Riemannian metric and the Riemann curvature tensor. For the surface (two-dimensional) case, the curvature at each point can be reduced to a number (scalar), with the surfaces of constant positive or negative curvature being models of the non-Euclidean geometries.

The Riemann metric is a collection of numbers at every point in space (i.e., a tensor) which allows measurements of speed in any trajectory, whose integral gives the distance between the trajectory&#x27;s endpoints. For example, Riemann found that in four spatial dimensions, one needs ten numbers at each point to describe distances and curvatures on a manifold, no matter how distorted it is.

==Complex analysis==
In his dissertation, he established a geometric foundation for complex analysis through Riemann surfaces, through which multi-valued functions like the logarithm (with infinitely many sheets) or the square root (with two sheets) could become one-to-one functions. Complex functions are harmonic functions (that is, they satisfy Laplace&#x27;s equation and thus the Cauchy–Riemann equations) on these surfaces and are described by the location of their singularities and the topology of the surfaces. The topological &quot;genus&quot; of the Riemann surfaces is given by formula_1, where the surface has formula_2 leaves coming together at formula_3 branch points. For formula_4 the Riemann surface has formula_5 parameters (the &quot;moduli&quot;).

His contributions to this area are numerous. The famous Riemann mapping theorem says that a simply connected domain in the complex plane is &quot;biholomorphically equivalent&quot; (i.e. there is a bijection between them that is holomorphic with a holomorphic inverse) to either formula_6 or to the interior of the unit circle. The generalization of the theorem to Riemann surfaces is the famous uniformization theorem, which was proved in the 19th century by Henri Poincaré and Felix Klein. Here, too, rigorous proofs were first given after the development of richer mathematical tools (in this case, topology). For the proof of the existence of functions on Riemann surfaces, he used a minimality condition, which he called the Dirichlet principle. Karl Weierstrass found a gap in the proof: Riemann had not noticed that his working assumption (that the minimum existed) might not work; the function space might not be complete, and therefore the existence of a minimum was not guaranteed. Through the work of David Hilbert in the Calculus of Variations, the Dirichlet principle was finally established. Otherwise, Weierstrass was very impressed with Riemann, especially with his theory of abelian functions. When Riemann&#x27;s work appeared, Weierstrass withdrew his paper from &quot;Crelle&#x27;s Journal&quot; and did not publish it. They had a good understanding when Riemann visited him in Berlin in 1859. Weierstrass encouraged his student Hermann Amandus Schwarz to find alternatives to the Dirichlet principle in complex analysis, in which he was successful. An anecdote from Arnold Sommerfeld shows the difficulties which contemporary mathematicians had with Riemann&#x27;s new ideas. In 1870, Weierstrass had taken Riemann&#x27;s dissertation with him on a holiday to Rigi and complained that it was hard to understand. The physicist Hermann von Helmholtz assisted him in the work overnight and returned with the comment that it was &quot;natural&quot; and &quot;very understandable&quot;.

Other highlights include his work on abelian functions and theta functions on Riemann surfaces. Riemann had been in a competition with Weierstrass since 1857 to solve the Jacobian inverse problems for abelian integrals, a generalization of elliptic integrals. Riemann used theta functions in several variables and reduced the problem to the determination of the zeros of these theta functions. Riemann also investigated period matrices and characterized them through the &quot;Riemannian period relations&quot; (symmetric, real part negative). By Ferdinand Georg Frobenius and Solomon Lefschetz the validity of this relation is equivalent with the embedding of formula_7 (where formula_8 is the lattice of the period matrix) in a projective space by means of theta functions. For certain values of formula_2, this is the Jacobian variety of the Riemann surface, an example of an abelian manifold.

Many mathematicians such as Alfred Clebsch furthered Riemann&#x27;s work on algebraic curves. These theories depended on the properties of a function defined on Riemann surfaces. For example, the Riemann–Roch theorem (Roch was a student of Riemann) says something about the number of linearly independent differentials (with known conditions on the zeros and poles) of a Riemann surface.

According to Detlef Laugwitz, automorphic functions appeared for the first time in an essay about the Laplace equation on electrically charged cylinders. Riemann however used such functions for conformal maps (such as mapping topological triangles to the circle) in his 1859 lecture on hypergeometric functions or in his treatise on minimal surfaces.

==Real analysis==
In the field of real analysis, he discovered the Riemann integral in his habilitation. Among other things, he showed that every piecewise continuous function is integrable. Similarly, the Stieltjes integral goes back to the Göttinger mathematician, and so they are named together the Riemann–Stieltjes integral.

In his habilitation work on Fourier series, where he followed the work of his teacher Dirichlet, he showed that Riemann-integrable functions are &quot;representable&quot; by Fourier series. Dirichlet has shown this for continuous, piecewise-differentiable functions (thus with countably many non-differentiable points). Riemann gave an example of a Fourier series representing a continuous, almost nowhere-differentiable function, a case not covered by Dirichlet. He also proved the Riemann–Lebesgue lemma: if a function is representable by a Fourier series, then the Fourier coefficients go to zero for large &quot;n&quot;.

Riemann&#x27;s essay was also the starting point for Georg Cantor&#x27;s work with Fourier series, which was the impetus for set theory.

He also worked with hypergeometric differential equations in 1857 using complex analytical methods and presented the solutions through the behaviour of closed paths about singularities (described by the monodromy matrix). The proof of the existence of such differential equations by previously known monodromy matrices is one of the Hilbert problems.

== Number theory==
Riemann made some famous contributions to modern analytic number theory. In a single short paper, the only one he published on the subject of number theory, he investigated the zeta function that now bears his name, establishing its importance for understanding the distribution of prime numbers. The Riemann hypothesis was one of a series of conjectures he made about the function&#x27;s properties.

In Riemann&#x27;s work, there are many more interesting developments. He proved the functional equation for the zeta function (already known to Leonhard Euler), behind which a theta function lies. Through the summation of this approximation function over the non-trivial zeros on the line with real portion 1/2, he gave an exact, &quot;explicit formula&quot; for formula_10.

Riemann knew of Pafnuty Chebyshev&#x27;s work on the Prime Number Theorem. He had visited Dirichlet in 1852.

== Writings ==
Riemann&#x27;s works include:
* 1851 – &quot;Grundlagen für eine allgemeine Theorie der Functionen einer veränderlichen complexen Grösse&quot;, Inaugural dissertation, Göttingen, 1851.
* 1857 – &quot;Theorie der Abelschen Functionen&quot;, Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik, Bd. 54. S. 101–155.
* 1859 – &quot;Über die Anzahl der Primzahlen unter einer gegebenen Größe&quot;, in: &quot;Monatsberichte der Preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.&quot; Berlin, November 1859, S. 671ff. With Riemann&#x27;s conjecture. &quot;&quot; (Wikisource), Facsimile of the manuscript with Clay Mathematics.
* 1861 – &quot;Commentatio mathematica, qua respondere tentatur quaestioni ab Illma Academia Parisiensi propositae&quot;, submitted to the Paris Academy for a prize competition
* 1867 – &quot;Über die Darstellbarkeit einer Function durch eine trigonometrische Reihe&quot;, Aus dem dreizehnten Bande der Abhandlungen der Königlichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen.
* 1868 – &quot;Über die Hypothesen, welche der Geometrie zugrunde liegen&quot;. Abh. Kgl. Ges. Wiss., Göttingen 1868. Translation EMIS, pdf &quot;On the hypotheses which lie at the foundation of geometry&quot;, translated by W.K.Clifford, Nature 8 1873 183 – reprinted in Clifford&#x27;s Collected Mathematical Papers, London 1882 (MacMillan); New York 1968 (Chelsea) http://www.emis.de/classics/Riemann/. Also in Ewald, William B., ed., 1996 &quot;From Kant to Hilbert: A Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics&quot;, 2 vols. Oxford Uni. Press: 652–61.
* 1876 – &quot;Bernhard Riemann&#x27;s Gesammelte Mathematische Werke und wissenschaftlicher Nachlass. herausgegeben von Heinrich Weber unter Mitwirkung von Richard Dedekind&quot;, Leipzig, B. G. Teubner 1876, 2. Auflage 1892, Nachdruck bei Dover 1953 (with contributions by Max Noether and Wilhelm Wirtinger, Teubner 1902). Later editions &quot;The collected Works of Bernhard Riemann: The Complete German Texts.&quot; Eds. Heinrich Weber; Richard Dedekind; M Noether; Wilhelm Wirtinger; Hans Lewy. Mineola, New York: Dover Publications, Inc., 1953, 1981, 2017
* 1876 – &quot;Schwere, Elektrizität und Magnetismus&quot;, Hannover: Karl Hattendorff.
* 1882 – &quot;Vorlesungen über Partielle Differentialgleichungen&quot; 3. Auflage. Braunschweig 1882.
* 1901 – &quot;Die partiellen Differential-Gleichungen der mathematischen Physik nach Riemann&#x27;s Vorlesungen&quot;. . On archive.org: 
* 2004 – 

== See also ==
*List of things named after Bernhard Riemann
*Non-Euclidean geometry
*On the Number of Primes Less Than a Given Magnitude, Riemann&#x27;s 1859 paper introducing the complex zeta function

== References==
== Further reading ==
* .

== External links ==

* The Mathematical Papers of Georg Friedrich Bernhard Riemann
* Riemann&#x27;s publications at emis.de
* Bernhard Riemann – one of the most important mathematicians
* Bernhard Riemann&#x27;s inaugural lecture
* Richard Dedekind (1892), Transcripted by D. R. Wilkins, Riemanns biography.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42299" start="0" end="32" title="Bernhard Riemann" label="Georg Friedrich Bernhard Riemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="85" end="98" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="134" end="142" title="mathematical analysis" label="analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="144" end="157" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q188444" start="163" end="184" title="differential geometry" label="differential geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q854531" start="202" end="215" title="real analysis" label="real analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q697181" start="292" end="308" title="Riemann integral" label="Riemann integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="326" end="340" title="Fourier series" label="Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q193756" start="363" end="379" title="complex analysis" label="complex analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q753035" start="421" end="436" title="Riemann surface" label="Riemann surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q905091" start="518" end="528" title="On the Number of Primes Less Than a Given Magnitude" label="1859 paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q251922" start="536" end="559" title="prime-counting function" label="prime-counting function"/>
<link wikidata="Q205966" start="602" end="620" title="Riemann hypothesis" label="Riemann hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843274" start="661" end="683" title="analytic number theory" label="analytic number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q761383" start="708" end="746" title="Riemannian Geometry" label="contributions to differential geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="799" end="817" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q573615" start="956" end="965" title="Breselenz" label="Breselenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q495745" start="982" end="992" title="Dannenberg (Elbe)" label="Dannenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q164079" start="1000" end="1018" title="Kingdom of Hanover" label="Kingdom of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="1071" end="1079" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="1118" end="1133" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="1445" end="1452" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q16463" start="1493" end="1499" title="lyceum" label="lyceum"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1661" end="1679" title=":de:Johanneum Lüneburg" label="Johanneum Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920" start="1698" end="1706" title="Lüneburg" label="Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="1735" end="1740" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="1996" end="2005" title="philology" label="philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="2010" end="2028" title="Christian theology" label="Christian theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="2189" end="2212" title="University of Göttingen" label="University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="2260" end="2268" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="2309" end="2320" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="2327" end="2347" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q74304" start="2382" end="2405" title="method of least squares" label="method of least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="2571" end="2591" title="University of Berlin" label="University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q76564" start="2627" end="2651" title="Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi" label="Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29193" start="2653" end="2683" title="Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet" label="Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q123514" start="2685" end="2698" title="Jakob Steiner" label="Jakob Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q61047" start="2704" end="2723" title="Gotthold Eisenstein" label="Gotthold Eisenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q761383" start="2890" end="2909" title="Riemannian geometry" label="Riemannian geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="2940" end="2955" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="2963" end="2991" title="general theory of relativity" label="general theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="3083" end="3106" title="University of Göttingen" label="University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="3255" end="3260" title="Gauss" label="Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="3429" end="3472" title="higher dimensions" label="dimensions higher than merely three or four"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="3649" end="3656" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="3661" end="3668" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="3703" end="3715" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639" start="3778" end="3786" title="Verbania" label="Verbania"/>
<link wikidata="Q14379" start="3790" end="3803" title="Lake Maggiore" label="Lake Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q23393" start="4166" end="4184" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q761383" start="4632" end="4651" title="Riemannian geometry" label="Riemannian geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="4653" end="4671" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q578874" start="4677" end="4693" title="complex manifold" label="complex manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q753035" start="4716" end="4731" title="Riemann surface" label="Riemann surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q76641" start="4751" end="4762" title="Felix Klein" label="Felix Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q58809" start="4780" end="4793" title="Adolf Hurwitz" label="Adolf Hurwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="4849" end="4857" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q156495" start="4902" end="4922" title="mathematical physics" label="mathematical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="4934" end="4939" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q308678" start="4987" end="5007" title="Habilitationsschrift" label="Habilitationsschrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="5096" end="5113" title="higher dimensions" label="higher dimensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q761383" start="5503" end="5522" title="Riemannian geometry" label="Riemannian geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188444" start="5598" end="5619" title="differential geometry" label="differential geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048874" start="5673" end="5690" title="theorema egregium" label="theorema egregium"/>
<link wikidata="Q632814" start="5737" end="5754" title="Riemannian metric" label="Riemannian metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q855112" start="5763" end="5787" title="Riemann curvature tensor" label="Riemann curvature tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q233858" start="5975" end="5999" title="non-Euclidean geometry" label="non-Euclidean geometries"/>
<link wikidata="Q188524" start="6081" end="6087" title="tensor" label="tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="6356" end="6364" title="manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q193756" start="6482" end="6498" title="complex analysis" label="complex analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q753035" start="6507" end="6522" title="Riemann surface" label="Riemann surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="6571" end="6580" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q134237" start="6618" end="6629" title="square root" label="square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q182003" start="6661" end="6680" title="one-to-one function" label="one-to-one function"/>
<link wikidata="Q599027" start="6705" end="6723" title="harmonic functions" label="harmonic functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q339444" start="6747" end="6770" title="Laplace&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Laplace&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q622741" start="6784" end="6808" title="Cauchy–Riemann equations" label="Cauchy–Riemann equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889798" start="7153" end="7159" title="Moduli of algebraic curves" label="moduli"/>
<link wikidata="Q927051" start="7225" end="7248" title="Riemann mapping theorem" label="Riemann mapping theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109761" start="7565" end="7587" title="uniformization theorem" label="uniformization theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q81082" start="7629" end="7643" title="Henri Poincaré" label="Henri Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q76641" start="7648" end="7659" title="Felix Klein" label="Felix Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q975727" start="7899" end="7918" title="Dirichlet principle" label="Dirichlet principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q57103" start="7920" end="7936" title="Karl Weierstrass" label="Karl Weierstrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="8181" end="8194" title="David Hilbert" label="David Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q318751" start="8361" end="8377" title="abelian function" label="abelian function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368270" start="8457" end="8478" title="Crelle&amp;#x27;s Journal" label="Crelle&amp;#x27;s Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q61223" start="8618" end="8641" title="Hermann Amandus Schwarz" label="Hermann Amandus Schwarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q77078" start="8756" end="8773" title="Arnold Sommerfeld" label="Arnold Sommerfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q60024" start="9016" end="9037" title="Hermann von Helmholtz" label="Hermann von Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154787" start="9232" end="9247" title="theta functions" label="theta functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126603" start="9413" end="9431" title="elliptic integrals" label="elliptic integrals"/>
<link wikidata="Q57228" start="9720" end="9745" title="Ferdinand Georg Frobenius" label="Ferdinand Georg Frobenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q371942" start="9750" end="9767" title="Solomon Lefschetz" label="Solomon Lefschetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q845729" start="9994" end="10010" title="Jacobian variety" label="Jacobian variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q61737" start="10099" end="10113" title="Alfred Clebsch" label="Alfred Clebsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q379048" start="10267" end="10287" title="Riemann–Roch theorem" label="Riemann–Roch theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q90610" start="10473" end="10488" title="Detlef Laugwitz" label="Detlef Laugwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826704" start="10490" end="10510" title="automorphic function" label="automorphic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545397" start="10793" end="10808" title="minimal surface" label="minimal surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q854531" start="10846" end="10859" title="real analysis" label="real analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q697181" start="10879" end="10895" title="Riemann integral" label="Riemann integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q308678" start="10903" end="10915" title="habilitation" label="habilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q285771" start="11018" end="11036" title="Stieltjes integral" label="Stieltjes integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q285771" start="11114" end="11140" title="Riemann–Stieltjes integral" label="Riemann–Stieltjes integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="11171" end="11185" title="Fourier series" label="Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q9363284" start="11626" end="11648" title="Riemann–Lebesgue lemma" label="Riemann–Lebesgue lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q76420" start="11822" end="11834" title="Georg Cantor" label="Georg Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="11894" end="11904" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028472" start="11927" end="11964" title="hypergeometric differential equations" label="hypergeometric differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901559" start="12110" end="12126" title="monodromy matrix" label="monodromy matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843274" start="12327" end="12349" title="analytic number theory" label="analytic number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q905091" start="12354" end="12374" title="On the Number of Primes Less Than a Given Magnitude" label="a single short paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q187235" start="12455" end="12468" title="Riemann zeta function" label="zeta function"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="12560" end="12572" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q205966" start="12579" end="12597" title="Riemann hypothesis" label="Riemann hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="12824" end="12838" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q206012" start="13072" end="13089" title="Pafnuty Chebyshev" label="Pafnuty Chebyshev"/>
<link wikidata="Q386292" start="13109" end="13129" title="Prime number theorem" label="Prime Number Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13226" end="13317" title="List of important publications in mathematics#Grundlagen für eine allgemeine Theorie der Functionen einer veränderlichen complexen Grösse" label="Grundlagen für eine allgemeine Theorie der Functionen einer veränderlichen complexen Grösse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13381" end="13413" title="List of important publications in mathematics#Theorie der Abelschen Functionen" label="Theorie der Abelschen Functionen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13982" end="14055" title="List of important publications in mathematics#Über die Darstellbarkeit einer Function durch eine trigonometrische Reihe" label="Über die Darstellbarkeit einer Function durch eine trigonometrische Reihe"/>
<link wikidata="Q323228" start="14393" end="14405" title="William Kingdon Clifford" label="W.K.Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644797" start="15648" end="15691" title="List of things named after Bernhard Riemann" label="List of things named after Bernhard Riemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q233858" start="15693" end="15715" title="Non-Euclidean geometry" label="Non-Euclidean geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q905091" start="15717" end="15768" title="On the Number of Primes Less Than a Given Magnitude" label="On the Number of Primes Less Than a Given Magnitude"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41985" wikidata="Q1058754" url="?curid=41985" title="Shortest path problem">
<text>In graph theory, the shortest path problem is the problem of finding a path between two vertices (or nodes) in a graph such that the sum of the weights of its constituent edges is minimized.

The problem of finding the shortest path between two intersections on a road map may be modeled as a special case of the shortest path problem in graphs, where the vertices correspond to intersections and the edges correspond to road segments, each weighted by the length or distance of each segment.

==Definition==
The shortest path problem can be defined for graphs whether undirected, directed, or mixed. The definition for undirected graphs states that every edge can be traversed in either direction. Directed graphs require that consecutive vertices be connected by an appropriate directed edge.

Two vertices are adjacent when they are both incident to a common edge. A path in an undirected graph is a sequence of vertices formula_1 such that formula_2 is adjacent to formula_3 for formula_4. Such a path formula_5 is called a path of length formula_6 from formula_7 to formula_8. (The formula_2 are variables; their numbering relates to their position in the sequence and need not relate to a canonical labeling.)

Let formula_10 where formula_11 is the edge incident to both formula_2 and formula_13. Given a real-valued weight function formula_14, and an undirected (simple) graph formula_15, the shortest path from formula_16 to formula_17 is the path formula_18 (where formula_19 and formula_20) that over all possible formula_21 minimizes the sum formula_22 When each edge in the graph has unit weight or formula_23, this is equivalent to finding the path with fewest edges.

The problem is also sometimes called the single-pair shortest path problem, to distinguish it from the following variations:
* The single-source shortest path problem, in which we have to find shortest paths from a source vertex &quot;v&quot; to all other vertices in the graph.
* The single-destination shortest path problem, in which we have to find shortest paths from all vertices in the directed graph to a single destination vertex &quot;v&quot;. This can be reduced to the single-source shortest path problem by reversing the arcs in the directed graph.
* The all-pairs shortest path problem, in which we have to find shortest paths between every pair of vertices &quot;v&quot;, &quot;v&#x27; &quot; in the graph.

These generalizations have significantly more efficient algorithms than the simplistic approach of running a single-pair shortest path algorithm on all relevant pairs of vertices.

==Algorithms==
Several well-known algorithms exist for solving this problem and its variants.
* Dijkstra&#x27;s algorithm solves the single-source shortest path problem with only non-negative edge weights.
* Bellman–Ford algorithm solves the single-source problem if edge weights may be negative.
* A* search algorithm solves for single-pair shortest path using heuristics to try to speed up the search.
* Floyd–Warshall algorithm solves all pairs shortest paths.
* Johnson&#x27;s algorithm solves all pairs shortest paths, and may be faster than Floyd–Warshall on sparse graphs.
* Viterbi algorithm solves the shortest stochastic path problem with an additional probabilistic weight on each node.

Additional algorithms and associated evaluations may be found in .

==Single-source shortest paths==

===Undirected graphs===
===Unweighted graphs===
===Directed acyclic graphs ===
An algorithm using topological sorting can solve the single-source shortest path problem in time in arbitrarily-weighted directed acyclic graphs.

===Directed graphs with nonnegative weights===
The following table is taken from , with some corrections and additions.
A green background indicates an asymptotically best bound in the table; &quot;L&quot; is the maximum length (or weight) among all edges, assuming integer edge weights.

===Directed graphs with arbitrary weights without negative cycles===

===Directed graphs with arbitrary weights with negative cycles===
Finds a negative cycle or calculates distances to all vertices.
===Planar graphs with nonnegative weights===
== Applications ==
Network flows are a fundamental concept in graph theory and operations research, often used to model problems involving the transportation of goods, liquids, or information through a network. A network flow problem typically involves a directed graph where each edge represents a pipe, wire, or road, and each edge has a capacity, which is the maximum amount that can flow through it. The goal is to find a feasible flow that maximizes the flow from a source node to a sink node.

Shortest Path Problems can be used to solve certain network flow problems, particularly when dealing with single-source, single-sink networks. In these scenarios, we can transform the network flow problem into a series of shortest path problems.

=== Transformation Steps ===

# Create a Residual Graph:
#* For each edge (u, v) in the original graph, create two edges in the residual graph:
#** (u, v) with capacity c(u, v)
#** (v, u) with capacity 0
#* The residual graph represents the remaining capacity available in the network.
# Find the Shortest Path:
#* Use a shortest path algorithm (e.g., Dijkstra&#x27;s algorithm, Bellman-Ford algorithm) to find the shortest path from the source node to the sink node in the residual graph.
# Augment the Flow:
#* Find the minimum capacity along the shortest path.
#* Increase the flow on the edges of the shortest path by this minimum capacity.
#* Decrease the capacity of the edges in the forward direction and increase the capacity of the edges in the backward direction.
# Update the Residual Graph:
#* Update the residual graph based on the augmented flow.
# Repeat:
#* Repeat steps 2-4 until no more paths can be found from the source to the sink.

==All-pairs shortest paths==
The all-pairs shortest path problem finds the shortest paths between every pair of vertices , in the graph. The all-pairs shortest paths problem for unweighted directed graphs was introduced by , who observed that it could be solved by a linear number of matrix multiplications that takes a total time of .

===Undirected graph===
===Directed graph===
==Applications==
Shortest path algorithms are applied to automatically find directions between physical locations, such as driving directions on web mapping websites like MapQuest or Google Maps. For this application fast specialized algorithms are available.

If one represents a nondeterministic abstract machine as a graph where vertices describe states and edges describe possible transitions, shortest path algorithms can be used to find an optimal sequence of choices to reach a certain goal state, or to establish lower bounds on the time needed to reach a given state. For example, if vertices represent the states of a puzzle like a Rubik&#x27;s Cube and each directed edge corresponds to a single move or turn, shortest path algorithms can be used to find a solution that uses the minimum possible number of moves.

In a networking or telecommunications mindset, this shortest path problem is sometimes called the min-delay path problem and usually tied with a widest path problem. For example, the algorithm may seek the shortest (min-delay) widest path, or widest shortest (min-delay) path.

A more lighthearted application is the games of &quot;six degrees of separation&quot; that try to find the shortest path in graphs like movie stars appearing in the same film.

Other applications, often studied in operations research, include plant and facility layout, robotics, transportation, and VLSI design.

===Road networks===
A road network can be considered as a graph with positive weights. The nodes represent road junctions and each edge of the graph is associated with a road segment between two junctions. The weight of an edge may correspond to the length of the associated road segment, the time needed to traverse the segment, or the cost of traversing the segment. Using directed edges it is also possible to model one-way streets. Such graphs are special in the sense that some edges are more important than others for long-distance travel (e.g. highways). This property has been formalized using the notion of highway dimension. There are a great number of algorithms that exploit this property and are therefore able to compute the shortest path a lot quicker than would be possible on general graphs.

All of these algorithms work in two phases. In the first phase, the graph is preprocessed without knowing the source or target node. The second phase is the query phase. In this phase, source and target node are known. The idea is that the road network is static, so the preprocessing phase can be done once and used for a large number of queries on the same road network.

The algorithm with the fastest known query time is called hub labeling and is able to compute shortest path on the road networks of Europe or the US in a fraction of a microsecond. Other techniques that have been used are:

* ALT (A* search, landmarks, and triangle inequality)
* Arc flags
* Contraction hierarchies
* Transit node routing
* Reach-based pruning
* Labeling
* Hub labels

==Related problems==
For shortest path problems in computational geometry, see Euclidean shortest path.

The shortest multiple disconnected path is a representation of the primitive path network within the framework of Reptation theory. The widest path problem seeks a path so that the minimum label of any edge is as large as possible.

Other related problems may be classified into the following categories.

===Paths with constraints===
Unlike the shortest path problem, which can be solved in polynomial time in graphs without negative cycles, shortest path problems which include additional constraints on the desired solution path are called Constrained Shortest Path First, and are harder to solve. One example is the constrained shortest path problem, which attempts to minimize the total cost of the path while at the same time maintaining another metric below a given threshold. This makes the problem NP-complete (such problems are not believed to be efficiently solvable for large sets of data, see P = NP problem). Another NP-complete example requires a specific set of vertices to be included in the path, which makes the problem similar to the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP). The TSP is the problem of finding the shortest path that goes through every vertex exactly once, and returns to the start. The problem of finding the longest path in a graph is also NP-complete.

===Partial observability===
The Canadian traveller problem and the stochastic shortest path problem are generalizations where either the graph is not completely known to the mover, changes over time, or where actions (traversals) are probabilistic.

===Strategic shortest paths===

Sometimes, the edges in a graph have personalities: each edge has its own selfish interest. An example is a communication network, in which each edge is a computer that possibly belongs to a different person. Different computers have different transmission speeds, so every edge in the network has a numeric weight equal to the number of milliseconds it takes to transmit a message. Our goal is to send a message between two points in the network in the shortest time possible. If we know the transmission-time of each computer (the weight of each edge), then we can use a standard shortest-paths algorithm. If we do not know the transmission times, then we have to ask each computer to tell us its transmission-time. But, the computers may be selfish: a computer might tell us that its transmission time is very long, so that we will not bother it with our messages. A possible solution to this problem is to use a variant of the VCG mechanism, which gives the computers an incentive to reveal their true weights.

=== Negative cycle detection ===
In some cases, the main goal is not to find the shortest path, but only to detect if the graph contains a negative cycle. Some shortest-paths algorithms can be used for this purpose:

* The Bellman–Ford algorithm can be used to detect a negative cycle in time formula_24.
* Cherkassky and Goldberg survey several other algorithms for negative cycle detection.

==General algebraic framework on semirings: the algebraic path problem==

Many problems can be framed as a form of the shortest path for some suitably substituted notions of addition along a path and taking the minimum. The general approach to these is to consider the two operations to be those of a semiring. Semiring multiplication is done along the path, and the addition is between paths. This general framework is known as the algebraic path problem.

Most of the classic shortest-path algorithms (and new ones) can be formulated as solving linear systems over such algebraic structures.

More recently, an even more general framework for solving these (and much less obviously related problems) has been developed under the banner of valuation algebras.

==Shortest path in stochastic time-dependent networks==
In real-life, a transportation network is usually stochastic and time-dependent. The travel duration on a road segment depends on many factors such as the amount of traffic (origin-destination matrix), road work, weather, accidents and vehicle breakdowns. A more realistic model of such a road network is a stochastic time-dependent (STD) network.

There is no accepted definition of optimal path under uncertainty (that is, in stochastic road networks). It is a controversial subject, despite considerable progress during the past decade. One common definition is a path with the minimum expected travel time. The main advantage of this approach is that it can make use of efficient shortest path algorithms for deterministic networks. However, the resulting optimal path may not be reliable, because this approach fails to address travel time variability.

To tackle this issue, some researchers use travel duration distribution instead of its expected value. So, they find the probability distribution of total travel duration using different optimization methods such as dynamic programming and Dijkstra&#x27;s algorithm . These methods use stochastic optimization, specifically stochastic dynamic programming to find the shortest path in networks with probabilistic arc length. The terms &quot;travel time reliability&quot; and &quot;travel time variability&quot; are used as opposites in the transportation research literature: the higher the variability, the lower the reliability of predictions.

To account for variability, researchers have suggested two alternative definitions for an optimal path under uncertainty. The &quot;most reliable path&quot; is one that maximizes the probability of arriving on time given a travel time budget. An &quot;α-reliable path&quot; is one that minimizes the travel time budget required to arrive on time with a given probability.

==See also==
* Bidirectional search, an algorithm that finds the shortest path between two vertices on a directed graph
* Euclidean shortest path
* Flow network
* K shortest path routing
* Min-plus matrix multiplication
* Pathfinding
* Shortest Path Bridging
* Shortest path tree
* TRILL (TRansparent Interconnection of Lots of Links)

==References==

===Notes===
===Bibliography===
*
*
*
*
* 
* 
*
* 
*
* 
*
* Attributes Dijkstra&#x27;s algorithm to Minty (&quot;private communication&quot;) on p. 225.
* 
*
*


==Further reading==
* 
* DTIC AD-661265.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="3" end="15" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058754" start="21" end="42" title="Shortest path problem" label="shortest path problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415372" start="71" end="75" title="path (graph theory)" label="path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304193" start="88" end="96" title="vertex (graph theory)" label="vertices"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="113" end="118" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="144" end="151" title="Glossary of graph theory terms#weighted graph" label="weights"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="554" end="560" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graphs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="569" end="579" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)#Undirected graph" label="undirected"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="581" end="589" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)#Directed graph" label="directed"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104046" start="594" end="599" title="Mixed graph" label="mixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415372" start="870" end="874" title="Path (graph theory)" label="path"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="903" end="911" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1312" end="1323" title="Function (mathematics)#Real function" label="real-valued"/>
<link wikidata="Q8548" start="2682" end="2707" title="Dijkstra&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Dijkstra&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q816022" start="2794" end="2816" title="Bellman–Ford algorithm" label="Bellman–Ford algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q277680" start="2885" end="2904" title="A* search algorithm" label="A* search algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047576" start="2992" end="3016" title="Floyd–Warshall algorithm" label="Floyd–Warshall algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345824" start="3052" end="3076" title="Johnson&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Johnson&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085841" start="3151" end="3163" title="sparse graph" label="sparse graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q83886" start="3168" end="3185" title="Viterbi algorithm" label="Viterbi algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3485" end="3504" title="Topological sorting#Application to shortest path finding" label="topological sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q649186" start="6374" end="6385" title="web mapping" label="web mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580938" start="6400" end="6408" title="MapQuest" label="MapQuest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12013" start="6412" end="6423" title="Google Maps" label="Google Maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q787114" start="6527" end="6543" title="abstract machine" label="abstract machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q47043" start="6871" end="6888" title="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Cube" label="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="7060" end="7070" title="Computer network" label="networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068715" start="7074" end="7092" title="Telecommunications network" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998708" start="7200" end="7219" title="widest path problem" label="widest path problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855754" start="7387" end="7412" title="six degrees of separation" label="six degrees of separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q194292" start="7547" end="7566" title="operations research" label="operations research"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="7603" end="7611" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="7613" end="7627" title="transportation" label="transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q876049" start="7633" end="7637" title="Very-large-scale integration" label="VLSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q277680" start="9062" end="9071" title="A* search" label="A* search"/>
<link wikidata="Q208216" start="9088" end="9107" title="triangle inequality" label="triangle inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165688" start="9123" end="9146" title="Contraction hierarchies" label="Contraction hierarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q85810474" start="9149" end="9169" title="Transit node routing" label="Transit node routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q39498739" start="9205" end="9215" title="Hub labels" label="Hub labels"/>
<link wikidata="Q874709" start="9268" end="9290" title="computational geometry" label="computational geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406126" start="9296" end="9319" title="Euclidean shortest path" label="Euclidean shortest path"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314336" start="9436" end="9452" title="Reptation theory" label="Reptation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998708" start="9458" end="9477" title="widest path problem" label="widest path problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128278" start="9865" end="9896" title="Constrained Shortest Path First" label="Constrained Shortest Path First"/>
<link wikidata="Q215206" start="10129" end="10140" title="NP-complete" label="NP-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q746242" start="10228" end="10242" title="P = NP problem" label="P = NP problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q215206" start="10253" end="10264" title="NP-complete" label="NP-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q322212" start="10376" end="10402" title="Traveling Salesman Problem" label="Traveling Salesman Problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916352" start="10548" end="10572" title="Longest path problem" label="finding the longest path"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030897" start="10638" end="10664" title="Canadian traveller problem" label="Canadian traveller problem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11802" end="11832" title="Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism#quickest paths" label="a variant of the VCG mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q816022" start="12127" end="12149" title="Bellman–Ford algorithm" label="Bellman–Ford algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333055" start="12599" end="12607" title="semiring" label="semiring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058754" start="12731" end="12753" title="algebraic path problem" label="algebraic path problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030963" start="13039" end="13056" title="valuation algebra" label="valuation algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q380679" start="14191" end="14210" title="dynamic programming" label="dynamic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8548" start="14215" end="14240" title="Dijkstra&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Dijkstra&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747770" start="14261" end="14284" title="stochastic optimization" label="stochastic optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q59750" start="15009" end="15029" title="Bidirectional search" label="Bidirectional search"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406126" start="15116" end="15139" title="Euclidean shortest path" label="Euclidean shortest path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412924" start="15142" end="15154" title="Flow network" label="Flow network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343044" start="15157" end="15180" title="K shortest path routing" label="K shortest path routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936134" start="15183" end="15213" title="Min-plus matrix multiplication" label="Min-plus matrix multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969601" start="15216" end="15227" title="Pathfinding" label="Pathfinding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653458" start="15230" end="15252" title="Shortest Path Bridging" label="Shortest Path Bridging"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919350" start="15255" end="15273" title="Shortest path tree" label="Shortest path tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7671354" start="15276" end="15281" title="TRILL" label="TRILL"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41986" wikidata="Q302619" url="?curid=41986" title="Von Neumann machine">
<text>Von Neumann machine may refer to:

* Von Neumann architecture, a conceptual model of nearly all computer architecture
* IAS machine, a computer designed in the 1940s based on von Neumann&#x27;s design
* Self-replicating machine, a class of machines that can replicate themselves
** Universal constructor (disambiguation)
** Von Neumann probes, hypothetical space probes capable of self-replication
** Nanorobots, capable of self-replication
* The Von Neumann cellular automaton</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189088" start="37" end="61" title="Von Neumann architecture" label="Von Neumann architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535967" start="120" end="131" title="IAS machine" label="IAS machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q691243" start="203" end="227" title="Self-replicating machine" label="Self-replicating machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894120" start="282" end="320" title="Universal constructor (disambiguation)" label="Universal constructor (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q898178" start="324" end="341" title="Von Neumann probe" label="Von Neumann probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q587024" start="401" end="411" title="Nanorobots" label="Nanorobots"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056286" start="447" end="477" title="Von Neumann cellular automaton" label="Von Neumann cellular automaton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41987" wikidata="Q156491" url="?curid=41987" title="Bonnie Tyler">
<text>Gaynor Sullivan (née Hopkins; born 8 June 1951), known professionally as Bonnie Tyler, is a Welsh singer. Known for her distinctive husky voice, Tyler came to prominence with the release of her 1977 album &quot;The World Starts Tonight&quot; and its singles &quot;Lost in France&quot; and &quot;More Than a Lover&quot;. Her 1977 single &quot;It&#x27;s a Heartache&quot; reached number four on the UK Singles Chart, and number three on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100.

In the 1980s, Tyler ventured into rock music with songwriter and producer Jim Steinman. He wrote Tyler&#x27;s biggest hit &quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot;, the lead single from her 1983 UK chart-topping album &quot;Faster Than the Speed of Night&quot;. Steinman also wrote Tyler&#x27;s other major 1980s hit &quot;Holding Out for a Hero&quot;. She had success in mainland Europe during the 1990s with Dieter Bohlen, who wrote and produced her hit &quot;Bitterblue&quot;. In 2003, Tyler re-recorded &quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot; with singer Kareen Antonn. Their bilingual duet, titled &quot;Si demain... (Turn Around)&quot;, topped the French charts.

&quot;Rocks and Honey&quot; was released in 2013 and features the single &quot;Believe in Me&quot;, which she performed representing the United Kingdom at the Eurovision Song Contest 2013 in Malmö, Sweden. After reuniting with the producer David Mackay, she released &quot;Between the Earth and the Stars&quot; (2019) and &quot;The Best Is Yet to Come&quot; (2021).

Her work has earned her three Grammy Award nominations and three Brit Award nominations (including twice for British Female Solo Artist), among other accolades. In 2022, she was awarded an MBE in the Queen&#x27;s Birthday Honours for services to music.

==Early life==
Tyler was born Gaynor Hopkins on 8 June 1951 in Skewen, Neath, Wales. Her father, Glyndŵr Hopkins, was a coal miner and serviceman in the Second World War, and her mother, Elsie Hopkins (née Lewis), was a former homemaker. She grew up in a four-bedroom council house with three sisters and two brothers. Her siblings had varied music tastes, exposing her to artists such as Elvis Presley, Frank Sinatra and the Beatles. Hopkins attended Rhydhir Comprehensive School in Neath, Wales. She left school, age 16, with no qualifications and began working in a grocery shop. Hopkins and her family were deeply religious Protestants. Her first public performance took place in a chapel as a child, singing the Anglican hymn &quot;All Things Bright and Beautiful&quot;. 

In April 1969, Hopkins was entered into a local talent competition by her aunt, and she came second to an accordionist. Inspired to pursue a career in singing, Hopkins found work as a backing singer for Bobby Wayne &amp; the Dixies before forming her own band, Imagination. It was around this time that she changed her name to Sherene Davis, to avoid being confused with Welsh folk singer Mary Hopkin.

==Career==
=== 1975–1978: &quot;The World Starts Tonight&quot; and &quot;Natural Force&quot; ===
In 1975, Davis was spotted singing with her band in the Townsman Club, Swansea, by talent scout Roger Bell, who invited her to London to record a demo track. After many months had passed, she received a phone call from RCA Records, offering her a recording contract. They also recommended that she change her name again. After compiling a list of surnames and first names from a newspaper, Davis found a new name in &quot;Bonnie Tyler&quot;.

Ronnie Scott and Steve Wolfe became her managers, songwriters and producers. &quot;My! My! Honeycomb&quot; was released as her debut single in April 1976, and failed to impact any charts worldwide. In September 1976, as part of a promotional campaign for Tyler&#x27;s subsequent single release, &quot;Lost in France&quot;, RCA Records allocated £4,000 for a strategic promotional initiative, which involved sending a group of 30 music journalists and radio DJs to Le Touquet, France, where they met Tyler over a four-course meal. &quot;Lost in France&quot; peaked at no. 9 in the UK and led to Tyler&#x27;s first appearance on &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;. &quot;More Than a Lover&quot; followed in January 1977. Due to perceived sexual nature of the song&#x27;s lyrics, it was banned from a new British children&#x27;s TV series, &quot;Get It Together&quot;. Though surprised by the decision, Tyler stated she was grateful for the &quot;extra publicity&quot;. It peaked at no. 27 in the UK.

Tyler&#x27;s debut album, &quot;The World Starts Tonight&quot;, was released in February 1977. To promote the album, Tyler embarked on her first UK tour as a guest artist with Gene Pitney. The album failed to chart in the UK, but reached no. 2 in Sweden. In the spring of 1977, Tyler underwent an operation to remove vocal cord nodules and was advised by her doctor to rest her voice for six weeks. Tyler screamed in frustration one day, resulting in a permanent raspy tone.

In July 1977, Tyler released her fourth single, &quot;Heaven&quot;. It peaked at no. 24 in Germany. Tyler ascribed the underwhelming performance of the single in other regions to the passing of Elvis Presley in August 1977. This event resulted in RCA redirecting its focus towards reissuing Presley&#x27;s extensive back catalogue. &quot;It&#x27;s a Heartache&quot; followed in November 1977 and became one of Tyler&#x27;s most-successful singles, peaking at no. 4 in the UK and no. 3 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. &quot;Here Am I&quot; was released in April 1978, and it peaked at no. 4 in Norway. David Mackay parted ways with Ronnie Scott and Steve Wolfe in 1978, and Gordon Mills briefly took over as Tyler&#x27;s manager. Mills organised Tyler&#x27;s first tour of the United States in July 1978, including several nights at the Greek Theatre in Los Angeles, supporting Tom Jones.

Tyler&#x27;s second studio album, &quot;Natural Force&quot;, was released in May 1978. It was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), with sales of over half a million copies.

===1979–1981: &quot;Diamond Cut&quot; and &quot;Goodbye to the Island&quot;===
Ronnie Scott and Steve Wolfe produced Tyler&#x27;s third album, &quot;Diamond Cut&quot;, with Robin Geoffrey Cable. Released in February 1979, it was a Top 20 record in Finland, Norway and Sweden, but only reached 145 in the US. Tyler felt that RCA was pushing her to record more country-oriented music, which frustrated her. The album yielded one major hit, &quot;My Guns Are Loaded&quot;, which peaked at no. 10 on the Canadian AC chart.

In the summer of 1979, Tyler had another UK Top 40 hit with &quot;(The World Is Full of) Married Men&quot;. She recorded it for a film adaptation of Jackie Collins&#x27; novel of the same name. Tyler performs the song during the film&#x27;s closing titles.

In November 1979, Tyler represented the United Kingdom at the Yamaha World Popular Song Festival in Japan. She won the Grand Prix International award for her performance of &quot;Sitting on the Edge of the Ocean&quot;, written by Ronnie Scott and Steve Wolfe. They co-produced Tyler&#x27;s fourth album, &quot;Goodbye to the Island&quot;, with Hugh Murphy. Released in 1981, it only charted in Norway. RCA invited Tyler to extend her contract for another five years, but she declined, expressing disillusionment with her artistic image and noting a scarcity of performance opportunities in the aftermath of several unsuccessful singles.

===1982–1989: The CBS Years===

After her contract with RCA expired, Tyler signed with CBS/Columbia. A&amp;R man Muff Winwood asked Tyler to scout a new producer. She considered Phil Collins, Jeff Lynne and Alan Tarney, but Jim Steinman was her first choice. &quot;I&#x27;m a huge fan of his records, especially his solo album, and when my manager and I were discussing my comeback we both agreed that I had to sound the best or nobody would take me seriously.&quot; Steinman initially declined, but reconsidered after Tyler sent him demos of the rock material she was hoping to record.

After their initial meeting, Tyler returned to Steinman&#x27;s apartment in New York a few weeks later where she performed &quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot; with Rory Dodd. Steinman described the song as &quot;a Wagnerian-like onslaught of sound and emotion&quot;, and a &quot;showpiece&quot; for Tyler&#x27;s voice. Her fifth album was recorded at the Power Station in New York, with members of the E Street Band, Rick Derringer on guitar, Rory Dodd and Eric Troyer on backing vocals, and Steinman as producer.

&quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot; was released in the UK on 11 February 1983. It became one of the best-selling singles of all time with over six million units sold. Her fifth studio album, &quot;Faster Than the Speed of Night&quot;, debuted at no. 1 on the UK Albums Chart and reached no. 3 on the US &quot;Cashbox&quot; chart and no. 4 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, selling over one million copies in the United States. Tyler&#x27;s commercial success led to several award nominations, including two Grammys, two AMAs and a BRIT Award. Tyler was named Best Recording Artist at the Variety Club of Great Britain Awards, and she received a Goldene Europa.

Tyler also found success through some of her soundtrack recordings in the mid-80s. In 1984, she released &quot;Holding Out for a Hero&quot; from the &quot;Footloose&quot; soundtrack. In the following year, her recording of &quot;Here She Comes&quot; for Giorgio Moroder&#x27;s restoration of the 1927 film &quot;Metropolis&quot; earned Tyler a Grammy nomination for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance. Tyler also declined an offer to record the theme for the James Bond spin-off &quot;Never Say Never Again&quot;.

In 1986, Tyler released her sixth studio album, &quot;Secret Dreams and Forbidden Fire&quot;. In another collaboration with Jim Steinman, the album also featured songs written by Desmond Child and Bryan Adams and a cover of &quot;Band of Gold&quot; by Freda Payne. &quot;If You Were a Woman (And I Was a Man)&quot; became the album&#x27;s most successful single, selling over 250,000 units in France. The music video, directed by Steinman and Stuart Orme, received six nominations at the &quot;Billboard&quot; Video Music Conference.

In 1987, Tyler collaborated with Mike Oldfield on the title track to his album &quot;Islands&quot;. In the following year, Tyler played Polly Garter in George Martin&#x27;s album &quot;Under Milk Wood&quot;, a radio drama by Dylan Thomas. The music was composed by Elton John, and features vocal contributions from Tom Jones, Anthony Hopkins and Mary Hopkin.

Tyler asked Desmond Child to produce her seventh album, &quot;Hide Your Heart&quot;, which came out on 9 May 1988. The album featured collaborations with Michael Bolton, Albert Hammond and Diane Warren. The album&#x27;s singles, &quot;Hide Your Heart&quot;, &quot;Save Up All Your Tears&quot; and &quot;The Best&quot; became major hits for other artists.

===1990–2000: Success in continental Europe===

In 1990, Tyler signed to Hansa/BMG Ariola and began working with various producers for her eighth studio album. She collaborated with Dieter Bohlen, Giorgio Moroder, Nik Kershaw and Roy Bittan. &quot;We used so many producers in efforts to capture many different moods for many different territories, because we believed in the international crossover potential of Tyler,&quot; stated David Brunner, A&amp;R manager for Hansa.

&quot;Bitterblue&quot; was released on 11 November 1991. In a retrospective review, AllMusic&#x27;s Tomas Mureika noted that the album marked a &quot;much more mainstream and less bombastic&quot; direction in Tyler&#x27;s career. The title track was released a month ahead of the album and became a top 40 hit in several European countries. It was named &#x27;Catchy Song of the Year&#x27; at the RSH-Gold Awards. In the following year, &quot;Bitterblue&quot; was released as a promotional single in the United States where it was met with criticism. &quot;Billboard&quot; wrote that &quot;bombastic production, with a rush of bagpipes and a choir of chirping children at the forefront, overpower Tyler&#x27;s distinctive raspy voice.&quot;

While &quot;Bitterblue&quot; was never released in the UK or US, the album was a commercial success in mainland Europe. It topped the charts in Austria and Norway, achieving 4× Platinum status in the latter country with eleven weeks at no. 1.

Tyler&#x27;s subsequent albums, &quot;Angel Heart&quot; (1992) and &quot;Silhouette in Red&quot; (1993), were also successful in mainland Europe. Both albums featured a greater share of songs written and produced by Dieter Bohlen. Tyler was named Best International Singer at the Goldene Europa Awards in 1993, and Best Pop/Rock Singer at the ECHO Awards in 1994.

In 1995, Tyler moved to EastWest Records and released &quot;Free Spirit&quot;. The album featured collaborations with a variety of producers including Humberto Gatica, David Foster and Jim Steinman. The lead single, a cover of Air Supply&#x27;s &quot;Making Love (Out of Nothing At All)&quot;, reached no. 45 on the UK Singles Chart in January 1996. The album was re-released in March 1996 featuring a cover of &quot;Limelight&quot; by the Alan Parsons Project. The track was used as a theme for the German team at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Georgia.

Tyler&#x27;s twelfth studio album, &quot;All in One Voice&quot;, was released in 1998. Much of the album was recorded with Jimmy Smyth in Dublin, and Harold Faltermeyer in Hamburg.

In 1998, Tyler appeared on Rick Wakeman&#x27;s orchestral album &quot;Return to the Centre of the Earth&quot; on the song &quot;Is Anybody There?&quot;. The album also included narration from &quot;Star Trek&quot; actor Patrick Stewart and vocals from Ozzy Osbourne, Katrina Leskanich and Justin Hayward.

===2001–2003: &quot;Greatest Hits&quot; and &quot;Heart Strings&quot;===
On 14 September 2001, Tyler released &quot;Greatest Hits&quot;, a compilation album containing seventeen tracks. The album entered the UK Albums Chart at number 18, and was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) for sales of over 60,000 units. &quot;Greatest Hits&quot; reached the Top 10 in a further five European countries.

In 2002, Tyler began working on her thirteenth studio album, &quot;Heart Strings&quot;. EMI approached her with the idea of recording a cover album with an orchestra and Tyler&#x27;s band. She selected thirteen songs by artists such as U2, The Beatles and Bruce Springsteen. The songs were arranged by composers Nick Ingman and Karl Jenkins, and performed by the City of Prague Philharmonic Orchestra.

&quot;Heart Strings&quot; was released on 18 March 2003, and was followed by a tour in Germany. The album charted in Europe, reaching the Top 50 in five countries.

===2004–2005: Success in France===
In 2003, vocalist Kareen Antonn invited Tyler to re-record &quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot; as a bilingual duet in French and English. The new version was re-titled &quot;Si demain... (Turn Around)&quot; and released in December 2003. It went to no. 1 in Belgium and France, where it held the top position for ten weeks, selling over 500,000 units. The success of the single was considered to be Tyler&#x27;s comeback in France, and received overwhelmingly positive reviews from music critics.

Tyler&#x27;s fourteenth studio album &quot;Simply Believe&quot; was released in April 2004. It featured seven new songs and various re-recordings and covers. Tyler and Antonn recorded &quot;Si tout s&#x27;arrête (It&#x27;s a Heartache)&quot; as a second bilingual duet. It peaked at number 12 in France. Tyler co-wrote the title track of the album, and two additional songs, with producer Jean Lahcene. &quot;Simply Believe&quot; spent 23 weeks on the French Album Charts and peaked at number 18.

Tyler released her fifteenth studio album &quot;Wings&quot; in the spring of 2005. It was recorded in Paris, and featured twelve new songs, two of which were also recorded in French, and new versions of &quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot; and &quot;It&#x27;s a Heartache&quot;. Tyler promoted the album with an extensive tour of Europe, including a televised performance at the Sopot International Song Festival in Poland, and recorded concerts at La Cigale in Paris and at the Fiestas del Pilar in Zaragoza, Spain. Footage from all three concerts appeared on Tyler&#x27;s live DVD &quot;Bonnie on Tour&quot; which was released in 2006. &quot;Wings&quot; was issued in the UK in 2006 under the title &quot;Celebrate&quot;. Tyler also received the Lifetime Achievement Steiger Award in 2005.

===2006–2011: &quot;From the Heart: Greatest Hits&quot; and &quot;Best of 3 CD&quot;===
In 2006, Tyler made her first appearance on US television in years when she performed &quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot; with actress Lucy Lawless on &quot;Celebrity Duets&quot;. In the following year she recorded a new version of &quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot; with punk band BabyPinkStar and released &quot;From the Heart: Greatest Hits&quot;, which reached number 2 in Ireland and number 31 in the UK.

In April 2009, Tyler joined Welsh male voice choir Only Men Aloud! on their UK tour to perform &quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot;. They recorded the song for their second studio album &quot;Band of Brothers&quot;, which was released in October. In the same year, she also recorded the title song for Mal Pope&#x27;s new musical &quot;Cappuccino Girls&quot;, and performed the song at the opening night in Swansea&#x27;s Grand Theatre. Tyler also made a cameo on &quot;Hollyoaks Later&quot; to sing &quot;Holding Out for a Hero&quot; in a dream sequence with Carmel McQueen (Gemma Merna).

In 2010, Tyler appeared in a television advertisement for MasterCard singing a parody of &quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot;. She released &quot;Something Going On&quot; with Country singer Wayne Warner and a new version of &quot;Making Love (Out of Nothing At All)&quot; with Matt Pétrin in July and August respectively. In October, she toured with Robin Gibb in Australia and New Zealand.

In 2011, Tyler appeared on Swedish TV show &quot;Kvällen är din&quot; (&quot;The Evening Is Yours&quot; in English), singing &quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot; with Swedish singer Niklas Paulström. Tyler also performed &quot;It&#x27;s a Heartache&quot;. She also made a guest appearance in the music video &quot;Newport (Ymerodraeth State of Mind)&quot;, a parody of the Jay-Z and Alicia Keys song &quot;Empire State of Mind&quot; for the BBC&#x27;s Comic Relief charity. Also in 2011, Tyler won an award at the BMI London Awards for &quot;It&#x27;s a Heartache&quot; gaining over three million airplays on US television and radio since it was first recorded in 1977. She also appeared on the Ukrainian version of &quot;X Factor&quot; as one of the three British guests, alongside Kylie Minogue and Cher Lloyd. She performed &quot;It&#x27;s a Heartache&quot;, &quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot; and &quot;Holding Out for a Hero&quot;. In December 2011, a portrait of Tyler by Rolf Harris, owned by Cathy Sims, was valued at £50,000 on BBC&#x27;s &quot;Antiques Roadshow&quot;.

In September 2011, Tyler released a new compilation titled &quot;Best of 3 CD&quot;, which charted at number 36 in France. The album featured a cover of &quot;Eternal Flame&quot; by The Bangles, which was recorded as a duet with Laura Zen in French and English and released as a single.

===2012–2018: &quot;Rocks and Honey&quot; and the Eurovision Song Contest===
In early 2012, Tyler began working on her sixteenth album, &quot;Rocks and Honey&quot;. She travelled to Nashville, Tennessee in search of material for the album. It was recorded at the Blackbird Studios in Nashville, and produced by David Huff. Tyler sent the album to the BBC ahead of its release for feedback. After hearing the third track &quot;Believe in Me&quot;, they asked Tyler to represent the United Kingdom with the song at the Eurovision Song Contest 2013. Although she was initially reluctant, Tyler accepted, describing Eurovision as &quot;great publicity for my album&quot;.

Tyler was announced as the United Kingdom&#x27;s entrant on 7 March 2013, and was met with a mixed reaction. &quot;Believe in Me&quot; was released on 13 March, and peaked at number 93 in the United Kingdom. As a member of the &quot;Big Five&quot;, the United Kingdom automatically qualified to the Eurovision Grand Final on 18 May. Tyler finished in 19th place with 23 points. Reacting to the results, Tyler stated, &quot;I did the best that I could do with a great song&quot;, adding, &quot;I&#x27;m so glad and so happy that I did it because it was an incredible experience. It was like the Grammy awards all over again.&quot;

Following the Eurovision Song Contest, Tyler became the first representative for the United Kingdom to receive a Eurovision Song Contest Radio Award. She received the accolades for Best Song and Best Female Singer.

&quot;Rocks and Honey&quot; was released on 6 May 2013 in the United Kingdom, and peaked at number 52 on the UK Albums Chart. The album was titled in reference to the contrast between Tyler and Vince Gill&#x27;s voice on their duet &quot;What You Need from Me&quot;, which was likened to &quot;rocks and honey&quot;. &quot;This Is Gonna Hurt&quot; and &quot;Love Is the Knife&quot; were released as the second and third singles in August and September 2013 respectively, though both songs failed to chart.

In 2014, Tyler released &quot;Miserere&quot; on Rhydian Roberts&#x27;s album &quot;One Day like This&quot;, and &quot;Fortune&quot; on Spike&#x27;s album &quot;100% Pure Frankie Miller&quot;.

In June 2015, Tyler appeared on &quot;Die schönsten Disney Songs aller Zeiten&quot;, a one-off televised celebration of popular Disney songs in Germany. She performed &quot;Circle of Life&quot; from &quot;The Lion King&quot;. In September 2015, Tyler performed &quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot; and &quot;Holding Out for a Hero&quot; on &quot;Best Time Ever&quot; with Neil Patrick Harris, Nicole Scherzinger and Alec Baldwin.

In 2016, Tyler featured on Frankie Miller&#x27;s album &quot;Double Take&quot;. In March 2017, Tyler released a new single titled &quot;Love&#x27;s Holding On&quot; with German metal band Axel Rudi Pell.

In August 2017, Tyler performed &quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot; aboard the MS Oasis of the Seas with American dance-rock band DNCE to mark the solar eclipse of 21 August 2017. The song received an increase of 31,000 online downloads, which led to a placement of number 13 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Digital Songs chart. In November, she released a new compilation titled &quot;Remixes and Rarities&quot;. The album debuted numerous tracks from her back catalogue that had not previously been released on CD.

In March 2018, Tyler embarked on a 22-date tour of Germany and Austria to celebrate the 40th anniversary of &quot;It&#x27;s a Heartache&quot;, with Sharron Levy as support.

===2019–present: Recent albums===
In February 2019, Tyler released &quot;Hold On&quot; as the lead single from her seventeenth studio album, &quot;Between the Earth and the Stars&quot;. The album followed in March 2019 and peaked at no. 34 on the UK Albums Chart. It was recorded with David Mackay, who produced Tyler&#x27;s first two albums in the 1970s. &quot;Between the Earth and the Stars&quot; features three duets with Rod Stewart, Francis Rossi and Cliff Richard. Tyler embarked on a 23-date tour of Europe to support the album in April 2019, culminating with an appearance at BBC Proms in the Park in Hyde Park, London, and a headline concert at the London Palladium in September. Her show at L&#x27;Olympia in Paris was filmed and released through Canal+.

In August 2019, Cherry Red Records released a box set compiling Tyler&#x27;s first four studio albums. &quot;Classic Pop&quot; magazine described &quot;The RCA Years&quot; as &quot;a thoroughly-researched 4CD-set&quot;. In November 2019, Tyler made a guest appearance at Ben Zucker&#x27;s concert at the Mercedes-Benz Arena, Berlin to sing &quot;It&#x27;s a Heartache&quot;. Their duet features on his live album, &quot;Wer Sagt das?! Zugabe!&quot;, released in May 2020.

In December 2019, Tyler released a new version of her 2005 song &quot;Streets of Stone&quot; for The World&#x27;s Big Sleep Out, an international homeless charity event. On 14 December 2019, she performed at the Vatican&#x27;s annual &quot;Concerto di Natale&quot; in the presence of Pope Francis.

In May 2020, Tyler released &quot;Through Thick and Thin (I&#x27;ll Stand by You)&quot; with Lorraine Crosby as a charity single in aid of the Teenage Cancer Trust. It reached no. 64 on the UK Downloads Chart. Her latest studio album, &quot;The Best Is Yet to Come&quot;, followed in February 2021.

On 2 September 2022, Tyler and Mike Batt released their duet &quot;Into the Sunset&quot; as a digital single. The track was originally released on the soundtrack to &quot;The Dreamstone&quot; in 1990. In October 2022, Tyler performed &quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot; live with the cast of &quot;Tanz der Vampire&quot; in Stuttgart to mark the musical&#x27;s 25th anniversary.

In November 2022, Tyler embarked on her first ever tour of South America, with eight dates in Brazil, and one date in Uruguay. Speaking with &quot;El País&quot;, Tyler stated that she hopes to release another studio album in 2023. Her memoir, &quot;Straight from the Heart&quot;, was published by Coronet Books on 28 September 2023.

On 19 April 2024, Tyler released her third live album, &quot;In Berlin&quot;. It was recorded at the Admiralspalast in Berlin during her Between the Earth and the Stars Live Tour on 8 May 2019. The album was preceded by its first single, &quot;Faster Than the Speed of Night&quot;, on 22 March 2024.

In September 2024, Tyler performed at the Plein Hotel for an event hosted by Philipp Plein as part of Milan Fashion Week. On 31 December 2024, Tyler will perform a brand new single, titled &quot;Yes I Can&quot;, on &quot;Silvester-Schlagerbooom 2025&quot;.

==Artistry==
===Influences===
Born into a musical family, Tyler grew up listening to a wide range of musical genres. One of Tyler&#x27;s earliest musical memories was listening to her mother singing opera music in the family home. Tyler attended church until she was sixteen years old. Her first ever performance was singing &quot;All Things Bright and Beautiful&quot; in church. She was also exposed to the music of Elvis Presley, Frank Sinatra, The Beatles and other 1960s bands due to her siblings&#x27; musical tastes. Frankie Miller was the first live act that Tyler saw, and she later recorded duets with him.

Tyler&#x27;s two biggest influences from a young age were Janis Joplin and Tina Turner. She cites &quot;River Deep – Mountain High&quot; as being her all-time favourite song. Other artists that influenced Tyler in her youth include Aretha Franklin, Wilson Pickett, Meat Loaf, Joe Cocker, Dusty Springfield and Tommy Steele. She has also expressed admiration for contemporary artists such as Guns N&#x27; Roses, Anastacia, Toni Braxton, Duffy, and Eminem. She has also expressed interest in collaborating with Adele, whom she describes as &quot;a great song writer, singer and performer.&quot;

===Vocal style===
Tyler&#x27;s music contains elements of country, rock, pop, blues and Celtic. Her voice has been likened to Rod Stewart and Kim Carnes as a result of her vocal cord nodule operation in the 1970s, sometimes even being referred to as &quot;the female Rod Stewart&quot;, and, after her collaborations with Jim Steinman, &quot;the female Meat Loaf&quot;. Soon after her operation, when recording her second album, &quot;Natural Force&quot;, the studio band complimented Tyler&#x27;s changed voice. Reviewers from AllMusic have described Tyler&#x27;s voice as &quot;inimitable&quot;, &quot;wonderfully gritty&quot;, and an &quot;effective instrument&quot; for drawing notice to her first managers, Ronnie Scott and Steve Wolfe.

In a review of &quot;Rocks and Honey&quot;, &quot;OMH Media&quot; described Tyler&#x27;s vocals as being &quot;good for only one thing and that&#x27;s belting out gravelly vocals,&quot; suggesting that she sounds like Johnny Cash in his later years when she &quot;tries to restrain [her voice].&quot; With reference to her modern voice, &quot;The Yorkshire Times&quot; wrote that Tyler&#x27;s vocals have &quot;still got what it takes to make you tingle.&quot; Jim Steinman told &quot;People&quot; magazine that he wrote &quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot; as a &quot;showpiece for [Tyler&#x27;s] voice.&quot; AllMusic said that Tyler&#x27;s voice &quot;produced the perfect type of &#x27;desperate lovelorn&#x27; effect to suit the romantic lyrics.&quot;

=== Songwriting ===
Though songwriting has never been a significant part of Tyler&#x27;s career, she has co-written a handful of B-Sides and other tracks. &quot;Gonna Get Better&quot;, a B-Side to the 1980 Japanese single &quot;Sayonara Tokyo&quot;, was written with her brother, Paul Hopkins.

In 2001, Tyler co-wrote four songs with Gary Pickford-Hopkins on his &quot;GPH&quot; album, and duetted with him on the track &quot;Loving You Means Leaving You&quot;. Tyler was also involved in writing several tracks for her 2005 album &quot;Wings&quot;, including its singles &quot;Louise&quot; and &quot;Celebrate&quot;.

==Philanthropy==
Tyler has featured in three charity supergroups. In 1986, she joined the Anti-Heroin Project to record &quot;It&#x27;s a Live-In World&quot;. The proceeds were donated to the Phoenix House Charities who funded heroin recovery centres in the UK.
In the following year, Tyler featured as a chorus vocalist in the British-American charity group Ferry Aid, who released a cover of &quot;Let It Be&quot; by the Beatles. Proceeds were donated to a charity supporting the victims of the Zeebrugge Disaster. The single sold over 500,000 copies in the UK where it topped the charts for three weeks. In 1990, Tyler joined Rock Against Repatriation to record a cover of &quot;Sailing&quot;. It was a protest song in response to the repatriation of Vietnamese boat people who fled to Hong Kong. The single peaked at no. 89 on the UK Singles Chart.

Since the 1990s, Tyler has been a patron of the Bobath Children&#x27;s Therapy Centre in Cardiff, Wales, who provide care for children with cerebral palsy. In 2013, she campaigned for Bobath to be recognised at the Pride of Britain Awards. Tyler is also an ambassador for the Noah&#x27;s Ark Children&#x27;s Hospital for Wales. In January 2005, Tyler performed at the Rock for Asia benefit concert in Ingolstadt, Germany, raising funds for the victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami. The event was recorded and released on DVD. In 2007, Tyler recorded &quot;I Don&#x27;t Know How to Love Him&quot; for &quot;Over the Rainbow&quot;, a charity album conceptualised by Anneka Rice on the television show &quot;Challenge Anneka&quot;. The album reached no. 1 on the UK Compilation Chart, with proceeds going to the Association of Children&#x27;s Hospices.

On 1 November 2009, Tyler performed as the headline act at the Pinktober Women in Rock concert at the Royal Albert Hall in London. In the following year, she co-headlined at a benefit concert alongside Leo Sayer raising funds for Variety, the Children&#x27;s Charity, in New Zealand. In 2012, Tyler was named patron of the AAG animal charity association in Guia, Portugal. Tyler re-recorded &quot;Holding Out for a Hero&quot; for the 2013 &quot;Children in Need&quot; appeal. In 2014, she endorsed the BUAV&#x27;s campaign to make it mandatory for animals in testing laboratories to be re-homed. In 2020, Tyler contributed to a cover of &quot;Don&#x27;t Answer Me&quot; by the Alan Parsons Project to raise funds for Bergamo, an Italian city that was deeply impacted by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.

==Personal life==
In July 1973, Tyler married Robert Sullivan. He is a property developer and 1972 Olympic judo competitor. They have no children; Tyler miscarried when she was aged 39. Tyler and her family are Protestant.

Since 1988, Tyler and her husband have owned a five-bedroom home in Albufeira, Portugal in the Algarve. Tyler had recorded one of her albums there in the late 1970s, and the couple spend much of the year there. In 2005, Tyler was filmed in the Algarve for the Polish entertainment TV show &quot;Zacisze gwiazd&quot;, which explores the houses of actors and musicians.

Tyler and Sullivan have invested in property. As of a 1999 interview, they owned farmland in Portugal and New Zealand, 22 houses in Berkshire and London, and 65 stables offering horse boarding services. In a 2013 interview, Tyler stated that the farm in New Zealand had been converted to a dairy farm twelve years after they purchased the land. In the same interview, she stated that she and Sullivan also own a quarry.

==Discography==
===Studio albums===

*&quot;The World Starts Tonight&quot; (1977)
*&quot;Natural Force&quot; (1978)
*&quot;Diamond Cut&quot; (1979)
*&quot;Goodbye to the Island&quot; (1981)
*&quot;Faster Than the Speed of Night&quot; (1983)
*&quot;Secret Dreams and Forbidden Fire&quot; (1986)
*&quot;Hide Your Heart&quot; (1988) 
*&quot;Bitterblue&quot; (1991)
*&quot;Angel Heart&quot; (1992)
*&quot;Silhouette in Red&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Free Spirit&quot; (1995)
*&quot;All in One Voice&quot; (1998)
*&quot;Heart Strings&quot; (2003) 
*&quot;Simply Believe&quot; (2004)
*&quot;Wings&quot; (2005) 
*&quot;Rocks and Honey&quot; (2013)
*&quot;Between the Earth and the Stars&quot; (2019)
*&quot;The Best Is Yet to Come&quot; (2021)
==Honours, awards and recognition==

&quot;Total Eclipse of the Heart&quot; and &quot;It&#x27;s a Heartache&quot; have estimated sales of over 6 million units each, and are among the best-selling singles of all time.

Tyler&#x27;s 1976 breakthrough with &quot;Lost in France&quot; led to her nomination for Best British Female Newcomer at the 1977 Brit Awards. In the 1980s, she received nominations for two more Brit Awards, and three Grammy Awards. In 2013, she was presented with the Gold Badge award by the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors (BASCA).

In 1979, Tyler won the 10th World Popular Song Festival with &quot;Sitting on the Edge of the Ocean&quot;, representing the United Kingdom. Tyler also became the first and only representative of the United Kingdom to receive a Eurovision Song Contest Radio award in 2013. She was also one of the first western artists to tour the Soviet Union.

In addition to her music awards, Tyler has received local honours in Wales; including being named freeman of Neath Port Talbot in 2011, and an honorary degree and doctorate from Swansea University in 2013. She is also an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Welsh College of Music &amp; Drama. In 2016, she was honoured by the Lord Mayor of Swansea for Services to Music.

Tyler was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in the 2022 Birthday Honours for services to music.

==See also==
* List of artists who reached number one on the UK Singles Chart
* List of artists who reached number one in the United States

==References==
== Bibliography ==
* 


==External links==
*
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q156491" start="0" end="15" title="Bonnie Tyler" label="Gaynor Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q156491" start="21" end="28" title="Bonnie Tyler" label="Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q156491" start="73" end="85" title="Bonnie Tyler" label="Bonnie Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q718945" start="211" end="235" title="The World Starts Tonight" label="The World Starts Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q629047" start="264" end="278" title="Lost in France" label="Lost in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026336" start="295" end="312" title="More Than a Lover" label="More Than a Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q724859" start="342" end="363" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Heartache" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Heartache"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="397" end="413" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="442" end="471" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q281908" start="548" end="560" title="Jim Steinman" label="Jim Steinman"/>
<link wikidata="Q138410" start="602" end="628" title="Total Eclipse of the Heart" label="Total Eclipse of the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q603371" start="695" end="725" title="Faster Than the Speed of Night" label="Faster Than the Speed of Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q931644" start="794" end="816" title="Holding Out for a Hero" label="Holding Out for a Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q76906" start="881" end="894" title="Dieter Bohlen" label="Dieter Bohlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q804111" start="933" end="943" title="Bitterblue (song)" label="Bitterblue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193049" start="1029" end="1042" title="Kareen Antonn" label="Kareen Antonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q138410" start="1079" end="1105" title="Si demain... (Turn Around)" label="Si demain... (Turn Around)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302066" start="1146" end="1161" title="Rocks and Honey" label="Rocks and Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460092" start="1219" end="1232" title="Believe in Me (Bonnie Tyler song)" label="Believe in Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567022" start="1260" end="1291" title="United Kingdom in the Eurovision Song Contest 2013" label="representing the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q10162" start="1299" end="1327" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2013" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211" start="1331" end="1336" title="Malmö" label="Malmö"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237018" start="1380" end="1392" title="David Mackay (producer)" label="David Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q61070576" start="1413" end="1444" title="Between the Earth and the Stars (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="Between the Earth and the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q104106899" start="1468" end="1491" title="The Best Is Yet to Come (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="The Best Is Yet to Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="1537" end="1549" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="1572" end="1582" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407246" start="1616" end="1642" title="Brit Award for British Female Solo Artist" label="British Female Solo Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606543" start="1651" end="1666" title="List of awards and nominations received by Bonnie Tyler" label="other accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="1696" end="1699" title="Order of the British Empire" label="MBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q113040496" start="1707" end="1736" title="2022 Birthday Honours" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396741" start="1824" end="1830" title="Skewen" label="Skewen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003342" start="1832" end="1837" title="Neath" label="Neath"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="1881" end="1891" title="coal miner" label="coal miner"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1914" end="1930" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306184" start="2029" end="2042" title="council house" label="council house"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="2150" end="2163" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="2165" end="2178" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="2183" end="2194" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003342" start="2245" end="2250" title="Neath" label="Neath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268637" start="2292" end="2306" title="Qualification types in the United Kingdom" label="qualifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="2478" end="2486" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q484692" start="2487" end="2491" title="hymn" label="hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147392" start="2498" end="2529" title="All Things Bright and Beautiful" label="All Things Bright and Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q230594" start="2928" end="2939" title="Mary Hopkin" label="Mary Hopkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="3110" end="3117" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="3185" end="3195" title="Demo (music)" label="demo track"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="3258" end="3269" title="RCA Records" label="RCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754168" start="3286" end="3304" title="recording contract" label="recording contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365981" start="3482" end="3494" title="Ronnie Scott (songwriter)" label="Ronnie Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q629047" start="3783" end="3797" title="Lost in France" label="Lost in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q323164" start="3946" end="3956" title="Le Touquet" label="Le Touquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="4115" end="4130" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026336" start="4144" end="4161" title="More Than a Lover" label="More Than a Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553963" start="4318" end="4333" title="Get It Together (British TV series)" label="Get It Together"/>
<link wikidata="Q718945" start="4506" end="4530" title="The World Starts Tonight" label="The World Starts Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q175238" start="4650" end="4661" title="Gene Pitney" label="Gene Pitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q473563" start="4791" end="4808" title="vocal cord nodule" label="vocal cord nodule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939200" start="4843" end="4857" title="vocal rest" label="rest her voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q19773616" start="5004" end="5010" title="Heaven (1977 Bonnie Tyler song)" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="5144" end="5157" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q724859" start="5288" end="5309" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Heartache" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Heartache"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="5442" end="5471" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035488" start="5479" end="5488" title="Here Am I (Bonnie Tyler song)" label="Here Am I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585574" start="5629" end="5641" title="Gordon Mills" label="Gordon Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601897" start="5792" end="5805" title="Greek Theatre (Los Angeles)" label="Greek Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="5809" end="5820" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q180850" start="5833" end="5842" title="Tom Jones (singer)" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q718962" start="5885" end="5898" title="Natural Force" label="Natural Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="5961" end="6002" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q731917" start="6203" end="6214" title="Diamond Cut (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="Diamond Cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798923" start="6498" end="6516" title="My Guns Are Loaded" label="My Guns Are Loaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483962" start="6640" end="6674" title="Married Men (song)" label="(The World Is Full of) Married Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610070" start="6704" end="6719" title="The World Is Full of Married Men (film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837775" start="6723" end="6737" title="Jackie Collins" label="Jackie Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775982" start="6750" end="6766" title="The World Is Full of Married Men" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041682" start="6901" end="6928" title="World Popular Song Festival" label="World Popular Song Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q371178" start="7142" end="7163" title="Goodbye to the Island" label="Goodbye to the Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="7557" end="7560" title="Sony Music" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="7561" end="7569" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="7571" end="7578" title="Artists and repertoire" label="A&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q981603" start="7583" end="7595" title="Muff Winwood" label="Muff Winwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q144622" start="7648" end="7660" title="Phil Collins" label="Phil Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q314358" start="7662" end="7672" title="Jeff Lynne" label="Jeff Lynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707878" start="7677" end="7688" title="Alan Tarney" label="Alan Tarney"/>
<link wikidata="Q281908" start="7694" end="7706" title="Jim Steinman" label="Jim Steinman"/>
<link wikidata="Q138410" start="8187" end="8213" title="Total Eclipse of the Heart" label="Total Eclipse of the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054171" start="8225" end="8234" title="Rory Dodd" label="Rory Dodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661000" start="8416" end="8429" title="Power Station (recording studio)" label="Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276681" start="8463" end="8476" title="E Street Band" label="E Street Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142941" start="8478" end="8492" title="Rick Derringer" label="Rick Derringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387652" start="8518" end="8529" title="Eric Troyer" label="Eric Troyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472550" start="8680" end="8712" title="List of best-selling singles" label="best-selling singles of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q603371" start="8777" end="8807" title="Faster Than the Speed of Night" label="Faster Than the Speed of Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="8839" end="8854" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="9090" end="9097" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammys"/>
<link wikidata="Q207601" start="9103" end="9107" title="American Music Awards" label="AMAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="9114" end="9124" title="BRIT Awards" label="BRIT Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9171" end="9207" title="Variety, the Children&amp;#x27;s Charity#Variety Club of Great Britain Awards" label="Variety Club of Great Britain Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q319993" start="9228" end="9242" title="Goldene Europa" label="Goldene Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q931644" start="9356" end="9378" title="Holding Out for a Hero" label="Holding Out for a Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q611368" start="9400" end="9409" title="Footloose (1984 soundtrack)" label="Footloose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035492" start="9474" end="9488" title="Here She Comes" label="Here She Comes"/>
<link wikidata="Q312674" start="9499" end="9514" title="Giorgio Moroder" label="Giorgio Moroder"/>
<link wikidata="Q151599" start="9557" end="9567" title="Metropolis (1927 film)" label="Metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542148" start="9611" end="9645" title="Best Female Rock Vocal Performance" label="Best Female Rock Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="9704" end="9714" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q180279" start="9730" end="9751" title="Never Say Never Again" label="Never Say Never Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q834326" start="9814" end="9846" title="Secret Dreams and Forbidden Fire" label="Secret Dreams and Forbidden Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q453987" start="9939" end="9952" title="Desmond Child" label="Desmond Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q482907" start="9957" end="9968" title="Bryan Adams" label="Bryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854254" start="9990" end="10002" title="Band of Gold (Freda Payne song)" label="Band of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086992" start="10012" end="10023" title="Freda Payne" label="Freda Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095938" start="10031" end="10068" title="If You Were a Woman (And I Was a Man)" label="If You Were a Woman (And I Was a Man)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008" start="10328" end="10341" title="Mike Oldfield" label="Mike Oldfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091268" start="10380" end="10387" title="Islands (Mike Oldfield album)" label="Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497140" start="10480" end="10495" title="Under Milk Wood" label="Under Milk Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q191023" start="10520" end="10532" title="Dylan Thomas" label="Dylan Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="10560" end="10570" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q180850" start="10610" end="10619" title="Tom Jones (singer)" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q65932" start="10621" end="10636" title="Anthony Hopkins" label="Anthony Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q230594" start="10641" end="10652" title="Mary Hopkin" label="Mary Hopkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q453987" start="10667" end="10680" title="Desmond Child" label="Desmond Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q643457" start="10717" end="10732" title="Hide Your Heart (album)" label="Hide Your Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q312514" start="10809" end="10823" title="Michael Bolton" label="Michael Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q451075" start="10825" end="10839" title="Albert Hammond" label="Albert Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q237354" start="10844" end="10856" title="Diane Warren" label="Diane Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586756" start="10890" end="10905" title="Hide Your Heart (song)" label="Hide Your Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285803" start="10919" end="10941" title="Save Up All Your Tears" label="Save Up All Your Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319098" start="10958" end="10966" title="The Best (song)" label="The Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q180277" start="11084" end="11089" title="Hansa Records" label="Hansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q662575" start="11090" end="11100" title="Ariola Records" label="BMG Ariola"/>
<link wikidata="Q76906" start="11193" end="11206" title="Dieter Bohlen" label="Dieter Bohlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q312674" start="11208" end="11223" title="Giorgio Moroder" label="Giorgio Moroder"/>
<link wikidata="Q453812" start="11225" end="11236" title="Nik Kershaw" label="Nik Kershaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q464238" start="11241" end="11251" title="Roy Bittan" label="Roy Bittan"/>
<link wikidata="Q718951" start="11493" end="11503" title="Bitterblue" label="Bitterblue"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="11571" end="11579" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q804111" start="11721" end="11732" title="Bitterblue (song)" label="title track"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="12044" end="12053" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q769258" start="12511" end="12522" title="Angel Heart (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="Angel Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q280236" start="12546" end="12563" title="Silhouette in Red" label="Silhouette in Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q319993" start="12753" end="12774" title="Goldene Europa" label="Goldene Europa Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q703237" start="12816" end="12827" title="Echo Music Prize" label="ECHO Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576206" start="12862" end="12878" title="EastWest Records" label="EastWest Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003756" start="12898" end="12909" title="Free Spirit (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="Free Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729211" start="12989" end="13004" title="Humberto Gatica" label="Humberto Gatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q77112" start="13006" end="13018" title="David Foster" label="David Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q281908" start="13023" end="13035" title="Jim Steinman" label="Jim Steinman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163857" start="13089" end="13124" title="Making Love Out of Nothing At All" label="Making Love (Out of Nothing At All)"/>
<link wikidata="Q533478" start="13274" end="13298" title="the Alan Parsons Project" label="the Alan Parsons Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="13381" end="13388" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="13390" end="13397" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q654275" start="13441" end="13457" title="All in One Voice" label="All in One Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q372489" start="13550" end="13568" title="Harold Faltermeyer" label="Harold Faltermeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q312053" start="13609" end="13621" title="Rick Wakeman" label="Rick Wakeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695699" start="13652" end="13685" title="Return to the Centre of the Earth" label="Return to the Centre of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="13780" end="13789" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16296" start="13802" end="13817" title="Patrick Stewart" label="Patrick Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="13834" end="13847" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q166769" start="13849" end="13866" title="Katrina Leskanich" label="Katrina Leskanich"/>
<link wikidata="Q968014" start="13871" end="13885" title="Justin Hayward" label="Justin Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319395" start="14004" end="14017" title="Bonnie Tyler Greatest Hits" label="Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="14096" end="14111" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="14158" end="14187" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034655" start="14377" end="14390" title="Heart Strings (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="Heart Strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="14398" end="14401" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="14446" end="14457" title="cover version" label="cover album"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="14546" end="14548" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="14550" end="14561" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="14566" end="14583" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027341" start="14622" end="14633" title="Nick Ingman" label="Nick Ingman"/>
<link wikidata="Q333168" start="14638" end="14650" title="Karl Jenkins" label="Karl Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123881" start="14673" end="14710" title="City of Prague Philharmonic Orchestra" label="City of Prague Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193049" start="14931" end="14944" title="Kareen Antonn" label="Kareen Antonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q138410" start="15090" end="15116" title="Si demain... (Turn Around)" label="Si demain... (Turn Around)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205075" start="15457" end="15471" title="Simply Believe" label="Simply Believe"/>
<link wikidata="Q966671" start="15960" end="15965" title="Wings (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638749" start="16293" end="16326" title="Sopot International Song Festival" label="Sopot International Song Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207410" start="16363" end="16372" title="La Cigale" label="La Cigale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092925" start="16393" end="16410" title="Fiestas del Pilar" label="Fiestas del Pilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q834499" start="16503" end="16517" title="Bonnie on Tour" label="Bonnie on Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q821717" start="16683" end="16696" title="Steiger Award" label="Steiger Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q133112" start="16933" end="16945" title="Lucy Lawless" label="Lucy Lawless"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117016" start="16955" end="16970" title="Celebrity Duets" label="Celebrity Duets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838171" start="17084" end="17096" title="BabyPinkStar" label="BabyPinkStar"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17116" end="17145" title="From the Heart: Greatest Hits" label="From the Heart: Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799876" start="17264" end="17279" title="Only Men Aloud!" label="Only Men Aloud!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854245" start="17407" end="17423" title="Band of Brothers (Only Men Aloud! album)" label="Band of Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740639" start="17517" end="17525" title="Mal Pope" label="Mal Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="17622" end="17629" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882430" start="17685" end="17700" title="Hollyoaks Later" label="Hollyoaks Later"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043302" start="17775" end="17789" title="Carmel McQueen" label="Carmel McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501152" start="17791" end="17802" title="Gemma Merna" label="Gemma Merna"/>
<link wikidata="Q489921" start="17864" end="17874" title="MasterCard" label="MasterCard"/>
<link wikidata="Q188482" start="18159" end="18169" title="Robin Gibb" label="Robin Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q138410" start="18332" end="18358" title="Total Eclipse of the Heart" label="Total Eclipse of the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018746" start="18517" end="18552" title="Newport (Ymerodraeth State of Mind)" label="Newport (Ymerodraeth State of Mind)"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="18576" end="18581" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q121507" start="18586" end="18597" title="Alicia Keys" label="Alicia Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q21123" start="18609" end="18629" title="Empire State of Mind" label="Empire State of Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="18644" end="18647" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="18655" end="18667" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053280" start="18925" end="18933" title="The X Factor (Ukraine)" label="X Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998" start="18986" end="18999" title="Kylie Minogue" label="Kylie Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q230451" start="19004" end="19014" title="Cher Lloyd" label="Cher Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975172" start="19185" end="19196" title="Rolf Harris" label="Rolf Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="19244" end="19247" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052933" start="19261" end="19278" title="The Antiques Roadshow" label="Antiques Roadshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q593804" start="19352" end="19364" title="Best of 3 CD" label="Best of 3 CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371048" start="19446" end="19459" title="Eternal Flame (song)" label="Eternal Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q214418" start="19469" end="19480" title="The Bangles" label="The Bangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302066" start="19717" end="19732" title="Rocks and Honey" label="Rocks and Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="19757" end="19777" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994776" start="19886" end="19896" title="David Huff (drummer)" label="David Huff"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="19926" end="19929" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460092" start="20001" end="20014" title="Believe in Me (Bonnie Tyler song)" label="Believe in Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q10162" start="20092" end="20120" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2013" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="20889" end="20912" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q924232" start="21285" end="21295" title="Vince Gill" label="Vince Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066370" start="21329" end="21350" title="What You Need from Me" label="What You Need from Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302066" start="21414" end="21432" title="This Is Gonna Hurt (Bonnie Tyler song)" label="This Is Gonna Hurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302066" start="21449" end="21466" title="Love Is the Knife" label="Love Is the Knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849841" start="21646" end="21661" title="Rhydian Roberts" label="Rhydian Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143954" start="21681" end="21698" title="One Day Like This (album)" label="One Day like This"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577180" start="21733" end="21738" title="Spike (musician)" label="Spike"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159511" start="21758" end="21782" title="100% Pure Frankie Miller" label="100% Pure Frankie Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="21919" end="21925" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q109026" start="21964" end="21978" title="Circle of Life" label="Circle of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q36479" start="21996" end="22009" title="The Lion King" label="The Lion King"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903177" start="22139" end="22153" title="Best Time Ever with Neil Patrick Harris" label="Best Time Ever"/>
<link wikidata="Q485310" start="22165" end="22184" title="Neil Patrick Harris" label="Neil Patrick Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q167696" start="22186" end="22204" title="Nicole Scherzinger" label="Nicole Scherzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q170572" start="22209" end="22221" title="Alec Baldwin" label="Alec Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q708053" start="22251" end="22265" title="Frankie Miller" label="Frankie Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963328" start="22285" end="22296" title="Frankie Miller&amp;#x27;s Double Take" label="Double Take"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="22401" end="22406" title="Heavy metal music" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q433073" start="22412" end="22426" title="Axel Rudi Pell" label="Axel Rudi Pell"/>
<link wikidata="Q192381" start="22511" end="22531" title="MS Oasis of the Seas" label="MS Oasis of the Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281409" start="22546" end="22556" title="dance-rock" label="dance-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q21648421" start="22562" end="22566" title="DNCE" label="DNCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437630" start="22579" end="22610" title="solar eclipse of August 21, 2017" label="solar eclipse of 21 August 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="22721" end="22730" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q862769" start="22737" end="22750" title="Digital Songs" label="Digital Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535551" start="23095" end="23107" title="Sharron Levy" label="Sharron Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q61070576" start="23268" end="23299" title="Between the Earth and the Stars (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="Between the Earth and the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="23368" end="23383" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237018" start="23406" end="23418" title="David Mackay (producer)" label="David Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q182655" start="23547" end="23558" title="Rod Stewart" label="Rod Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q559609" start="23560" end="23573" title="Francis Rossi" label="Francis Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q82238" start="23578" end="23591" title="Cliff Richard" label="Cliff Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046677" start="23706" end="23727" title="BBC Proms" label="BBC Proms in the Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q123738" start="23731" end="23748" title="Hyde Park, London" label="Hyde Park, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q676755" start="23780" end="23796" title="London Palladium" label="London Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q915451" start="23823" end="23837" title="Olympia (Paris)" label="L&amp;#x27;Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="23841" end="23846" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032540" start="23879" end="23885" title="Canal+ (French TV channel)" label="Canal+"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494570" start="23904" end="23922" title="Cherry Red Records" label="Cherry Red Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401596" start="23997" end="24008" title="Classic Pop (magazine)" label="Classic Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872732" start="24159" end="24169" title="Ben Zucker" label="Ben Zucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q265463" start="24192" end="24211" title="Mercedes-Benz Arena (Berlin)" label="Mercedes-Benz Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="24573" end="24580" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="24645" end="24657" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q666199" start="24753" end="24768" title="Lorraine Crosby" label="Lorraine Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694371" start="24803" end="24823" title="Teenage Cancer Trust" label="Teenage Cancer Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522638" start="24850" end="24868" title="UK Singles Downloads Chart" label="UK Downloads Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q104106899" start="24901" end="24924" title="The Best Is Yet to Come (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="The Best Is Yet to Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q705596" start="24991" end="25000" title="Mike Batt" label="Mike Batt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197607" start="25131" end="25145" title="The Dreamstone" label="The Dreamstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074321" start="25261" end="25277" title="Tanz der Vampire" label="Tanz der Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q50009" start="25490" end="25497" title="El País" label="El País"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172291" start="25640" end="25653" title="Coronet Books" label="Coronet Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q124886360" start="25738" end="25747" title="In Berlin (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="In Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q359242" start="25778" end="25792" title="Admiralspalast" label="Admiralspalast"/>
<link wikidata="Q124392549" start="25814" end="25855" title="Between the Earth and the Stars Live Tour" label="Between the Earth and the Stars Live Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q996641" start="25921" end="25951" title="Faster Than the Speed of Night (song)" label="Faster Than the Speed of Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q73234" start="26055" end="26068" title="Philipp Plein" label="Philipp Plein"/>
<link wikidata="Q130829" start="26080" end="26098" title="Milan Fashion Week" label="Milan Fashion Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q131649898" start="26173" end="26182" title="Yes I Can (song)" label="Yes I Can"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26199" end="26227" title=":de:Die Feste mit Florian Silbereisen" label="Silvester-Schlagerbooom 2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q188451" start="26337" end="26351" title="Music genre" label="musical genres"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147392" start="26567" end="26598" title="All Things Bright and Beautiful" label="All Things Bright and Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="26653" end="26666" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="26668" end="26681" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="26683" end="26694" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q708053" start="26759" end="26773" title="Frankie Miller" label="Frankie Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514" start="26911" end="26923" title="Janis Joplin" label="Janis Joplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131814" start="26928" end="26939" title="Tina Turner" label="Tina Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248020" start="26957" end="26983" title="River Deep – Mountain High" label="River Deep – Mountain High"/>
<link wikidata="Q125121" start="27085" end="27100" title="Aretha Franklin" label="Aretha Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q312270" start="27102" end="27116" title="Wilson Pickett" label="Wilson Pickett"/>
<link wikidata="Q152929" start="27118" end="27127" title="Meat Loaf" label="Meat Loaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q190076" start="27129" end="27139" title="Joe Cocker" label="Joe Cocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q219782" start="27141" end="27158" title="Dusty Springfield" label="Dusty Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284241" start="27163" end="27175" title="Tommy Steele" label="Tommy Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895" start="27244" end="27262" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q34584" start="27264" end="27273" title="Anastacia" label="Anastacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155412" start="27275" end="27287" title="Toni Braxton" label="Toni Braxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q192587" start="27289" end="27294" title="Duffy (singer)" label="Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="27300" end="27306" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q23215" start="27362" end="27367" title="Adele" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q182655" start="27573" end="27584" title="Rod Stewart" label="Rod Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4070" start="27589" end="27599" title="Kim Carnes" label="Kim Carnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q473563" start="27619" end="27636" title="vocal cord nodule" label="vocal cord nodule"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="28407" end="28418" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776726" start="28532" end="28551" title="The Yorkshire Times" label="The Yorkshire Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q730018" start="29177" end="29191" title="Sayonara Tokyo" label="Sayonara Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q47458804" start="29284" end="29305" title="Gary Pickford-Hopkins" label="Gary Pickford-Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q966671" start="29487" end="29492" title="Wings (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361987" start="29614" end="29632" title="charity supergroup" label="charity supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408111" start="29928" end="29937" title="Ferry Aid" label="Ferry Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184259" start="29969" end="29978" title="Let It Be (song)" label="Let It Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="29988" end="29999" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607814" start="30066" end="30084" title="Zeebrugge Disaster" label="Zeebrugge Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400205" start="30251" end="30258" title="Sailing (Sutherland Brothers song)" label="Sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449297" start="30323" end="30345" title="Vietnamese boat people" label="Vietnamese boat people"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="30358" end="30367" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242820" start="30638" end="30661" title="Pride of Britain Awards" label="Pride of Britain Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098126" start="30699" end="30749" title="Noah&amp;#x27;s Ark Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital for Wales" label="Noah&amp;#x27;s Ark Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="30882" end="30922" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491986" start="30998" end="31031" title="I Don&amp;#x27;t Know How to Love Him" label="I Don&amp;#x27;t Know How to Love Him"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113510" start="31048" end="31064" title="Over the Rainbow (2007 charity album)" label="Over the Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768946" start="31106" end="31117" title="Anneka Rice" label="Anneka Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068894" start="31147" end="31163" title="Challenge Anneka" label="Challenge Anneka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864847" start="31202" end="31222" title="UK Compilation Chart" label="UK Compilation Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449768" start="31356" end="31365" title="Pinktober" label="Pinktober"/>
<link wikidata="Q363074" start="31495" end="31504" title="Leo Sayer" label="Leo Sayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915874" start="31523" end="31559" title="Variety, the Children&amp;#x27;s Charity" label="Variety, the Children&amp;#x27;s Charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q954937" start="31650" end="31664" title="Guia (Albufeira)" label="Guia, Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595862" start="31738" end="31754" title="Children in Need" label="Children in Need"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567186" start="31795" end="31799" title="Cruelty Free International" label="BUAV"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988911" start="31936" end="31956" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Answer Me" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Answer Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q533478" start="31966" end="31990" title="the Alan Parsons Project" label="the Alan Parsons Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q628" start="32010" end="32017" title="Bergamo" label="Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="32083" end="32100" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55361176" start="32149" end="32164" title="Robert Sullivan (judoka)" label="Robert Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q688392" start="32197" end="32214" title="Judo at the 1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972 Olympic judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="32314" end="32324" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q373813" start="32395" end="32414" title="Albufeira" label="Albufeira, Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26831" start="32422" end="32429" title="Algarve" label="Algarve"/>
<link wikidata="Q23220" start="32828" end="32837" title="Berkshire" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188040" start="33108" end="33114" title="quarry" label="quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q718945" start="33161" end="33185" title="The World Starts Tonight" label="The World Starts Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q718962" start="33206" end="33219" title="Natural Force" label="Natural Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q731917" start="33240" end="33251" title="Diamond Cut (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="Diamond Cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q371178" start="33272" end="33293" title="Goodbye to the Island" label="Goodbye to the Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q603371" start="33314" end="33344" title="Faster Than the Speed of Night" label="Faster Than the Speed of Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q834326" start="33365" end="33397" title="Secret Dreams and Forbidden Fire" label="Secret Dreams and Forbidden Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q643457" start="33418" end="33433" title="Hide Your Heart (album)" label="Hide Your Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q718951" start="33455" end="33465" title="Bitterblue" label="Bitterblue"/>
<link wikidata="Q769258" start="33486" end="33497" title="Angel Heart (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="Angel Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q280236" start="33518" end="33535" title="Silhouette in Red" label="Silhouette in Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003756" start="33556" end="33567" title="Free Spirit (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="Free Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q654275" start="33588" end="33604" title="All in One Voice" label="All in One Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034655" start="33625" end="33638" title="Heart Strings (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="Heart Strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205075" start="33660" end="33674" title="Simply Believe" label="Simply Believe"/>
<link wikidata="Q966671" start="33695" end="33700" title="Wings (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302066" start="33722" end="33737" title="Rocks and Honey" label="Rocks and Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q61070576" start="33758" end="33789" title="Between the Earth and the Stars (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="Between the Earth and the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q104106899" start="33810" end="33833" title="The Best Is Yet to Come (Bonnie Tyler album)" label="The Best Is Yet to Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q138410" start="33890" end="33916" title="Total Eclipse of the Heart" label="Total Eclipse of the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q724859" start="33933" end="33954" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Heartache" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Heartache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472550" start="34030" end="34050" title="list of best-selling singles" label="best-selling singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="34190" end="34206" title="Brit Awards" label="1977 Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="34283" end="34296" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041682" start="34445" end="34477" title="World Popular Song Festival" label="10th World Popular Song Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="34752" end="34764" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420500" start="34945" end="34963" title="Swansea University" label="Swansea University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375001" start="35011" end="35051" title="Royal Welsh College of Music &amp;amp; Drama" label="Royal Welsh College of Music &amp;amp; Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="35152" end="35193" title="Member of the Order of the British Empire" label="Member of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q113040496" start="35207" end="35228" title="2022 Birthday Honours" label="2022 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606236" start="35268" end="35330" title="List of artists who reached number one on the UK Singles Chart" label="List of artists who reached number one on the UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845766" start="35333" end="35392" title="List of artists who reached number one in the United States" label="List of artists who reached number one in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41988" wikidata="Q341826" url="?curid=41988" title="Path">
<text>A path is a route for physical travel – see [[Trail]].

Path or PATH may also refer to:

== Physical paths of different types ==
* Bicycle path
* Bridle path, used by people on horseback
* Course (navigation), the intended path of a vehicle
* Desire path, created by human or animal foot traffic
* Footpath, intended for use only by pedestrians
* Shared-use path, intended for multiple modes such as walking, bicycling, in-line skating or others
* Sidewalk, a paved path along the side of a road
* Hoggin, a buff-coloured gravel &amp; clay pathway often seen in gardens of Stately Homes, Parks etc.

* Trail, an unpaved lane or road

== Mathematics, physics, and computing ==
* Path (computing), in file systems, the human-readable address of a resource
** PATH (variable), in computing, a way to specify a list of directories containing executable programs
* Path (graph theory), a sequence of edges of a graph
** st-connectivity problem, sometimes known as the &quot;path problem&quot;
* Path (topology), a continuous function
* Path (geometry), a curve
* Path, a name for the vectors in vector graphics
** Clipping path, in digital image processing
* Path (physics), a trajectory

==Organizations==
* PATH (global health organization), an international nonprofit organization in Seattle
* Partners for Advanced Transit and Highways, a research organization operated by the University of California
* PATH Foundation, a trail-building organization in Georgia, USA
* People&#x27;s Alliance of Tower Hamlets, a minor political party in Tower Hamlets, London
* Positive Alternatives to Homosexuality, a coalition of anti-gay organizations
* Professional Association of Therapeutic Horsemanship, a non-profit organization that promotes the benefits equine-assisted therapies
* Projects for Assistance in Transition from Homelessness, American formula grant program

== Other uses ==
* Path (social network), a photo sharing and messaging service
* PATH (rail system), Port Authority Trans-Hudson, serving New York and New Jersey
* Path (Toronto), a network of underground pedestrian tunnels in Toronto, Ontario, Canada
* Golden Path (&quot;Dune&quot;), a metaphysical theme from Frank Herbert&#x27;s &quot;Dune&quot; novels
* &quot;Path Vol. 1 &amp; 2&quot;, a 2000 single by Apocalyptica
* Potomac-Appalachian Transmission Highline, a proposed electrical line
* Train path, infrastructure capacity needed to run a train between two places over a given time-period
* &quot;Path&quot; (album), by American shoegaze musician Kraus

==See also==

* Control flow path, a possible execution sequence in a computer program
* Footpath (disambiguation)
* Pathé
* Pathway (disambiguation)
* Road (disambiguation)
* Route (disambiguation)
* The Path (disambiguation)
* Track (disambiguation)
* Trail (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q341826" start="2" end="6" title="Path" label="path"/>
<link wikidata="Q341826" start="44" end="53" title="Path" label="[[Trail]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q341826" start="56" end="60" title="Path" label="Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q341826" start="64" end="68" title="Path" label="PATH"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198662" start="131" end="143" title="Bicycle path" label="Bicycle path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639395" start="146" end="157" title="Bridle path" label="Bridle path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962728" start="189" end="208" title="Course (navigation)" label="Course (navigation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143085" start="243" end="254" title="Desire path" label="Desire path"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352369" start="298" end="306" title="Footpath" label="Footpath"/>
<link wikidata="Q65054925" start="347" end="362" title="Shared-use path" label="Shared-use path"/>
<link wikidata="Q177749" start="448" end="456" title="Sidewalk" label="Sidewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5877291" start="498" end="504" title="Hoggin" label="Hoggin"/>
<link wikidata="Q628179" start="602" end="607" title="Trail" label="Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q817765" start="678" end="694" title="Path (computing)" label="Path (computing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q817775" start="757" end="772" title="PATH (variable)" label="PATH (variable)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415372" start="860" end="879" title="Path (graph theory)" label="Path (graph theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361537" start="915" end="930" title="st-connectivity" label="st-connectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366002" start="990" end="1005" title="Path (topology)" label="Path (topology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="1031" end="1046" title="Path (geometry)" label="Path (geometry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="1090" end="1105" title="vector graphics" label="vector graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134395" start="1109" end="1122" title="Clipping path" label="Clipping path"/>
<link wikidata="Q193139" start="1154" end="1168" title="Path (physics)" label="Path (physics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248414" start="1204" end="1237" title="PATH (global health organization)" label="PATH (global health organization)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140724" start="1292" end="1334" title="Partners for Advanced Transit and Highways" label="Partners for Advanced Transit and Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118279" start="1403" end="1418" title="PATH Foundation" label="PATH Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24083497" start="1468" end="1507" title="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance of Tower Hamlets" label="People&amp;#x27;s Alliance of Tower Hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105684" start="1560" end="1598" title="Positive Alternatives to Homosexuality" label="Positive Alternatives to Homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247928" start="1640" end="1692" title="Professional Association of Therapeutic Horsemanship" label="Professional Association of Therapeutic Horsemanship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933780" start="1775" end="1830" title="Projects for Assistance in Transition from Homelessness" label="Projects for Assistance in Transition from Homelessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342648" start="1883" end="1904" title="Path (social network)" label="Path (social network)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055811" start="1946" end="1964" title="PATH (rail system)" label="PATH (rail system)"/>
<link wikidata="Q917121" start="2029" end="2043" title="Path (Toronto)" label="Path (Toronto)"/>
<link wikidata="Q304741" start="2119" end="2149" title="Golden Path (Dune)" label="Golden Path (&amp;quot;Dune&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487232" start="2230" end="2249" title="Path Vol. 1 &amp;amp; 2" label="Path Vol. 1 &amp;amp; 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235030" start="2289" end="2330" title="Potomac-Appalachian Transmission Highline" label="Potomac-Appalachian Transmission Highline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328608" start="2361" end="2371" title="Train path" label="Train path"/>
<link wikidata="Q111937960" start="2465" end="2489" title="Path (album)" label="&amp;quot;Path&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="2544" end="2556" title="Control flow" label="Control flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466539" start="2617" end="2642" title="Footpath (disambiguation)" label="Footpath (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544011" start="2645" end="2650" title="Pathé" label="Pathé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984527" start="2653" end="2677" title="Pathway (disambiguation)" label="Pathway (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q425060" start="2680" end="2701" title="Road (disambiguation)" label="Road (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q415384" start="2704" end="2726" title="Route (disambiguation)" label="Route (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q579383" start="2729" end="2754" title="The Path (disambiguation)" label="The Path (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q351303" start="2757" end="2779" title="Track (disambiguation)" label="Track (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q448871" start="2782" end="2804" title="Trail (disambiguation)" label="Trail (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41990" wikidata="Q489168" url="?curid=41990" title="Mass noun">
<text>In linguistics, a mass noun, uncountable noun, non-count noun, uncount noun, or just uncountable, is a noun with the syntactic property that any quantity of it is treated as an undifferentiated unit, rather than as something with discrete elements. Uncountable nouns are distinguished from count nouns.

Given that different languages have different grammatical features, the actual test for which nouns are mass nouns may vary between languages. In English, mass nouns are characterized by the impossibility of being directly modified by a numeral without specifying a unit of measurement and by the impossibility of being combined with an indefinite article (&quot;a&quot; or &quot;an&quot;). Thus, the mass noun &quot;water&quot; is quantified as &quot;20 litres of water&quot; while the count noun &quot;chair&quot; is quantified as &quot;20 chairs&quot;. However, both mass and count nouns can be quantified in relative terms without unit specification (e.g., &quot;so much water&quot;, &quot;so many chairs&quot;, though note the different quantifiers &quot;much&quot; and &quot;many&quot;).

Mass nouns have no concept of singular and plural, although in English they take singular verb forms. However, many mass nouns in English can be converted to count nouns, which can then be used in the plural to denote (for instance) more than one instance or variety of a certain sort of entity – for example, &quot;&quot;Many cleaning agents today are technically not soaps [i.e. types of soap], but detergents,&quot; or &quot;I drank about three beers [i.e. bottles or glasses of beer]&quot;&quot;.

Some nouns can be used indifferently as mass or count nouns, &quot;e.g.&quot;, &quot;three cabbages&quot; or &quot;three heads of cabbage&quot;; &quot;three ropes&quot; or &quot;three lengths of rope&quot;. Some have different senses as mass and count nouns: &quot;paper&quot; is a mass noun as a material (&quot;three reams of paper&quot;, &quot;one sheet of paper&quot;), but a count noun as a unit of writing (&quot;the students passed in their papers&quot;).

==Grammatical number and physical discreteness==

In English (and in many other languages), there is a tendency for nouns referring to liquids (&quot;water&quot;, &quot;juice&quot;), powders (&quot;sugar&quot;, &quot;sand&quot;), or substances (&quot;metal&quot;, &quot;wood&quot;) to be used in mass syntax, and for nouns referring to objects or people to be count nouns. But there are many exceptions: the mass/count distinction is a property of the &quot;terms&quot;, not their referents. For example, the same set of chairs can be referred to as &quot;seven chairs&quot; (count) and as &quot;furniture&quot; (mass); the Middle English mass noun &quot;pease&quot; has become the count noun &quot;pea&quot; by morphological reanalysis; &quot;vegetables&quot; are a plural count form, while the British English slang synonym &quot;veg&quot; is a mass noun.

In languages that have a partitive case, the distinction is explicit and mandatory. For example, in Finnish, &quot;join vettä&quot;, &quot;I drank (some) water&quot;, the word &quot;vesi&quot;, &quot;water&quot;, is in the partitive case. The related sentence &quot;join veden&quot;, &quot;I drank (the) water&quot;, using the accusative case instead, assumes that there was a specific countable portion of water that was completely drunk.

The work of logicians like Godehard Link and Manfred Krifka established that the mass/count distinction can be given a precise, mathematical definition in terms of quantization and cumulativity.

==Cumulativity and mass nouns==
An expression &quot;P&quot; has cumulative reference if and only if for any &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot;:
*If &quot;X&quot; can be described as &quot;P&quot; and &quot;Y&quot; can be described as &quot;P&quot;, as well, then the sum of &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot; can also be described as &quot;P&quot;.
In more formal terms (Krifka 1998):

:formula_1

which may be read as: &quot;X&quot; is cumulative if there exists at least one pair&quot; x,y&quot;, where &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; are distinct, and both have the property &quot;X&quot;, and if for all possible pairs &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; fitting that description, &quot;X&quot; is a property of the sum of &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot;.

Consider, for example &quot;cutlery&quot;: If one collection of cutlery is combined with another, we still have &quot;cutlery.&quot; Similarly, if water is added to water, we still have &quot;water.&quot; But if a chair is added to another, we do not have &quot;a chair&quot;, but rather two chairs. Thus the nouns &quot;cutlery&quot; and &quot;water&quot; have cumulative reference, while the expression &quot;a chair&quot; does not. The expression &quot;chairs&quot;, however, does, suggesting that the generalization is not actually specific to the mass-count distinction. As many have noted, it is possible to provide an alternative analysis, by which mass nouns and plural count nouns are assigned a similar semantics, as distinct from that of singular count nouns.

An expression &quot;P&quot; has quantized reference if and only if, for any X:
*If &quot;X&quot; can be described as &quot;P&quot;, then no proper part of &quot;X&quot; can be described as &quot;P&quot;.
This can be seen to hold in the case of the noun &quot;house&quot;: no proper part of &quot;a house&quot;, for example the bathroom, or the entrance door, is itself a house. Similarly, no proper part of &quot;a man&quot;, say his index finger, or his knee, can be described as &quot;a man&quot;. Hence, &quot;house&quot; and &quot;man&quot; have quantized reference. However, collections of &quot;cutlery&quot; do have proper parts that can themselves be described as &quot;cutlery&quot;. Hence &quot;cutlery&quot; does not have quantized reference. Notice again that this is probably not a fact about mass-count syntax, but about prototypical examples, since many singular count nouns have referents whose proper parts can be described by the same term. Examples include divisible count nouns like &quot;rope&quot;, &quot;string&quot;, &quot;stone&quot;, &quot;tile&quot;, etc.

Some expressions are neither quantized nor cumulative. Examples of this include collective nouns like &quot;committee&quot;. A committee may well contain a proper part which is itself a committee. Hence this expression is not quantized. It is not cumulative, either: the sum of two separate committees is not necessarily a &quot;committee&quot;. In terms of the mass/count distinction, &quot;committee&quot; behaves like a count noun. By some accounts, these examples are taken to indicate that the best characterization of mass nouns is that they are &quot;cumulative nouns&quot;. On such accounts, count nouns should then be characterized as &quot;non-cumulative&quot; nouns: this characterization correctly groups &quot;committee&quot; together with the count nouns. If, instead, we had chosen to characterize count nouns as &quot;quantized nouns&quot;, and mass nouns as &quot;non-quantized&quot; ones, then we would (incorrectly) be led to expect &quot;committee&quot; to be a mass noun. However, as noted above, such a characterization fails to explain many central phenomena of the mass-count distinction.

==Multiple senses for one noun==
Many English nouns can be used in either mass or count syntax, and in these cases, they take on cumulative reference when used as mass nouns. For example, one may say that &quot;there&#x27;s &quot;apple&quot; in this sauce&quot;, and then &quot;apple&quot; has cumulative reference, and, hence, is used as a mass noun. The names of animals, such as &quot;chicken&quot;, &quot;fox&quot; or &quot;lamb&quot; are count when referring to the animals themselves, but are mass when referring to their meat, fur, or other substances produced by them. (e.g., &quot;I&#x27;m cooking chicken tonight&quot; or &quot;This coat is made of fox.&quot;) Conversely, &quot;fire&quot; is frequently used as a mass noun, but &quot;a fire&quot; refers to a discrete entity. Substance terms like &quot;water&quot; which are frequently used as mass nouns, can be used as count nouns to denote arbitrary units of a substance (&quot;Two &quot;waters&quot;, please&quot;) or of several types/varieties (&quot;&quot;waters&quot; of the world&quot;). One may say that mass nouns that are used as count nouns are &quot;&quot; and that count ones that are used as mass nouns are &quot;&quot;. However, this may confuse syntax and semantics, by presupposing that words which denote substances are mass nouns by default. According to many accounts, nouns do not have a lexical specification for mass-count status, and instead are specified as such only when used in a sentence. Nouns differ in the extent to which they can be used flexibly, depending largely on their meanings and the context of use. For example, the count noun &quot;house&quot; is difficult to use as mass (though clearly possible), and the mass noun &quot;cutlery&quot; is most frequently used as mass, despite the fact that it denotes objects, and has count equivalents in other languages:

* Incorrect: *There is house on the road. (Incorrect even if a catastrophe is considered)
* Incorrect: *There is a cutlery on the table. (Incorrect even if just one fork is on the table)
* Correct: You got a lot of house for your money since the recession.
* Correct: Spanish cutlery is my favorite. (type / kind reading)

In some languages, such as Chinese and Japanese, it has been claimed by some that all nouns are effectively mass nouns, requiring a measure word to be quantified.

==Quantification==
Some quantifiers are specific to mass nouns (e.g., &quot;an amount of&quot;) or count nouns (e.g., &quot;a number of&quot;, &quot;every&quot;). Others can be used with both types (e.g., &quot;a lot of&quot;, &quot;some&quot;).

===Words &quot;fewer&quot; and &quot;less&quot;===

Where &quot;much&quot; and &quot;little&quot; qualify mass nouns, &quot;many&quot; and &quot;few&quot; have an analogous function for count nouns:
* How much damage? —Very little.
* How many mistakes? —Very few.

Whereas &quot;more&quot; and &quot;most&quot; are the comparative and superlative of both &quot;much&quot; and &quot;many&quot;, &quot;few&quot; and &quot;little&quot; have differing comparative and superlative (&quot;fewer&quot;, &quot;fewest&quot; and &quot;less&quot;, &quot;least&quot;). However, suppletive use of &quot;less&quot; and &quot;least&quot; with count nouns is common in many contexts, some of which attract criticism as nonstandard or low-prestige. This criticism dates back to at least 1770; the usage dates back to Old English. In 2008, Tesco changed supermarket checkout signs reading &quot;ten items or less&quot; after complaints that it was bad grammar; at the suggestion of the Plain English Campaign it switched to &quot;up to ten items&quot; rather than to &quot;ten items or fewer&quot;.

==Conflation of collective noun and mass noun==

There is often confusion about the two different concepts of &quot;collective noun&quot; and &quot;mass noun&quot;. Generally, collective nouns such as &quot;group, family&quot;, and &quot;committee&quot; are not mass nouns but are rather a special subset of count nouns. However, the term &quot;collective noun&quot; is often used to mean &quot;mass noun&quot; (even in some dictionaries) because users conflate two different kinds of verb number invariability: (a) that seen with mass nouns such as &quot;water&quot; or &quot;furniture&quot;, with which only singular verb forms are used because the constituent matter is &quot;grammatically&quot; indivisible (although it may [&quot;water&quot;] or may not [&quot;furniture&quot;] be &quot;etically&quot; indivisible); and (b) that seen with collective nouns, which is the result of the metonymical shift between the group and its (both grammatically and etically) discrete constituents.

Some words, including &quot;mathematics&quot; and &quot;physics&quot;, have developed true mass-noun senses despite having grown from count-noun roots.

==See also==

==References==
==External links==
* The Mavens Word of the Day: less/fewer
* Semantic Archives: Mass nouns, count nouns and non-count nouns
* F.J. Pelletier L.K. Schubert (2001) Mass Expressions in D. Gabbay &amp; F. Guenthner (eds) Handbook of Philosophical Logic, Vol. 10
* &quot;Conceptual Categories and Linguistic Categories VIII: Nouns and Individuation&quot;, summer 2011, by Beth Levin at web.stanford.edu</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="3" end="14" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q489168" start="18" end="27" title="Mass noun" label="mass noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q489168" start="29" end="45" title="Mass noun" label="uncountable noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q489168" start="47" end="61" title="Mass noun" label="non-count noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q489168" start="63" end="75" title="Mass noun" label="uncount noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q489168" start="85" end="96" title="Mass noun" label="uncountable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="103" end="107" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="117" end="126" title="Syntax" label="syntactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520033" start="290" end="300" title="count noun" label="count noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="325" end="333" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q12050496" start="350" end="370" title="Feature (linguistics)" label="grammatical features"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="450" end="457" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q63116" start="541" end="548" title="Numeral (linguistics)" label="numeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q47574" start="570" end="589" title="unit of measurement" label="unit of measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="641" end="659" title="indefinite article" label="indefinite article"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="1129" end="1137" title="Grammatical number" label="singular"/>
<link wikidata="Q146786" start="1142" end="1148" title="plural" label="plural"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="1189" end="1199" title="Grammatical conjugation" label="verb forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783534" start="1244" end="1253" title="Conversion (word formation)" label="converted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570700" start="1828" end="1833" title="Word sense" label="sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q109964" start="2777" end="2801" title="morphological reanalysis" label="morphological reanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q857325" start="2949" end="2963" title="partitive case" label="partitive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="3024" end="3031" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="3251" end="3266" title="accusative case" label="accusative case"/>
<link wikidata="Q121834" start="3392" end="3405" title="Godehard Link" label="Godehard Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748507" start="3410" end="3424" title="Manfred Krifka" label="Manfred Krifka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176628" start="3529" end="3541" title="quantization (linguistics)" label="quantization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476077" start="3546" end="3558" title="cumulativity" label="cumulativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476077" start="3625" end="3645" title="cumulativity" label="cumulative reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176628" start="5116" end="5135" title="quantization (linguistics)" label="quantized reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q504952" start="6248" end="6263" title="collective noun" label="collective noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="7328" end="7332" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="7971" end="7975" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="9496" end="9503" title="Chinese (language)" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="9508" end="9516" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916780" start="9601" end="9613" title="measure word" label="measure word"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532504" start="9657" end="9668" title="Quantifier (linguistics)" label="quantifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14169499" start="10199" end="10210" title="comparative" label="comparative"/>
<link wikidata="Q577714" start="10215" end="10226" title="superlative" label="superlative"/>
<link wikidata="Q324982" start="10446" end="10456" title="suppletion" label="suppletive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="10583" end="10594" title="nonstandard dialect" label="nonstandard"/>
<link wikidata="Q919978" start="10602" end="10610" title="prestige (sociolinguistics)" label="prestige"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="10680" end="10691" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q487494" start="10702" end="10707" title="Tesco" label="Tesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q386147" start="10728" end="10736" title="Point of sale" label="checkout"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281301" start="10848" end="10870" title="Plain English Campaign" label="Plain English Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q504952" start="11078" end="11093" title="collective noun" label="collective noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520033" start="11270" end="11280" title="count noun" label="count noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337916" start="11754" end="11758" title="etic" label="etic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11851" end="11868" title="English collective nouns#Metonymic merging of grammatical number" label="metonymical shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="11981" end="11992" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="12009" end="12016" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q19664745" start="12503" end="12513" title="Beth Levin (linguist)" label="Beth Levin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41992" wikidata="Q26426" url="?curid=41992" title="Montpelier, Vermont">
<text>Montpelier is the capital city of the U.S. state of Vermont and the county seat of Washington County. The site of Vermont&#x27;s state government, it is the least populous state capital in the United States. As of the 2020 census, the population was 8,074, with a daytime population growth of about 21,000 due to the large number of jobs within city limits. The Vermont College of Fine Arts is located in the municipality. It was named after Montpellier, a city in the south of France.

Montpelier was chartered as a town by proprietors from Massachusetts and western Vermont on August 14, 1781, and the Town of Montpelier was granted municipal powers by the &quot;Governor, Council and General Assembly of the Freemen of the State of Vermont&quot;. The first permanent settlement began in May 1787, and a town meeting was established in 1791. The city received a French name because the Franco-American alliance during the Revolutionary War had inspired widespread Francophilia. Montpelier was selected as state capital in 1805, and citizens of the town donated funds to build the first state house. The legislature chartered the City of Montpelier in 1894, and it was organized at a town meeting the next year.

Montpelier is in the north-central area of the state. The Winooski River flows by the south side of the city, passing near the state house and continuing northwest into Chittenden County. The North Branch River, a tributary of the Winooski, also flows through the city. Flooding is a periodic problem in Montpelier, with three serious floods occurring in 1927, 1992, and 2023. In 1875, fires destroyed 38 buildings in the city, and the commercial area was rebuilt with brick to avoid a repeat of the disaster. The state government contributes to the city&#x27;s economy, which also relies on insurance and tourism. The insurance industry in Montpelier dates back to the early 19th century. Historically, tradesmen shops and mills along the North Branch also fueled the economy, and sheds for finishing granite from Barre operated along the Winooski. Ski areas are also located near the city.

Travelers can reach the city via the Amtrak Montpelier station, which is located 2 miles west of the downtown area and offers regular service on the Vermonter train. Private planes can also use the nearby Edward F. Knapp State Airport in Berlin, Vermont, but the closest commercial air service is via the Patrick Leahy Burlington International Airport to the northwest.

==History==

The meadows and flats of the Winooski River were well known among natives for their corn-raising capacities. The natural site of Montpelier made it a favorite residence for the natives who first inhabited the land. The level plain of nearly two hundred acres of the rich farmland, sheltered from winds by the surrounding valley made the area comparatively warm and comfortable. Its position near the confluence of many streams allowed for favorable hunting, fishing, and trading. Native mounds, tombstones, and other memorials of aboriginal life and death were found in Montpelier, or in the vicinity, by the first settlers, and traces of some of them still remain.

Between 1600 and 1800, European settlers began to arrive in the region. Soon after, war, disease, and dispersal virtually destroyed the Native American settlements. However, evidence suggests some Native Americans remained in the area as late as the mid-1800s.

Originally chartered on August 14, 1781, the Town of Montpelier was granted municipal powers by the &quot;Governor, Council and General Assembly of the Freemen of the State of Vermont&quot;. The first permanent settlement began in May 1787, when Colonel Jacob Davis and General Parley Davis arrived from Charlton, Massachusetts. General Davis surveyed the land, while Colonel Davis cleared forest and erected a large log house on the west side of the North Branch of the Winooski River. His family moved in the following winter.

Colonel Davis selected the name &quot;Montpelier&quot; after the French city of Montpellier, capital of the department of Hérault. There was a general enthusiasm for things French as a result of the country&#x27;s aid to the American colonies during the Revolutionary War. The settlement grew quickly, and by 1791 the population reached 117.

The configuration of the early village was strongly influenced by geography. As early as 1799 a bridge was constructed across the Winooski River to Berlin.

The Town&#x27;s Charter was reissued on February 6, 1804, to include a boundary description of the lands granted to the Town&#x27;s inhabitants and proprietors. The confluence of the Winooski, North Branch and Dog Rivers provided a central point for the local population and commerce.

By 1805, the town had a population of 1,200. In that year, the state legislature sought a permanent home. Montpelier was selected because of its central location and accessibility, and because local residents provided land and money. A humble State House was soon constructed on State Street.

In 1825, the Marquis de Lafayette visited Montpelier on a triumphal tour of the United States, 50 years after the Revolutionary War.

The town developed into a center for manufacturing, especially after the Central Vermont Railway opened in Montpelier on June 20, 1849. In response to Montpelier&#x27;s growth and changing demographics, on November 9, 1848, the General Assembly divided the original Town into two district municipal corporations. The towns of East Montpelier and Montpelier were created. Later, in an attempt to modernize its form of government, the town was reconstituted as the Village of Montpelier.

By 1858, the layout of the main streets paralleling the rivers was in place. The downtown street pattern has changed little since that time.

Ten thousand people turned out to greet Major General Philip Sheridan in 1867 when he visited to address the fourth annual meeting of Vermont former Union officers. He particularly thanked Vermont veterans of the Civil War for their performance at the Battle of Cedar Creek.

In 1875, a large fire destroyed many downtown buildings.

The village had the first municipal water driven hydro system in Vermont in 1884. Water pressure generated sufficient electricity for streetlights.

The first charter of Montpelier was granted in 1894 and was amended shortly thereafter in 1898, and again in 1900 and 1912. The first amendment permitted the city to annex a part of the Town of Berlin; the latter enactments amended the 1898 charter to deal with such matters as water works, the relationship between the city and the Washington County Grammar School, and composition of the City Council.

The state proclaimed October 12, 1899, as &quot;Dewey Day&quot; to honor native son George Dewey, the hero of Battle of Manila Bay in the Spanish–American War. Thousands turned out from the state to his hometown of Montpelier for the celebration. In 1899, Hubbard Park was established with a donation of land, known as &quot;Hubbard Hill&quot;, bequeathed to the City of Montpelier by John Erastus Hubbard (1847–1899) with the intent to &quot;preserve wilderness&quot; for future generations. In 1911, additional land was donated and from 1915 to 1930 an observation tower was constructed on this donated land.

In 1927, after a particularly wet summer and fall, heavy rains began on the evening of November 2 that continued until the morning of November 4. The heaviest rain fell on November 3, when more than seven inches fell in a six-hour period. The prolonged heavy rains on top of the already saturated soil from the summer and fall proved to be more than the watercourses could handle. Brooks and rivers overflowed, carrying trees and logs in their wake. Dams, bridges and embankments were destroyed. Buildings were submerged, farm animals drowned, and homes and barns were swept away. Rivers reached 13 feet or more above their normal depths. Flood waters gradually receded, leaving behind silt, gravel and debris. At least a foot of mud was left on the floors of downtown stores.

At the time, only two stores in Montpelier carried flood insurance. The staggering loss represented an average of $400 for every man, woman, and child in town—equivalent to roughly $5,760 in 2018 dollars. In the days following the flood, Vermont was widely praised for its recovery efforts. President Calvin Coolidge, in particular, hailed the “indomitable spirit” of Vermonters, of whom he was one.

In response to the damage suffered by Montpelier and surrounding communities in the Great Flood of 1927, the Civilian Conservation Corps built the Wrightsville Dam during a period from 1933 to 1935. The resulting reservoir, Wrightsville Reservoir, required the disbandment and flooding of the village of Wrightsville, which contained at least 30 built structures at the time.

The City of Montpelier grew slowly in the late 19th and early 20th centuries during the period of intensive out-migration from the state to new lands in the West, or to industrial centers elsewhere in New England. Montpelier was already established as a government, market, service and industrial center in the region. When the automobile arrived, new state highways were routed to the city limits, and traffic then circulated through the original streets of the city. In 1954, a new bridge was constructed at Bailey Avenue which linked to an extension of Winooski Avenue, now Memorial Drive, and diverted some of the traffic from the downtown area.

An early spring thaw in March 1992 caused an ice jam to form in the Winooski River downstream of the Bailey Avenue bridge in Montpelier. In less than an hour, water levels in the Winooski and North Branch rivers rose upstream of the ice jam and flooded downtown Montpelier. The damage shut down 120 businesses, left 50 residents without homes, disrupted the operations of state government, and caused upwards of $5 million in damage.

Heavy rains on July 10-11, 2023, resulted in catastrophic flooding in Montpelier and many other parts of Vermont. In addition to many residences, the waters severely affected multiple downtown businesses as well as the city&#x27;s fire department, police department, and City Hall.

==Geography==

Montpelier is located in the north-central area of Vermont. The city center is a flat clay zone (elevation ), surrounded by hills and granite ledges. Towne Hill runs in a ridge (~) along the northern edge of the city.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and 0.10% is water. The Winooski River flows west along the south edge of downtown village and is fed by several smaller tributaries that cut through residential districts. Montpelier has been subject to periodic flooding in the flat city center, with two major floods occurring in 1927 and in 1992.

On its borders are the towns of Middlesex to the west, Berlin to the south, and East Montpelier to the north and east. Montpelier lies near the geographic center of the state. Though it does not share a border, Montpelier is frequently associated with the nearby city of Barre, and the two are often referred to together as &quot;Barre-Montpelier&quot;.

===Climate===
Montpelier features a humid continental climate (Köppen &quot;Dfb&quot;), with long, cold, and snowy winters, short springs and autumns, and warm, humid summers. From January to July, daily means range from . In winter, lows fall below on 24 mornings and daytime highs stay below freezing for the majority of afternoons from December to February. Snow is also frequent and remains on the ground for long stretches throughout the winter, though thaws are by no means infrequent. Average annual snowfall is . Summers are warm and often humid, with 2 or 3 days above , but rarely reaching .

Extremes have ranged from in January 1981 to , most recently recorded in July 1977.

==Demographics==
Along with Barre, the city forms a small micropolitan area in the center of the state; together they are known as &quot;the twin cities&quot;.

At the 2019 American Community Survey, an estimated 7,852 people lived in the city. At the census of 2010, there were 7,855 people, 3,739 households, and 1,940 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 3,899 housing units at an average density of .

At the 2010 census, there were 3,739 households, out of which 26.0% had children under the age of 18 years living with them, 38.5% were married couples living together, 10.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 48.1% were non-families. 39.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.09 and the average family size was 2.84.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 21.3% under the age of 18, 8.6% from 18 to 24, 28.2% from 25 to 44, 27.1% from 45 to 64, and 14.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 84.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 82.0 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $37,513, and the median income for a family was $51,818. Males had a median income of $35,957 versus $29,442 for females. The per capita income for the city was $22,599. About 7.2% of families and 9.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12.9% of those under age 18 and 5.7% of those age 65 or over.

In 2019, there were 3,668 households with an average of 2.03 persons per household. The city had an owner-occupied housing rate of 55.6% and median value of owner-occupied housing rate of $252,600. The median monthly cost of an owner-occupied housing unit was $1,827 and without a mortgage $822. The city had a median gross rent of $1,022.

=== Race and ethnicity ===
In 2019, the racial and ethnic makeup of Montpelier was 92.2% non-Hispanic white, 1.6% Black or African American, 1.5% Asian, 2.4% two or more races, and 2.3% Hispanic or Latin American of any race. Among the population in 2019, 4.1% were foreign-born persons. In 2010, the racial makeup of the city was 93.7% White, 1.0% African American, 0.3% Native American, 2.2% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.39% from other races, and 2.2% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.1% of the population.

==Economy==

Government, higher education, insurance and tourism are principal businesses in Montpelier.

===Industry===
Since the city&#x27;s establishment as capital in 1805, the primary business in Montpelier has been state government. By the mid-19th century, Montpelier was also the home of life and fire insurance companies including National Life Group.

The majority of businesses in the downtown area, mostly retail, are locally owned. These include antiques, books, handmade toys, crafts, kitchenware, jewelry, and Vermont-themed gifts.

Montpelier is the only state capital that neither has at least one Starbucks location nor one McDonald&#x27;s store.

The Savoy Theater, which was opened in 1905, is an eclectic art house with a main theater that holds 120 and a smaller room that holds 35. It specializes in documentaries, independent features, and international films. The annual Green Mountain Film Festival is held in Montpelier, and is hosted by the Savoy.

===Tourism===
The Vermont History Museum, operated in The Pavilion by the Vermont Historical Society, is an attraction.

==Arts and culture==

* Kellogg-Hubbard Library—with a copy of the Parthenon Frieze
* Lost Nation Theater
* Montpelier Theatre Guild
* Vermont History Museum—in The Pavilion
* Vermont State House
* T. W. Wood Gallery &amp; Arts Center
*Capital City Concerts
* An annual local vernacular culture phenomenon, the Valentine Phantom, a tradition of covering downtown storefronts and public buildings with red hearts each February 14, began in Montpelier in the 1990s.

==Sports==
The Vermont Mountaineers of the New England Collegiate Baseball League play at the Montpelier Recreation Field.

The Grand Depart of the Vermont Super 8 bikepacking route takes place on the steps of the capitol each fall.

==Parks and recreation==

The city has three city nature centers. Hubbard Park rises behind the state capitol building and extends along the ridge line towards the north past the pool to the stump dump. Accessible from Cummings Street off State Route 12, the North Branch River Park is the second-largest park in the city. The Mill Pond Park is located along State Route 12 approximately from the cemetery and features boat access to the North Branch river, as well as benches and short-term parking. The North Branch Nature Center is located at the northern end of town and includes of protected land as well as a community nature center. A bridge from the North Branch Nature Center connects the land to the North Branch River Park on the opposite side of the North Branch River. In recent years, North Branch River Park has significantly expanding its mountain biking trails, making it a hub for area mountain bikers of all ages. The first mountain bike trail in North Branch River Park was constructed and opened in 2005 as part of a partnership between the Montpelier Area Mountain Bike Association and the Montpelier Parks Department. Since that time, 4 additional miles of trails have been added. A pump track is also currently under construction.

==Government==
Montpelier&#x27;s government maintains a city council, city manager, and mayor. The city council consists of a mayor and six members. Council members are elected on a nonpartisan ballot from three districts, with councilors serving staggered two-year terms. The mayor is elected to a two-year term in each even-numbered year on a nonpartisan ballot in a citywide election. The council appoints the city manager who is the chief administrative officer of the city.

The city provides municipal services for its residents and businesses. These include local law enforcement, firefighting, planning and zoning regulation, and provision for potable drinking water and wastewater.

Politically, Montpelier is a Democratic stronghold. In the 2020 United States presidential election, Joe Biden received 88 percent of the vote to Donald Trump&#x27;s 9 percent.

==Education==
* Public schools include:
** Montpelier High School 
** Main Street Middle School 
**Union Elementary School
* River Rock School is a private school serving kindergarten through 8th grade students.
* A campus of the Community College of Vermont
* Union Institute &amp; University Vermont campus, offers a Master of Education program through a low-residency (online) program
* Vermont College of Fine Arts is a low-residency graduate school offering Masters of Fine Arts degrees in visual arts, writing, and writing for children and young adults

==Media==
The &quot;Barre Montpelier Times Argus i&quot;s a daily newspaper that serves Montpelier and Washington County. The Montpelier Bridge is a semi-monthly paper covering the Montpelier area. The broadcast television station WNNE (The CW) is licensed to the city. ORCA Media is a non-profit community media center that serves Montpelier and surrounding communities, including Randolph and Waterbury.

==Infrastructure==
===Transportation===

Montpelier has become one of Vermont&#x27;s most readily accessible cities and towns, as Vermont&#x27;s founders deliberately placed the capital near the geographic center of the state.

====Roads====
The city is located along Interstate 89. East–west U.S. Route 2 and north–south Vermont Route 12 are two other principal routes that intersect in Montpelier. Both I-89 and U.S. 2 provide a direct link to Burlington and the populous Lake Champlain Valley in the northwestern corner of the state. U.S. Route 302 has its western terminus in Montpelier, connecting it with the nearby city of Barre and points east.

====Rail====

Amtrak, the national passenger rail system, provides daily service from its station at Montpelier Junction in the neighboring town of Berlin, on the route known as the &quot;Vermonter&quot;, operating between St. Albans, Vermont and Washington, D.C.

====Bus====
Greyhound and Megabus operate buses that serve Montpelier. The Green Mountain Transit Authority (GMTA) operates a local bus network throughout the micropolitan area, with stops in Montpelier and Barre, including nearby Waterbury, the Vermont State House, the Ben &amp; Jerry&#x27;s factory, and the local Berlin Mall. GMTA and its sister bus company in Burlington, the Chittenden County Transportation Authority (CCTA), operate a series of LINK commuter buses with stops in Montpelier, Burlington, Richmond, and Waterbury.

====Air====
Air travelers in private planes can use the Edward F. Knapp State Airport in Berlin to access Montpelier. The Burlington International Airport in Chittenden County is the closest commercial air service, located northwest of Montpelier.

====Other====
Two shared-use paths for walking and bicycling connect to Montpelier: the Cross Vermont Trail and the Central Vermont Regional Path. Montpelier&#x27;s downtown is relatively compact and pedestrian-friendly, with sidewalks and crosswalks throughout the downtown area.

==Notable people==
==Sister cities ==
* Zapopan, Mexico

==See also==

* Athenwood and the Thomas W. Wood Studio – historic buildings in Montpelier
* Christ Episcopal Church – historic church in Montpelier
* Saint Augustine&#x27;s Church – historic church in Montpelier
* USS &quot;Montpelier&quot;, 3 ships

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q26426" start="0" end="10" title="Montpelier, Vermont" label="Montpelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="18" end="30" title="List of capitals in the United States" label="capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="38" end="48" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="52" end="59" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="68" end="79" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q505380" start="83" end="100" title="Washington County, Vermont" label="Washington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589330" start="114" end="145" title="Government of Vermont" label="Vermont&amp;#x27;s state government"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="157" end="185" title="List of capitals in the United States" label="least populous state capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="218" end="229" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921694" start="362" end="390" title="Vermont College of Fine Arts" label="Vermont College of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="442" end="453" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="478" end="484" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="542" end="555" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838107" start="888" end="912" title="Franco-American alliance" label="Franco-American alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="924" end="941" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445368" start="966" end="978" title="Francophile" label="Francophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164787" start="1272" end="1286" title="Winooski River" label="Winooski River"/>
<link wikidata="Q509770" start="1383" end="1400" title="Chittenden County, Vermont" label="Chittenden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q28232384" start="1569" end="1573" title="Great Vermont Flood of 1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q120850444" start="1585" end="1589" title="July 2023 Northeastern United States floods" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q28123745" start="2016" end="2023" title="Vermont Granite Museum" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q26071" start="2029" end="2034" title="Barre (city), Vermont" label="Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="2144" end="2150" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906179" start="2151" end="2169" title="Montpelier station (Vermont)" label="Montpelier station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412872" start="2256" end="2265" title="Vermonter (train)" label="Vermonter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342836" start="2312" end="2341" title="Edward F. Knapp State Airport" label="Edward F. Knapp State Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q821245" start="2345" end="2360" title="Berlin, Vermont" label="Berlin, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750047" start="2412" end="2458" title="Patrick Leahy Burlington International Airport" label="Patrick Leahy Burlington International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559543" start="3724" end="3747" title="Charlton, Massachusetts" label="Charlton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164787" start="3891" end="3905" title="Winooski River" label="Winooski River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="4030" end="4041" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="4058" end="4068" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q12545" start="4072" end="4079" title="Hérault" label="Hérault"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="4204" end="4221" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q821245" start="4441" end="4447" title="Berlin, Vermont" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="5043" end="5063" title="Gilbert du Motier, marquis de Lafayette" label="Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q743414" start="5237" end="5260" title="Central Vermont Railway" label="Central Vermont Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q355452" start="5847" end="5862" title="Philip Sheridan" label="Philip Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="6006" end="6015" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710916" start="6045" end="6066" title="Battle of Cedar Creek" label="Battle of Cedar Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q467093" start="6765" end="6777" title="George Dewey" label="George Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q528550" start="6791" end="6811" title="Battle of Manila Bay" label="Battle of Manila Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="6819" end="6839" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q39074072" start="6937" end="6949" title="Hubbard Park (Montpelier, Vermont)" label="Hubbard Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="8372" end="8387" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q28232384" start="8556" end="8575" title="Great Vermont Flood of 1927" label="Great Flood of 1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094508" start="8581" end="8608" title="Civilian Conservation Corps" label="Civilian Conservation Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197359" start="8696" end="8718" title="Wrightsville Reservoir" label="Wrightsville Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q120850444" start="9980" end="10001" title="July_2023_Northeastern_United_States_floods" label="catastrophic flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="10469" end="10496" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164787" start="10570" end="10584" title="Winooski River" label="Winooski River"/>
<link wikidata="Q28232384" start="10828" end="10832" title="Great Vermont Flood of 1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450947" start="10879" end="10888" title="Middlesex, Vermont" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q821245" start="10902" end="10908" title="Berlin, Vermont" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450958" start="10927" end="10942" title="East Montpelier, Vermont" label="East Montpelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q590232" start="10991" end="11008" title="geographic center" label="geographic center"/>
<link wikidata="Q26071" start="11118" end="11123" title="Barre (city), Vermont" label="Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="11238" end="11263" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="11265" end="11271" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q26071" start="11918" end="11923" title="Barre (city), Vermont" label="Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270419" start="11948" end="11965" title="micropolitan area" label="micropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="12063" end="12088" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="12142" end="12148" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="12246" end="12264" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="13278" end="13295" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="13387" end="13399" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14152" end="14157" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14164" end="14180" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14187" end="14202" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14209" end="14214" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14222" end="14238" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14251" end="14262" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14297" end="14305" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14309" end="14315" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974184" start="14698" end="14717" title="National Life Group" label="National Life Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q37158" start="14973" end="14982" title="Starbucks" label="Starbucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="15000" end="15015" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139022" start="15254" end="15282" title="Green Mountain Film Festival" label="Green Mountain Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756395" start="15389" end="15401" title="The Pavilion (Vermont)" label="The Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921723" start="15409" end="15435" title="Vermont Historical Society" label="Vermont Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087894" start="15523" end="15539" title="Parthenon Frieze" label="Parthenon Frieze"/>
<link wikidata="Q723549" start="15632" end="15651" title="Vermont State House" label="Vermont State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921928" start="15732" end="15750" title="vernacular culture" label="vernacular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7910999" start="15767" end="15784" title="Valentine Phantom" label="Valentine Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921747" start="15936" end="15956" title="Vermont Mountaineers" label="Vermont Mountaineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007209" start="15964" end="16002" title="New England Collegiate Baseball League" label="New England Collegiate Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906194" start="16015" end="16042" title="Montpelier Recreation Field" label="Montpelier Recreation Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q39074072" start="16221" end="16233" title="Hubbard Park (Montpelier, Vermont)" label="Hubbard Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118241" start="17361" end="17371" title="pump track" label="pump track"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="18162" end="18202" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="18204" end="18213" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="18249" end="18261" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906189" start="18324" end="18346" title="Montpelier High School (Vermont)" label="Montpelier High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154694" start="18511" end="18539" title="Community College of Vermont" label="Community College of Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885779" start="18542" end="18574" title="Union Institute &amp;amp; University" label="Union Institute &amp;amp; University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921694" start="18671" end="18699" title="Vermont College of Fine Arts" label="Vermont College of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863287" start="18861" end="18889" title="Barre Montpelier Times Argus" label="Barre Montpelier Times Argus"/>
<link wikidata="Q57786175" start="18967" end="18984" title="Montpelier Bridge" label="Montpelier Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144899" start="19043" end="19063" title="broadcast television" label="broadcast television"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711943" start="19072" end="19076" title="WNNE" label="WNNE"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="19078" end="19084" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q94957" start="19516" end="19529" title="Interstate 89" label="Interstate 89"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488332" start="19541" end="19553" title="U.S. Route 2 in Vermont" label="U.S. Route 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507300" start="19570" end="19586" title="Vermont Route 12" label="Vermont Route 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411062" start="19785" end="19799" title="U.S. Route 302" label="U.S. Route 302"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="19916" end="19922" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906179" start="19992" end="19999" title="Montpelier station (Amtrak)" label="station"/>
<link wikidata="Q821245" start="20050" end="20056" title="Berlin, Vermont" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412872" start="20090" end="20099" title="Vermonter (train)" label="Vermonter"/>
<link wikidata="Q968060" start="20125" end="20144" title="St. Albans (town), Vermont" label="St. Albans, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="20149" end="20165" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="20179" end="20188" title="Greyhound Bus Lines" label="Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808155" start="20193" end="20200" title="Megabus (North America)" label="Megabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602908" start="20242" end="20274" title="Green Mountain Transit Authority" label="Green Mountain Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q26071" start="20374" end="20379" title="Barre (city), Vermont" label="Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374855" start="20398" end="20407" title="Waterbury, Vermont" label="Waterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q723549" start="20413" end="20432" title="Vermont State House" label="Vermont State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q816412" start="20438" end="20460" title="Ben &amp;amp; Jerry&amp;#x27;s" label="Ben &amp;amp; Jerry&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102479" start="20548" end="20590" title="Chittenden County Transportation Authority" label="Chittenden County Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q31058" start="20665" end="20675" title="Burlington, Vermont" label="Burlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965047" start="20677" end="20685" title="Richmond, Vermont" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374855" start="20691" end="20700" title="Waterbury, Vermont" label="Waterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342836" start="20759" end="20788" title="Edward F. Knapp State Airport" label="Edward F. Knapp State Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750047" start="20825" end="20857" title="Burlington International Airport" label="Burlington International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q509770" start="20861" end="20878" title="Chittenden County, Vermont" label="Chittenden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q147402" start="21274" end="21281" title="Zapopan" label="Zapopan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813546" start="21307" end="21346" title="Athenwood and the Thomas W. Wood Studio" label="Athenwood and the Thomas W. Wood Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108870" start="21384" end="21407" title="Christ Episcopal Church (Montpelier, Vermont)" label="Christ Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400997" start="21442" end="21471" title="Saint Augustine&amp;#x27;s Church, Montpelier" label="Saint Augustine&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470354" start="21506" end="21532" title="USS Montpelier" label="USS &amp;quot;Montpelier&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41993" wikidata="Q1061524" url="?curid=41993" title="Intensity (physics)">
<text>In physics and many other areas of science and engineering the intensity or flux of radiant energy is the power transferred per unit area, where the area is measured on the plane perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the energy. In the SI system, it has units watts per square metre (W/m2), or kg⋅s−3 in base units. Intensity is used most frequently with waves such as acoustic waves (sound), matter waves such as electrons in electron microscopes, and electromagnetic waves such as light or radio waves, in which case the &quot;average&quot; power transfer over one period of the wave is used. &quot;Intensity&quot; can be applied to other circumstances where energy is transferred. For example, one could calculate the intensity of the kinetic energy carried by drops of water from a garden sprinkler.

The word &quot;intensity&quot; as used here is not synonymous with &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot;, or &quot;&quot;, as it sometimes is in colloquial speech.

Intensity can be found by taking the energy density (energy per unit volume) at a point in space and multiplying it by the velocity at which the energy is moving. The resulting vector has the units of power divided by area (i.e., surface power density). The intensity of a wave is proportional to the square of its amplitude. For example, the intensity of an electromagnetic wave is proportional to the square of the wave&#x27;s electric field amplitude.

==Mathematical description==
If a point source is radiating energy in all directions (producing a spherical wave), and no energy is absorbed or scattered by the medium, then the intensity decreases in proportion to the distance from the object squared. This is an example of the inverse-square law.

Applying the law of conservation of energy, if the net power emanating is constant,
formula_1
where 
* is the net power radiated;
* is the intensity vector as a function of position;
*the magnitude is the intensity as a function of position;
* is a differential element of a closed surface that contains the source.

If one integrates a uniform intensity, , over a surface that is perpendicular to the intensity vector, for instance over a sphere centered around the point source, the equation becomes
formula_2
where 
* is the intensity at the surface of the sphere;
* is the radius of the sphere;
*formula_3 is the expression for the surface area of a sphere.

Solving for gives
formula_4

If the medium is damped, then the intensity drops off more quickly than the above equation suggests.

Anything that can transmit energy can have an intensity associated with it. For a monochromatic propagating electromagnetic wave, such as a plane wave or a Gaussian beam, if is the complex amplitude of the electric field, then the time-averaged energy density of the wave, travelling in a non-magnetic material, is given by:
formula_5
and the local intensity is obtained by multiplying this expression by the wave velocity, 
formula_6
where
* is the refractive index;
* is the speed of light in vacuum;
* is the vacuum permittivity.

For non-monochromatic waves, the intensity contributions of different spectral components can simply be added. The treatment above does not hold for arbitrary electromagnetic fields. For example, an evanescent wave may have a finite electrical amplitude while not transferring any power. The intensity should then be defined as the magnitude of the Poynting vector.

==Electron beams==
For electron beams, &quot;intensity&quot; is the probability of electrons reaching some particular position on a detector (e.g. a charge-coupled device) which is used to produce images that are interpreted in terms of both microstructure of inorganic or biological materials, as well as atomic scale structure. The map of the intensity of scattered electrons or x-rays as a function of direction is also extensively used in crystallography.

==Alternative definitions==
In photometry and radiometry &quot;intensity&quot; has a different meaning: it is the luminous or radiant power &quot;per unit solid angle&quot;. This can cause confusion in optics, where &quot;intensity&quot; can mean any of radiant intensity, luminous intensity or irradiance, depending on the background of the person using the term. Radiance is also sometimes called &quot;intensity&quot;, especially by astronomers and astrophysicists, and in heat transfer.

==See also==
*Field strength
*Sound intensity
*Magnitude (astronomy)

==Footnotes==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3" end="10" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061524" start="63" end="72" title="Intensity (physics)" label="intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061524" start="76" end="80" title="Intensity (physics)" label="flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259526" start="84" end="98" title="radiant energy" label="radiant energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25342" start="106" end="111" title="Power (physics)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11500" start="133" end="137" title="area" label="area"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="247" end="249" title="SI" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="271" end="275" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25343" start="281" end="293" title="square metre" label="square metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="305" end="307" title="kilogram" label="kg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11574" start="308" end="309" title="second" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q223662" start="315" end="325" title="SI base unit" label="base units"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="366" end="370" title="wave" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="396" end="401" title="sound" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q193907" start="404" end="415" title="matter wave" label="matter wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560" start="438" end="457" title="electron microscope" label="electron microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="464" end="484" title="electromagnetic wave" label="electromagnetic wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="494" end="499" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="503" end="513" title="radio wave" label="radio wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130194" start="534" end="553" title="time averaging" label="&amp;quot;average&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="578" end="584" title="Period (physics)" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="749" end="763" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q998539" start="797" end="813" title="garden sprinkler" label="garden sprinkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q828402" start="1021" end="1035" title="energy density" label="energy density"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="1107" end="1115" title="velocity" label="velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="1161" end="1167" title="Vector (geometry)" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815910" start="1214" end="1235" title="surface power density" label="surface power density"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="1413" end="1427" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552709" start="1474" end="1486" title="point source" label="point source"/>
<link wikidata="Q193846" start="1538" end="1552" title="spherical wave" label="spherical wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q333094" start="1719" end="1737" title="inverse-square law" label="inverse-square law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11382" start="1760" end="1782" title="conservation of energy" label="conservation of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130428" start="1989" end="2009" title="differential element" label="differential element"/>
<link wikidata="Q122518" start="2674" end="2684" title="plane wave" label="plane wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q944873" start="2690" end="2703" title="Gaussian beam" label="Gaussian beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q827674" start="2715" end="2732" title="complex amplitude" label="complex amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="2740" end="2754" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q828402" start="2779" end="2793" title="energy density" label="energy density"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="2984" end="3000" title="refractive index" label="refractive index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="3011" end="3025" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="3029" end="3035" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158" start="3046" end="3065" title="vacuum permittivity" label="vacuum permittivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341668" start="3267" end="3282" title="evanescent wave" label="evanescent wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q504186" start="3417" end="3432" title="Poynting vector" label="Poynting vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q207340" start="3458" end="3472" title="electron beams" label="electron beams"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="3584" end="3605" title="charge-coupled device" label="charge-coupled device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498213" start="3677" end="3691" title="microstructure" label="microstructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817346" start="3741" end="3753" title="atomic scale" label="atomic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q160398" start="3878" end="3893" title="crystallography" label="crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q625648" start="3927" end="3937" title="photometry (optics)" label="photometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q247760" start="3942" end="3952" title="radiometry" label="radiometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q208476" start="4051" end="4062" title="solid angle" label="solid angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620" start="4098" end="4104" title="optics" label="optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253365" start="4150" end="4167" title="radiant intensity" label="radiant intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q104831" start="4169" end="4187" title="luminous intensity" label="luminous intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q830654" start="4191" end="4201" title="irradiance" label="irradiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411145" start="4261" end="4269" title="Radiance" label="Radiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q179635" start="4372" end="4385" title="heat transfer" label="heat transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365197" start="4402" end="4416" title="Field strength" label="Field strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140289" start="4418" end="4433" title="Sound intensity" label="Sound intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028919" start="4435" end="4456" title="Magnitude (astronomy)" label="Magnitude (astronomy)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41997" wikidata="Q110863" url="?curid=41997" title="Twin prime">
<text>A twin prime is a prime number that is either 2 less or 2 more than another prime number—for example, either member of the twin prime pair or In other words, a twin prime is a prime that has a prime gap of two. Sometimes the term &quot;twin prime&quot; is used for a pair of twin primes; an alternative name for this is prime twin or prime pair.

Twin primes become increasingly rare as one examines larger ranges, in keeping with the general tendency of gaps between adjacent primes to become larger as the numbers themselves get larger. However, it is unknown whether there are infinitely many twin primes (the so-called twin prime conjecture) or if there is a largest pair. The breakthrough
work of Yitang Zhang in 2013, as well as work by James Maynard, Terence Tao and others, has made substantial progress towards proving that there are infinitely many twin primes, but at present this remains unsolved.
==Properties==
Usually the pair is not considered to be a pair of twin primes.
Since 2 is the only even prime, this pair is the only pair of prime numbers that differ by one; thus twin primes are as closely spaced as possible for any other two primes.

The first several twin prime pairs are

Five is the only prime that belongs to two pairs, as every twin prime pair greater than is of the form formula_1 for some natural number ; that is, the number between the two primes is a multiple of 6.
As a result, the sum of any pair of twin primes (other than 3 and 5) is divisible by 12.

===Brun&#x27;s theorem===

In 1915, Viggo Brun showed that the sum of reciprocals of the twin primes was convergent.
This famous result, called Brun&#x27;s theorem, was the first use of the Brun sieve and helped initiate the development of modern sieve theory. The modern version of Brun&#x27;s argument can be used to show that the number of twin primes less than does not exceed
:formula_2

for some absolute constant 
In fact, it is bounded above by 
formula_3
where formula_4 is the &quot;twin prime constant&quot; (slightly less than 2/3), given below.

==Twin prime conjecture==
The question of whether there exist infinitely many twin primes has been one of the great open questions in number theory for many years. This is the content of the &quot;twin prime conjecture&quot;, which states that there are infinitely many primes such that is also prime. In 1849, de Polignac made the more general conjecture that for every natural number , there are infinitely many primes such that is also prime.
The of de Polignac&#x27;s conjecture is the twin prime conjecture.
A stronger form of the twin prime conjecture, the Hardy–Littlewood conjecture (see below), postulates a distribution law for twin primes akin to the prime number theorem.

On 17 April 2013, Yitang Zhang announced a proof that there exists an integer that is less than 70 million, where there are infinitely many pairs of primes that differ by . Zhang&#x27;s paper was accepted in early May 2013. Terence Tao subsequently proposed a Polymath Project collaborative effort to optimize Zhang&#x27;s bound.

One year after Zhang&#x27;s announcement, the bound had been reduced to 246, where it remains.
These improved bounds were discovered using a different approach that was simpler than Zhang&#x27;s and was discovered independently by James Maynard and Terence Tao. This second approach also gave bounds for the smallest needed to guarantee that infinitely many intervals of width contain at least primes. Moreover (see also the next section) assuming the Elliott–Halberstam conjecture and its generalized form, the Polymath Project wiki states that the bound is 12 and 6, respectively.

A strengthening of Goldbach’s conjecture, if proved, would also prove there is an infinite number of twin primes, as would the existence of Siegel zeroes.

==Other theorems weaker than the twin prime conjecture==
In 1940, Paul Erdős showed that there is a constant and infinitely many primes such that where denotes the next prime after . What this means is that we can find infinitely many intervals that contain two primes as long as we let these intervals grow slowly in size as we move to bigger and bigger primes. Here, &quot;grow slowly&quot; means that the length of these intervals can grow logarithmically. This result was successively improved; in 1986 Helmut Maier showed that a constant can be used. In 2004 Daniel Goldston and Cem Yıldırım showed that the constant could be improved further to In 2005, Goldston, Pintz, and Yıldırım established that can be chosen to be arbitrarily small,
i.e.
:formula_5

On the other hand, this result does not rule out that there may not be infinitely many intervals that contain two primes if we only allow the intervals to grow in size as, for example, 

By assuming the Elliott–Halberstam conjecture or a slightly weaker version, they were able to show that there are infinitely many such that at least two of , , , , , , or are prime. Under a stronger hypothesis they showed that for infinitely many , at least two of , , , and are prime.

The result of Yitang Zhang,

:formula_6

is a major improvement on the Goldston–Graham–Pintz–Yıldırım result. The Polymath Project optimization of Zhang&#x27;s bound and the work of Maynard have reduced the bound: the limit inferior is at most 246.

==Conjectures==

===First Hardy–Littlewood conjecture===

The first Hardy–Littlewood conjecture (named after G. H. Hardy and John Littlewood) is a generalization of the twin prime conjecture. It is concerned with the distribution of prime constellations, including twin primes, in analogy to the prime number theorem. Let denote the number of primes such that is also prime. Define the &quot;twin prime constant&quot; as
formula_7
(Here the product extends over all prime numbers .) Then a special case of the first Hardy-Littlewood conjecture is that
formula_8
in the sense that the quotient of the two expressions tends to 1 as approaches infinity. (The second ~ is not part of the conjecture and is proven by integration by parts.)

The conjecture can be justified (but not proven) by assuming that describes the density function of the prime distribution. This assumption, which is suggested by the prime number theorem, implies the twin prime conjecture, as shown in the formula for above.

The fully general first Hardy–Littlewood conjecture on prime -tuples (not given here) implies that the &quot;second&quot; Hardy–Littlewood conjecture is false.

This conjecture has been extended by Dickson&#x27;s conjecture.

===Polignac&#x27;s conjecture===

Polignac&#x27;s conjecture from 1849 states that for every positive even integer , there are infinitely many consecutive prime pairs and such that (i.e. there are infinitely many prime gaps of size ). The case is the twin prime conjecture. The conjecture has not yet been proven or disproven for any specific value of , but Zhang&#x27;s result proves that it is true for at least one (currently unknown) value of . Indeed, if such a did not exist, then for any positive even natural number there are at most finitely many such that formula_9 for all and so for large enough we have formula_10 which would contradict Zhang&#x27;s result.

==Large twin primes==
Beginning in 2007, two distributed computing projects, Twin Prime Search and PrimeGrid, have produced several record-largest twin primes. , the current largest twin prime pair known is with 388,342 decimal digits. It was discovered in September 2016.

There are 808,675,888,577,436 twin prime pairs below .

An empirical analysis of all prime pairs up to 4.35 × shows that if the number of such pairs less than is then is about 1.7 for small and decreases towards about 1.3 as tends to infinity. The limiting value of is conjectured to equal twice the twin prime constant () (not to be confused with Brun&#x27;s constant), according to the Hardy–Littlewood conjecture.

==Other elementary properties==
Every third odd number is divisible by 3, and therefore no three successive odd numbers can be prime unless one of them is 3. Therefore, 5 is the only prime that is part of two twin prime pairs. The lower member of a pair is by definition a Chen prime.

If &quot;m&quot; − 4 or &quot;m&quot; + 6 is also prime then the three primes are called a prime triplet.

It has been proven that the pair (&quot;m&quot;, &quot;m&quot; + 2) is a twin prime if and only if

:formula_11

For a twin prime pair of the form (6&quot;n&quot; − 1, 6&quot;n&quot; + 1) for some natural number &quot;n&quot; &gt; 1, &quot;n&quot; must end in the digit 0, 2, 3, 5, 7, or 8 (). If &quot;n&quot; were to end in 1 or 6, 6&quot;n&quot; would end in 6, and 6&quot;n&quot; −1 would be a multiple of 5. This is not prime unless &quot;n&quot; = 1. Likewise, if &quot;n&quot; were to end in 4 or 9, 6&quot;n&quot; would end in 4, and 6&quot;n&quot; +1 would be a multiple of 5. The same rule applies modulo any prime &quot;p&quot; ≥ 5: If &quot;n&quot; ≡ ±6−1 (mod &quot;p&quot;), then one of the pair will be divisible by &quot;p&quot; and will not be a twin prime pair unless 6&quot;n&quot; = &quot;p&quot; ±1. &quot;p&quot; = 5 just happens to produce particularly simple patterns in base 10.

==Isolated prime==
An isolated prime (also known as single prime or non-twin prime) is a prime number &quot;p&quot; such that neither &quot;p&quot; − 2 nor &quot;p&quot; + 2 is prime. In other words, &quot;p&quot; is not part of a twin prime pair. For example, 23 is an isolated prime, since 21 and 25 are both composite.

The first few isolated primes are

:2, 23, 37, 47, 53, 67, 79, 83, 89, 97, ... .

It follows from Brun&#x27;s theorem that almost all primes are isolated in the sense that the ratio of the number of isolated primes less than a given threshold &quot;n&quot; and the number of all primes less than &quot;n&quot; tends to 1 as &quot;n&quot; tends to infinity.

==See also==
* Cousin prime
* Prime gap
* Prime &quot;k&quot;-tuple
* Prime quadruplet
* Prime triplet
* Sexy prime

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* Top-20 Twin Primes at Chris Caldwell&#x27;s Prime Pages
* Xavier Gourdon, Pascal Sebah: &quot;Introduction to Twin Primes and Brun&#x27;s Constant&quot;
* &quot;Official press release&quot; of 58711-digit twin prime record
* The 20 000 first twin primes
* Polymath: Bounded gaps between primes
* Sudden Progress on Prime Number Problem Has Mathematicians Buzzing</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q110863" start="2" end="12" title="Twin prime" label="twin prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="18" end="30" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377044" start="193" end="202" title="prime gap" label="prime gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q110863" start="320" end="330" title="Twin prime" label="prime twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q110863" start="334" end="344" title="Twin prime" label="prime pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q110863" start="623" end="644" title="Twin prime" label="twin prime conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360454" start="702" end="714" title="Yitang Zhang" label="Yitang Zhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q19655060" start="743" end="756" title="James Maynard (mathematician)" label="James Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q295981" start="758" end="769" title="Terence Tao" label="Terence Tao"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="820" end="827" title="mathematical proof" label="proving"/>
<link wikidata="Q230967" start="1009" end="1013" title="parity (mathematics)" label="even"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="1325" end="1339" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q381433" start="1531" end="1541" title="Viggo Brun" label="Viggo Brun"/>
<link wikidata="Q216906" start="1565" end="1576" title="multiplicative inverse" label="reciprocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211057" start="1600" end="1610" title="convergent series" label="convergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q844612" start="1639" end="1658" title="Brun&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Brun&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003952" start="1685" end="1695" title="Brun sieve" label="Brun sieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517976" start="1742" end="1754" title="sieve theory" label="sieve theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2040" end="2051" title="#First Hardy–Littlewood conjecture" label="given below"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321906" start="2170" end="2184" title="open problem" label="open questions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="2188" end="2201" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270375" start="2365" end="2376" title="Alphonse de Polignac" label="de Polignac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402534" start="2507" end="2536" title="de Polignac&amp;#x27;s conjecture" label="de Polignac&amp;#x27;s conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q386292" start="2716" end="2736" title="prime number theorem" label="prime number theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360454" start="2757" end="2769" title="Yitang Zhang" label="Yitang Zhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="2809" end="2816" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q295981" start="2963" end="2974" title="Terence Tao" label="Terence Tao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000812" start="2999" end="3015" title="Polymath Project" label="Polymath Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q19655060" start="3301" end="3314" title="James Maynard (mathematician)" label="James Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q295981" start="3319" end="3330" title="Terence Tao" label="Terence Tao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993296" start="3522" end="3551" title="Elliott–Halberstam conjecture" label="Elliott–Halberstam conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q485520" start="3673" end="3694" title="Goldbach’s conjecture" label="Goldbach’s conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773226" start="3794" end="3805" title="Siegel zero" label="Siegel zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q173746" start="3876" end="3886" title="Paul Erdős" label="Paul Erdős"/>
<link wikidata="Q186509" start="3910" end="3918" title="Mathematical constant" label="constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="4253" end="4262" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5709706" start="4317" end="4329" title="Helmut Maier" label="Helmut Maier"/>
<link wikidata="Q607250" start="4374" end="4389" title="Daniel Goldston" label="Daniel Goldston"/>
<link wikidata="Q472787" start="4394" end="4406" title="Cem Yıldırım" label="Cem Yıldırım"/>
<link wikidata="Q607250" start="4470" end="4478" title="Daniel Goldston" label="Goldston"/>
<link wikidata="Q963230" start="4480" end="4485" title="János Pintz" label="Pintz"/>
<link wikidata="Q472787" start="4491" end="4499" title="Cem Yıldırım" label="Yıldırım"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993296" start="4776" end="4805" title="Elliott–Halberstam conjecture" label="Elliott–Halberstam conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360454" start="5061" end="5073" title="Yitang Zhang" label="Yitang Zhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076611" start="5265" end="5279" title="limit inferior" label="limit inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q18450813" start="5359" end="5392" title="first Hardy–Littlewood conjecture" label="first Hardy–Littlewood conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q184337" start="5406" end="5417" title="G. H. Hardy" label="G. H. Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q353426" start="5422" end="5437" title="John Edensor Littlewood" label="John Littlewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243373" start="5530" end="5549" title="prime constellation" label="prime constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q386292" start="5593" end="5613" title="prime number theorem" label="prime number theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q33540" start="5913" end="5921" title="limit of a function" label="tends to"/>
<link wikidata="Q273328" start="6009" end="6029" title="integration by parts" label="integration by parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q207522" start="6113" end="6129" title="density function" label="density function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243373" start="6348" end="6360" title="prime k-tuple" label="prime -tuple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920423" start="6396" end="6442" title="second Hardy–Littlewood conjecture" label="&amp;quot;second&amp;quot; Hardy–Littlewood conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993313" start="6491" end="6516" title="Dickson&amp;#x27;s conjecture" label="Dickson&amp;#x27;s conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402534" start="6553" end="6579" title="Polignac&amp;#x27;s conjecture" label="Polignac&amp;#x27;s conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377044" start="6732" end="6741" title="prime gap" label="prime gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q180634" start="7236" end="7257" title="distributed computing" label="distributed computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117142" start="7268" end="7285" title="Twin Prime Search" label="Twin Prime Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146690" start="7290" end="7299" title="PrimeGrid" label="PrimeGrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q844612" start="7813" end="7833" title="Brun&amp;#x27;s constant" label="Brun&amp;#x27;s constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q230967" start="7927" end="7930" title="parity (mathematics)" label="odd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344088" start="8156" end="8166" title="Chen prime" label="Chen prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516865" start="8260" end="8273" title="prime triplet" label="prime triplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q50707" start="9492" end="9501" title="composite number" label="composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q200" start="9540" end="9541" title="2 (number)" label="2"/>
<link wikidata="Q48240" start="9543" end="9545" title="23 (number)" label="23"/>
<link wikidata="Q712770" start="9547" end="9549" title="37 (number)" label="37"/>
<link wikidata="Q712687" start="9551" end="9553" title="47 (number)" label="47"/>
<link wikidata="Q712808" start="9555" end="9557" title="53 (number)" label="53"/>
<link wikidata="Q713157" start="9559" end="9561" title="67 (number)" label="67"/>
<link wikidata="Q713148" start="9563" end="9565" title="79 (number)" label="79"/>
<link wikidata="Q713181" start="9567" end="9569" title="83 (number)" label="83"/>
<link wikidata="Q535061" start="9571" end="9573" title="89 (number)" label="89"/>
<link wikidata="Q673849" start="9575" end="9577" title="97 (number)" label="97"/>
<link wikidata="Q844612" start="9602" end="9621" title="Brun&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Brun&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9627" end="9637" title="Almost all#Meaning in number theory" label="almost all"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191657" start="9877" end="9889" title="Cousin prime" label="Cousin prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377044" start="9892" end="9901" title="Prime gap" label="Prime gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243373" start="9904" end="9929" title="Prime k-tuple" label="Prime &amp;quot;k&amp;quot;-tuple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663458" start="9932" end="9948" title="Prime quadruplet" label="Prime quadruplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516865" start="9951" end="9964" title="Prime triplet" label="Prime triplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194842" start="9967" end="9977" title="Sexy prime" label="Sexy prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360437" start="10080" end="10091" title="Prime Pages" label="Prime Pages"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="41999" wikidata="Q111999" url="?curid=41999" title="Franz Mertens">
<text>Franz Mertens (20 March 1840 – 5 March 1927) (also known as Franciszek Mertens) was a Polish mathematician. He was born in Schroda in the Grand Duchy of Posen, Kingdom of Prussia (now Środa Wielkopolska, Poland) and died in Vienna, Austria.

The Mertens function &quot;M&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) is the sum function for the Möbius function, in the theory of arithmetic functions. The Mertens conjecture concerning its growth, conjecturing it bounded by &quot;x&quot;1/2, which would have implied the Riemann hypothesis, is now known to be false (Odlyzko and te Riele, 1985). The Meissel–Mertens constant is analogous to the Euler–Mascheroni constant, but the harmonic series sum in its definition is only over the primes rather than over all integers and the logarithm is taken twice, not just once. Mertens&#x27;s theorems are three 1874 results related to the density of prime numbers.

Erwin Schrödinger was taught calculus and algebra by Mertens.

His memory is honoured by the Franciszek Mertens Scholarship granted (from 2017) to those outstanding pupils of foreign secondary schools who wish to study at the Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science of the Jagiellonian University in Kraków and were finalists of the national-level mathematics, or computer science olympiads, or they have participated in one of the following international olympiads: in mathematics (IMO), computer science (IOI), artificial intelligence (IOAI), astronomy (IAO), astronomy and astrophysics (IOAA), physics (IPhO), linguistics (IOL), European Girls&#x27; Mathematical Olympiad (EGMO), European Girls’ Olympiad in Informatics (EGOI), Romanian Masters of Mathematics (RMM), Romanian Masters of Informatics (RMI) or International Zhautykov Olympiad (IZhO).

==See also==
* Mertens&#x27;s theorems
* Cauchy product

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q111999" start="0" end="13" title="Franz Mertens" label="Franz Mertens"/>
<link wikidata="Q111999" start="60" end="78" title="Franz Mertens" label="Franciszek Mertens"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="93" end="106" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q52903" start="123" end="130" title="Środa Wielkopolska" label="Schroda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783098" start="138" end="158" title="Grand Duchy of Posen" label="Grand Duchy of Posen"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="160" end="178" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52903" start="184" end="202" title="Środa Wielkopolska" label="Środa Wielkopolska"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="204" end="210" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="224" end="230" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q518101" start="232" end="239" title="First Austrian Republic" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q841254" start="246" end="262" title="Mertens function" label="Mertens function"/>
<link wikidata="Q205243" start="320" end="335" title="Möbius function" label="Möbius function"/>
<link wikidata="Q140744" start="354" end="373" title="arithmetic function" label="arithmetic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600201" start="380" end="398" title="Mertens conjecture" label="Mertens conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q205966" start="496" end="514" title="Riemann hypothesis" label="Riemann hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q506615" start="542" end="549" title="Andrew Odlyzko" label="Odlyzko"/>
<link wikidata="Q454904" start="554" end="562" title="Herman te Riele" label="te Riele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918289" start="575" end="599" title="Meissel–Mertens constant" label="Meissel–Mertens constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q273023" start="620" end="645" title="Euler–Mascheroni constant" label="Euler–Mascheroni constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q464100" start="655" end="670" title="harmonic series (mathematics)" label="harmonic series"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="710" end="716" title="prime number" label="primes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196729" start="796" end="819" title="Mertens&amp;#x27;s theorems" label="Mertens&amp;#x27;s theorems"/>
<link wikidata="Q9130" start="885" end="902" title="Erwin Schrödinger" label="Erwin Schrödinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q189441" start="1162" end="1185" title="Jagiellonian University" label="Jagiellonian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="1189" end="1195" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1222" end="1248" title="List of mathematics competitions#National mathematics olympiads" label="national-level mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983" start="1359" end="1370" title="International Mathematical Olympiad" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q742584" start="1378" end="1394" title="International Olympiad in Informatics" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q130329559" start="1402" end="1425" title="International Olympiad in Artificial Intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411047" start="1434" end="1443" title="International Astronomy Olympiad" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944134" start="1451" end="1477" title="International Olympiad on Astronomy and Astrophysics" label="astronomy and astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q505654" start="1486" end="1493" title="International Physics Olympiad" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341622" start="1502" end="1513" title="International Linguistics Olympiad" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412628" start="1521" end="1563" title="European Girls&amp;#x27; Mathematical Olympiad" label="European Girls&amp;#x27; Mathematical Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196729" start="1757" end="1780" title="Mertens&amp;#x27;s theorems" label="Mertens&amp;#x27;s theorems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051404" start="1783" end="1797" title="Cauchy product" label="Cauchy product"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42000" wikidata="Q286375" url="?curid=42000" title="Émile Picard">
<text>Charles Émile Picard (; 24 July 1856 – 11 December 1941) was a French mathematician. He was elected the fifteenth member to occupy seat 1 of the Académie française in 1924.

==Life==

He was born in Paris on 24 July 1856 and educated there at the Lycée Henri-IV. He then studied mathematics at the École Normale Supérieure.

Picard&#x27;s mathematical papers, textbooks, and many popular writings exhibit an extraordinary range of interests, as well as an impressive mastery of the mathematics of his time. Picard&#x27;s little theorem states that every nonconstant entire function takes every value in the complex plane, with perhaps one exception. Picard&#x27;s great theorem states that an analytic function with an essential singularity takes every value infinitely often, with perhaps one exception, in any neighborhood of the singularity. He made important contributions in the theory of differential equations, including work on Picard–Vessiot theory, Painlevé transcendents and his introduction of a kind of symmetry group for a linear differential equation. He also introduced the Picard group in the theory of algebraic surfaces, which describes the classes of algebraic curves on the surface modulo linear equivalence. In connection with his work on function theory, he was one of the first mathematicians to use the emerging ideas of algebraic topology. In addition to his theoretical work, Picard made contributions to applied mathematics, including the theories of telegraphy and elasticity. His collected papers run to four volumes.

Louis Couturat studied integral calculus with Picard in 1891-1892, taking detailed notes of the lectures. These notes were preserved and now are available in three cahiers from Internet Archive.

Like his contemporary, Henri Poincaré, Picard was much concerned with the training of mathematics, physics, and engineering students.
He wrote a classic textbook on analysis and one of the first textbooks on the theory of relativity. Picard&#x27;s popular writings include biographies of many leading French mathematicians, including his father in law, Charles Hermite.

Picard was an International Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, an International Member of the United States National Academy of Sciences, and an International Member of the American Philosophical Society.

==Family==

In 1881 he married Marie, the daughter of Charles Hermite.

==Society==
Charles Émile Picard was one of the founder members in 1930 of the Society of Friends of André-Marie Ampère which was created to develop the first science museum in France, the Ampère Museum close to Lyons.

==Works==
* 1891–96: 
* 1905: 
* 1906 : (with Georges Simart) Theorie des Fonctions Algebrique de deux Variables Independente volume 2, via Internet Archive
* 1922: 
* 1922: 
* 1931: 
* 1978–81: 

==See also==
* Émile Picard Medal
* Picard modular group
* Picard modular surface
* Picard horn

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q286375" start="0" end="20" title="Émile Picard" label="Charles Émile Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="70" end="83" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q161806" start="145" end="163" title="Académie française" label="Académie française"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="199" end="204" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878600" start="247" end="261" title="Lycée Henri-IV" label="Lycée Henri-IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q83259" start="298" end="322" title="École normale supérieure (Paris)" label="École Normale Supérieure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668861" start="507" end="535" title="Picard&amp;#x27;s little theorem" label="Picard&amp;#x27;s little theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q847600" start="566" end="581" title="entire function" label="entire function"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="607" end="620" title="complex plane" label="complex plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668861" start="650" end="677" title="Picard&amp;#x27;s great theorem" label="Picard&amp;#x27;s great theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q215084" start="693" end="710" title="analytic function" label="analytic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876526" start="719" end="740" title="essential singularity" label="essential singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="894" end="915" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190519" start="936" end="957" title="Picard–Vessiot theory" label="Picard–Vessiot theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q907724" start="959" end="981" title="Painlevé transcendents" label="Painlevé transcendents"/>
<link wikidata="Q902019" start="1016" end="1030" title="symmetry group" label="symmetry group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129902" start="1037" end="1065" title="linear differential equation" label="linear differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042963" start="1090" end="1102" title="Picard group" label="Picard group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434805" start="1120" end="1137" title="algebraic surface" label="algebraic surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q266237" start="1171" end="1186" title="algebraic curve" label="algebraic curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q212803" start="1346" end="1364" title="algebraic topology" label="algebraic topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q33521" start="1432" end="1451" title="applied mathematics" label="applied mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="1479" end="1489" title="telegraphy" label="telegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q62932" start="1494" end="1504" title="Elasticity (physics)" label="elasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724" start="1549" end="1563" title="Louis Couturat" label="Louis Couturat"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="1572" end="1589" title="integral calculus" label="integral calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="1726" end="1742" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q81082" start="1768" end="1782" title="Henri Poincaré" label="Henri Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="1910" end="1918" title="Mathematical analysis" label="analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="1957" end="1977" title="theory of relativity" label="theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q168401" start="2098" end="2113" title="Charles Hermite" label="Charles Hermite"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="2167" end="2204" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="2251" end="2279" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="2316" end="2346" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q168401" start="2403" end="2418" title="Charles Hermite" label="Charles Hermite"/>
<link wikidata="Q109044713" start="2500" end="2540" title="Society of Friends of André-Marie Ampère" label="Society of Friends of André-Marie Ampère"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627617" start="2610" end="2623" title="Ampère Museum" label="Ampère Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="2633" end="2638" title="Lyons" label="Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="2781" end="2797" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q912998" start="2853" end="2871" title="Émile Picard Medal" label="Émile Picard Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190504" start="2874" end="2894" title="Picard modular group" label="Picard modular group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190505" start="2897" end="2919" title="Picard modular surface" label="Picard modular surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190502" start="2922" end="2933" title="Picard horn" label="Picard horn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42001" wikidata="Q43522" url="?curid=42001" title="Antonie van Leeuwenhoek">
<text>Antonie Philips van Leeuwenhoek ( ; ; 24 October 1632 – 26 August 1723) was a Dutch microbiologist and microscopist in the Golden Age of Dutch science and technology. A largely self-taught man in science, he is commonly known as &quot;the Father of Microbiology&quot;, and one of the first microscopists and microbiologists. Van Leeuwenhoek is best known for his pioneering work in microscopy and for his contributions toward the establishment of microbiology as a scientific discipline.

Raised in Delft, Dutch Republic, Van Leeuwenhoek worked as a draper in his youth and founded his own shop in 1654. He became well-recognized in municipal politics and developed an interest in lensmaking. In the 1670s, he started to explore microbial life with his microscope.

Using single-lensed microscopes of his own design and make, Van Leeuwenhoek was the first to observe and to experiment with microbes, which he originally referred to as , or . He was the first to relatively determine their size. Most of the &quot;animalcules&quot; are now referred to as unicellular organisms, although he observed multicellular organisms in pond water. He was also the first to document microscopic observations of muscle fibers, bacteria, spermatozoa, red blood cells, crystals in gouty tophi, and among the first to see blood flow in capillaries. Although Van Leeuwenhoek did not write any books, he described his discoveries in chaotic letters to the Royal Society, which published many of his letters in their &quot;Philosophical Transactions&quot;.

==Early life and career==
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek was born in Delft, Dutch Republic, on 24 October 1632. On 4 November, he was baptized as &quot;Thonis&quot;. His father, Philips Antonisz van Leeuwenhoek, was a basket maker who died when Antonie was five years old. His mother, Margaretha (Bel van den Berch), came from a well-to-do brewer&#x27;s family. She remarried Jacob Jansz Molijn, a painter and the family moved to Warmond around 1640. Antonie had four older sisters: Margriet, Geertruyt, Neeltje, and Catharina. When he was around ten years old his step-father died. He was sent to live in Benthuizen with his uncle, an attorney. At the age of 16 he became a bookkeeper&#x27;s apprentice (casher) at a linen-draper&#x27;s shop at Warmoesstraat in Amsterdam, which was owned by William Davidson. Van Leeuwenhoek left there after six years.

In July 1654, Van Leeuwenhoek married Barbara de Mey in Delft, with whom he fathered one surviving daughter, Maria (four other children died in infancy). He would live and study for the rest of his life at Hypolytusbuurt in a house he bought in 1655. He opened a draper&#x27;s shop, selling linen, yarn and ribbon to seamstresses and tailors. His status in Delft grew throughout the years. In 1660 he received a lucrative job as chamberlain for the sheriffs in the city hall, a position which he would hold for almost 40 years. His duties included maintaining the premises, heating, cleaning, opening for meetings, performing duties for those assembled, and maintaining silence on all matters discussed there.

In 1669 he was appointed as a land surveyor by the court of Holland; at some time he combined it with another municipal job, being the official &quot;wine-gauger&quot; of Delft and in charge of the city wine imports and taxation. His wife had died in 1666, and in 1671, Van Leeuwenhoek remarried to Cornelia Swalmius with whom he had no children.

Van Leeuwenhoek was a contemporary of another famous Delft citizen, the painter Johannes Vermeer, who was baptized just four days earlier. It has been suggested that he is the man portrayed in two Vermeer paintings of the late 1660s, &quot;The Astronomer&quot; and &quot;The Geographer&quot;, but others argue that there appears to be little physical similarity. Because they were both relatively important men in a city with only 24,000 inhabitants, living both close to the main market, it is likely they knew each other. Van Leeuwenhoek acted as the executor of Vermeer&#x27;s will when the painter died in 1675.

Van Leeuwenhoek&#x27;s religion was &quot;Dutch Reformed&quot; and Calvinist. Like Jan Swammerdam he often referred with reverence to the wonders God designed in making creatures great and small, and believed that his discoveries were merely further proof of the wonder of creation.

==Microscopic study==

While running his draper shop, Van Leeuwenhoek wanted to see the quality of the thread better than what was possible using the magnifying lenses of the time. He developed an interest in lensmaking, although few records exist of his early activity. By placing the middle of a small rod of soda lime glass in a hot flame, one can pull the hot section apart to create two long whiskers of glass. Then, by reinserting the end of one whisker into the flame, a very small, high-quality glass lens is created. Significantly, a May 2021 neutron tomography study of a high-magnification Leeuwenhoek microscope captured images of the short glass stem characteristic of this lens creation method. For lower magnifications he also made ground lenses. To help keep his methods confidential he apparently intentionally encouraged others to think grinding was his primary or only lens construction method.

===Recognition by the Royal Society===
After developing his method for creating powerful lenses and applying them to the study of the microscopic world, Van Leeuwenhoek introduced his work to his friend, the prominent Dutch physician Reinier de Graaf. When the Royal Society in London published the groundbreaking work of an Italian lensmaker in their journal &quot;Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society&quot;, de Graaf wrote to the editor of the journal, Henry Oldenburg, with a ringing endorsement of Van Leeuwenhoek&#x27;s microscopes which, he claimed, &quot;far surpass those which we have hitherto seen&quot;. In response, in 1673 the society published a letter from Van Leeuwenhoek that included his microscopic observations on mold, bees, and lice. Then, in 1674, Van Leeuwenhoek made his most significant discovery. Starting from the assumption that life and motility are similar, he determined that the moving objects observed under his microscope were little animals. He later recorded his observations in his diary.

Van Leeuwenhoek&#x27;s work fully captured the attention of the Royal Society, and he began corresponding regularly with the society regarding his observations. At first he had been reluctant to publicize his findings, regarding himself as a businessman with little scientific, artistic, or writing background, but de Graaf urged him to be more confident in his work. By the time Van Leeuwenhoek died in 1723, he had written some 190 letters to the Royal Society, detailing his findings in a wide variety of fields, centered on his work in microscopy. He only wrote letters in his own colloquial Dutch; he never published a proper scientific paper in Latin. He strongly preferred to work alone, distrusting the sincerity of those who offered their assistance. The letters were translated into Latin or English by Henry Oldenburg, who had learned Dutch for this very purpose. He was also the first to use the word &quot;animalcules&quot; to translate the Dutch words that Leeuwenhoek used to describe microorganisms. Despite the initial success of Van Leeuwenhoek&#x27;s relationship with the Royal Society, soon relations became severely strained. His credibility was questioned when he sent the Royal Society a copy of his first observations of microscopic single-celled organisms dated 9 October 1676. Previously, the existence of single-celled organisms was entirely unknown. Thus, even with his established reputation with the Royal Society as a reliable observer, his observations of microscopic life were initially met with some skepticism.

Eventually, in the face of Van Leeuwenhoek&#x27;s insistence, the Royal Society arranged for Alexander Petrie, minister to the English Reformed Church in Delft; Benedict Haan, at that time Lutheran minister at Delft; and Henrik Cordes, then Lutheran minister at the Hague, accompanied by Sir Robert Gordon and four others, to determine whether it was in fact Van Leeuwenhoek&#x27;s ability to observe and reason clearly, or perhaps, the Royal Society&#x27;s theories of life that might require reform. Finally in 1677, Van Leeuwenhoek&#x27;s observations were fully acknowledged by the Royal Society.

Antonie van Leeuwenhoek was elected to the Royal Society in February 1680 on the nomination of William Croone, a then-prominent physician. Van Leeuwenhoek was &quot;taken aback&quot; by the nomination, which he considered a high honour, although he did not attend the induction ceremony in London, nor did he ever attend a Royal Society meeting. He had his portrait painted by Jan Verkolje with the certificate signed by James II of England on the table beside him.

===Scientific fame===
By the end of the seventeenth century, Van Leeuwenhoek had a virtual monopoly on microscopic study and discovery. His contemporary Robert Hooke, an early microscope pioneer, bemoaned that the field had come to rest entirely on one man&#x27;s shoulders. In 1673, his first letter was published in the journal of the Royal Society of London. He was visited over the years by many notable individuals who gazed at the &quot;tiny creatures&quot;. One of the first was Jan Swammerdam. Around 1675, it was Johan Huydecoper, who was very interested in collecting and growing plants for his estate &quot;Goudestein&quot;, becoming in 1682 manager of the Hortus Botanicus Amsterdam. Christiaan Huygens, Leibniz (1676), John Locke (1678, 1685), James II of England (1679), William III of Orange, Mary II of England and Thomas Molyneux (in 1685) visited. In October 1697, Van Leeuwenhoek visited the Tsar Peter the Great on his boat, moored in the Schie or the Arsenaal. On this occasion, he presented the Tsar with an &quot;eel-viewer&quot;, so Peter could study blood circulation whenever he wanted. In 1706, it was Govert Bidloo; in 1714, Richard Bradley (botanist); and, in 1716, Herman Boerhaave and Frederik Ruysch. To the disappointment of his guests, Van Leeuwenhoek refused to reveal the cutting-edge microscopes he relied on for his discoveries, instead showing visitors a collection of average-quality lenses.

==Techniques==

Antonie van Leeuwenhoek made more than 500 optical lenses. He also created at least 25 single-lens microscopes, of differing types, of which only nine have survived. These microscopes were made of silver or copper frames, holding hand-made lenses. Those that have survived are capable of magnification up to 275 times. It is suspected that Van Leeuwenhoek possessed some microscopes that could magnify up to 500 times. Although he has been widely regarded as a dilettante or amateur, his scientific research was of remarkably high quality.

The single-lens microscopes of Van Leeuwenhoek were relatively small devices, the largest being about 5 cm long. They are used by placing the lens very close in front of the eye. The other side of the microscope had a pin, where the sample was attached in order to stay close to the lens. There were also three screws to move the pin and the sample along three axes: one axis to change the focus, and the two other axes to navigate through the sample.

Van Leeuwenhoek maintained throughout his life that there are aspects of microscope construction &quot;which I only keep for myself&quot;, in particular his most critical secret of how he made the lenses. For many years no one was able to reconstruct Van Leeuwenhoek&#x27;s design techniques, but, in 1957, C.L. Stong used thin glass thread fusing instead of polishing, and successfully created some working samples of a Van Leeuwenhoek design microscope. Such a method was also discovered independently by A. Mosolov and A. Belkin at the Russian Novosibirsk State Medical Institute. In May 2021, researchers in the Netherlands published a non-destructive neutron tomography study of a Leeuwenhoek microscope. One image in particular shows a Stong/Mosolov-type spherical lens with a single short glass stem attached (Fig. 4). Such lenses are created by pulling an extremely thin glass filament, breaking the filament, and briefly fusing the filament end. The nuclear tomography article notes this lens creation method was first devised by Robert Hooke rather than Leeuwenhoek, which is ironic given Hooke&#x27;s subsequent surprise at Leeuwenhoek&#x27;s findings.

Van Leeuwenhoek used samples and measurements to estimate numbers of microorganisms in units of water. He also made good use of the huge advantage provided by his method. He studied a broad range of microscopic phenomena, and shared the resulting observations freely with groups such as the British Royal Society. Such work firmly established his place in history as one of the first and most important explorers of the microscopic world. Van Leeuwenhoek was one of the first people to observe cells, much like Robert Hooke. He also corresponded with Antonio Magliabechi.

==Discoveries==

*Leeuwenhoek was one of the first to conduct experiments on himself. It was from his finger that blood was drawn for examination, and he placed pieces of his skin under a microscope, examining its structure in various parts of the body, and counting the number of vessels that permeate it.
* Both Marcello Malpighi and Jan Swammerdam saw these structures before Leeuwenhoek, but Leeuwenhoek was the first to recognize what they are: red blood cells.
* Infusoria (protists in modern zoological classification), in 1674
* In 1675, he was studying a variety of minerals, especially salts, and parts of plants and animals.
* The vacuole of the cell in 1676
* Spermatozoa, in 1677
* The banded pattern of muscular fibers, in 1682
* Bacteria, (e.g., large Selenomonads from the human mouth), in 1683
* It seems he used horseradish to find out what causes irritation on the tongue. He used the effect of vinegar.
* Leeuwenhoek diligently began to search for his animalcules. He found them everywhere: in rotten water, in ditches, on his own teeth. &quot;Although I am now fifty years old,&quot; he wrote to the Royal Society, &quot;my teeth are well preserved, because I am in the habit of rubbing them with salt every morning.&quot; He described paradontitis.
* In 1684 he published his research on the ovary.
* In 1687, Van Leeuwenhoek reported his research on the coffee bean. He roasted the bean, cut it into slices and saw a spongy interior. The bean was pressed, and an oil appeared. He boiled the coffee with rain water twice and set it aside.
* Leeuwenhoek corresponded regularly with Anthonie Heinsius, the Delft pensionary in the States of Holland and in 1687 member of the board of the Delft chamber of the VOC.
* In 1696 Nicolaas Witsen sent him a map of Tartary and ore found near the Amur in Siberia.

* Van Leeuwenhoek has been recognized as the first person to use a histological stain to color specimens observed under the microscope using saffron. He used this technique only once.

* In 1702 he requested a book on Peruvian silver mines in Potosí.

Like Robert Boyle and Nicolaas Hartsoeker, Van Leeuwenhoek was interested in dried cochineal, trying to find out if the dye came from a berry or an insect.

He studied rainwater, the seeds of oranges, worms in sheep&#x27;s liver, the eye of a whale, the blood of fishes, mites, coccinellidae, the skin of elephants, Celandine, and Cinchona.

==Legacy and recognition==

By the end of his life, Van Leeuwenhoek had written approximately 560 letters to the Royal Society and other scientific institutions concerning his observations and discoveries. Even during the last weeks of his life, Van Leeuwenhoek continued to send letters full of observations to London. The last few contained a precise description of his own illness. He suffered from a rare disease, an uncontrolled movement of the midriff, which now is named &quot;Van Leeuwenhoek&#x27;s disease&quot;. He died at the age of 90, on 26 August 1723, and was buried four days later in the Oude Kerk in Delft.

In 1981, the British microscopist Brian J. Ford found that Van Leeuwenhoek&#x27;s original specimens had survived in the collections of the Royal Society of London. They were found to be of high quality, and all were well preserved. Ford carried out observations with a range of single-lens microscopes, adding to our knowledge of Van Leeuwenhoek&#x27;s work. In Ford&#x27;s opinion, Leeuwenhoek remained imperfectly understood, the popular view that his work was crude and undisciplined at odds with the evidence of conscientious and painstaking observation. He constructed rational and repeatable experimental procedures and was willing to oppose received opinion, such as spontaneous generation, and he changed his mind in the light of evidence.

On his importance in the history of microbiology and science in general, the British biochemist Nick Lane wrote that he was &quot;the first even to think of looking—certainly, the first with the power to see.&quot; His experiments were ingenious, and he was &quot;a scientist of the highest calibre&quot;, attacked by people who envied him or &quot;scorned his unschooled origins&quot;, not helped by his secrecy about his methods.

The Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital in Amsterdam, named after Van Leeuwenhoek, is specialized in oncology. In 2004, a public poll in the Netherlands to determine the greatest Dutchman (&quot;De Grootste Nederlander&quot;) named Van Leeuwenhoek the 4th-greatest Dutchman of all time.

On 24 October 2016, Google commemorated the 384th anniversary of Van Leeuwenhoek&#x27;s birth with a Doodle that depicted his discovery of &quot;little animals&quot; or animalcules, now known as unicellular organisms.

The Leeuwenhoek Medal, Leeuwenhoek Lecture, Leeuwenhoek crater, &quot;Leeuwenhoeckia&quot;, &quot;Levenhookia&quot; (a genus in the family Stylidiaceae), &quot;Leeuwenhoekiella&quot; (an aerobic bacterial genus), and the scientific publication &quot;Antonie van Leeuwenhoek: International Journal of General and Molecular Microbiology&quot; are named after him.

As a fictional character, he appears as a flea circus owner, microscopist and magician in E.T.A. Hoffmann&#x27;s novel Master Flea, together with Jan Swammerdam.

==See also==
* Animalcule
* Regnier de Graaf
* Dutch Golden Age
* History of microbiology
* Microscopy
* Microscope
* Robert Hooke
* Microscopic discovery of microorganisms
* Microscopic scale
* Science and technology in the Dutch Republic
* Scientific Revolution
* Nicolas Steno
* Jan Swammerdam
* Timeline of microscope technology
* Johannes Vermeer

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* Cobb, Matthew: &quot;Generation: The Seventeenth-Century Scientists Who Unraveled the Secrets of Sex, Life, and Growth&quot;. (US: Bloomsbury, 2006) 
* Cobb, Matthew: &quot;The Egg and Sperm Race: The Seventeenth-Century Scientists Who Unlocked the Secrets of Sex and Growth&quot;. (London: Simon &amp; Schuster, 2006)
* Davids, Karel: &quot;The Rise and Decline of Dutch Technological Leadership: Technology, Economy and Culture in the Netherlands, 1350–1800&quot; [2 vols.]. (Brill, 2008, )
* 
* Ford, Brian J.: &quot;Single Lens: The Story of the Simple Microscope&quot;. (London: William Heinemann, 1985, 182 pp)
* Ford, Brian J.: &quot;The Revealing Lens: Mankind and the Microscope&quot;. (London: George Harrap, 1973, 208 pp)
* Fournier, Marian: &quot;The Fabric of Life: The Rise and Decline of Seventeenth-Century Microscopy&quot; (Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996, )
* 
* Ratcliff, Marc J.: &quot;The Quest for the Invisible: Microscopy in the Enlightenment&quot;. (Ashgate, 2009, 332 pp)
* Robertson, Lesley; Backer, Jantien et al.: &quot;Antoni van Leeuwenhoek: Master of the Minuscule&quot;. (Brill, 2016, )
* 
* Struik, Dirk J.: &quot;The Land of Stevin and Huygens: A Sketch of Science and Technology in the Dutch Republic during the Golden Century (Studies in the History of Modern Science)&quot;. (Springer, 1981, 208 pp)
* Wilson, Catherine: &quot;The Invisible World: Early Modern Philosophy and the Invention of the Microscope&quot;. (Princeton University Press, 1997, )

==External links==
* to the Royal Society (archived)
* The Correspondence of Anthonie van Leeuwenhoek in EMLO
* Lens on Leeuwenhoek (site on Leeuwenhoek&#x27;s life and observations; archived)
* Vermeer connection website
* University of California, Berkeley article on van Leeuwenhoek
* 
* Retrospective paper on the Leeuwenhoek research by Brian J. Ford.
* Images seen through a van Leeuwenhoek microscope by Brian J. Ford.
* Instructions on making a van Leeuwenhoek Microscope Replica by Alan Shinn (archived)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43522" start="0" end="31" title="Antonie van Leeuwenhoek" label="Antonie Philips van Leeuwenhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779582" start="84" end="98" title="microbiologist" label="microbiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074953" start="103" end="115" title="microscopist" label="microscopist"/>
<link wikidata="Q661566" start="123" end="165" title="Golden Age of Dutch science and technology" label="Golden Age of Dutch science and technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q207650" start="177" end="188" title="self-taught" label="self-taught"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632170" start="235" end="261" title="List of people considered father or mother of a scientific field" label="the Father of Microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193" start="447" end="459" title="microbiology" label="microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465832" start="465" end="486" title="scientific discipline" label="scientific discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q690" start="499" end="504" title="Delft" label="Delft"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="506" end="520" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q593362" start="550" end="556" title="draper" label="draper"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="729" end="743" title="microbial life" label="microbial life"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="890" end="897" title="microbe" label="microbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36468" start="1054" end="1074" title="unicellular organism" label="unicellular organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36458" start="1098" end="1120" title="multicellular organism" label="multicellular organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38456" start="1171" end="1195" title="microscopic scale" label="microscopic observations"/>
<link wikidata="Q428914" start="1199" end="1211" title="muscle fiber" label="muscle fiber"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1214" end="1222" title="Bacteria#History of bacteriology" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q74560" start="1224" end="1235" title="spermatozoa" label="spermatozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="1237" end="1251" title="red blood cell" label="red blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="1254" end="1261" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293277" start="1266" end="1277" title="gouty tophus" label="gouty tophi"/>
<link wikidata="Q103142" start="1320" end="1331" title="capillary" label="capillaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="1438" end="1451" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q913162" start="1504" end="1530" title="Philosophical Transactions" label="Philosophical Transactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q690" start="1601" end="1606" title="Delft" label="Delft"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="1608" end="1622" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615421" start="1962" end="1969" title="Warmond" label="Warmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q818270" start="2138" end="2148" title="Benthuizen" label="Benthuizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q389909" start="2278" end="2291" title="Warmoesstraat" label="Warmoesstraat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007630" start="2325" end="2341" title="William Davidson of Curriehill" label="William Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q264323" start="2817" end="2828" title="chamberlain (office)" label="chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218704" start="2837" end="2845" title="schepen" label="sheriffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q732262" start="2849" end="2862" title="City Hall (Delft)" label="the city hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="3129" end="3142" title="land surveyor" label="land surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q102911" start="3159" end="3166" title="Holland" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41264" start="3527" end="3543" title="Johannes Vermeer" label="Johannes Vermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q544315" start="3687" end="3701" title="The Astronomer (Vermeer)" label="The Astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q45130" start="3718" end="3732" title="The Geographer" label="The Geographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q654437" start="4000" end="4008" title="executor" label="executor"/>
<link wikidata="Q515880" start="4106" end="4120" title="Dutch Reformed" label="Dutch Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="4131" end="4140" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q336794" start="4147" end="4161" title="Jan Swammerdam" label="Jan Swammerdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003125" start="4900" end="4918" title="neutron tomography" label="neutron tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q266995" start="5497" end="5513" title="Reinier de Graaf" label="Reinier de Graaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="5524" end="5537" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q913162" start="5629" end="5676" title="Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society" label="Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q700422" start="5729" end="5744" title="Henry Oldenburg" label="Henry Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q33596" start="6141" end="6149" title="motility" label="motility"/>
<link wikidata="Q737248" start="7221" end="7232" title="animalcules" label="animalcules"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154294" start="8138" end="8155" title="Sir Robert Gordon, 3rd Baronet" label="Sir Robert Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007314" start="8547" end="8561" title="William Croone" label="William Croone"/>
<link wikidata="Q120609" start="8829" end="8841" title="Jan Verkolje" label="Jan Verkolje"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="8873" end="8892" title="James II of England" label="James II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q46830" start="9072" end="9084" title="Robert Hooke" label="Robert Hooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q336794" start="9405" end="9419" title="Jan Swammerdam" label="Jan Swammerdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690749" start="9441" end="9457" title="Joan Huydecoper II" label="Johan Huydecoper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576733" start="9587" end="9613" title="Hortus Botanicus Amsterdam" label="Hortus Botanicus Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q39599" start="9615" end="9633" title="Christiaan Huygens" label="Christiaan Huygens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="9635" end="9642" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="9651" end="9661" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="9676" end="9695" title="James II of England" label="James II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="9704" end="9725" title="William III of England" label="William III of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="9727" end="9745" title="Mary II of England" label="Mary II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529211" start="9750" end="9765" title="Sir Thomas Molyneux, 1st Baronet" label="Thomas Molyneux"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="9835" end="9850" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532522" start="9878" end="9883" title="Schie" label="Schie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781661" start="9891" end="9899" title="Legermuseum" label="Arsenaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397888" start="10048" end="10061" title="Govert Bidloo" label="Govert Bidloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q726087" start="10072" end="10098" title="Richard Bradley (botanist)" label="Richard Bradley (botanist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q313093" start="10114" end="10130" title="Herman Boerhaave" label="Herman Boerhaave"/>
<link wikidata="Q529211" start="10135" end="10150" title="Frederik Ruysch" label="Frederik Ruysch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4325460" start="11909" end="11944" title="Novosibirsk State Medical Academy" label="Novosibirsk State Medical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q46830" start="12401" end="12413" title="Robert Hooke" label="Robert Hooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="12826" end="12839" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q603103" start="13078" end="13097" title="Antonio Magliabechi" label="Antonio Magliabechi"/>
<link wikidata="Q232583" start="13414" end="13431" title="Marcello Malpighi" label="Marcello Malpighi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="13550" end="13565" title="red blood cells" label="red blood cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q224920" start="13569" end="13578" title="Infusoria" label="Infusoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10892" start="13580" end="13587" title="protist" label="protist"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="13599" end="13609" title="zoology" label="zoological"/>
<link wikidata="Q127702" start="13742" end="13749" title="vacuole" label="vacuole"/>
<link wikidata="Q74560" start="13772" end="13783" title="spermatozoon" label="Spermatozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048687" start="13817" end="13832" title="muscular fibers" label="muscular fibers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954750" start="13867" end="13878" title="Selenomonad" label="Selenomonad"/>
<link wikidata="Q26545" start="13930" end="13941" title="horseradish" label="horseradish"/>
<link wikidata="Q41354" start="14014" end="14021" title="vinegar" label="vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q520127" start="14357" end="14369" title="paradontitis" label="paradontitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9631" start="14414" end="14419" title="ovary" label="ovary"/>
<link wikidata="Q153697" start="14477" end="14488" title="coffee bean" label="coffee bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q572597" start="14703" end="14720" title="Anthonie Heinsius" label="Anthonie Heinsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899215" start="14732" end="14742" title="pensionary" label="pensionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q769041" start="14750" end="14767" title="States of Holland" label="States of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="14828" end="14831" title="Dutch East India Company" label="VOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q510776" start="14843" end="14858" title="Nicolaas Witsen" label="Nicolaas Witsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83971" start="14877" end="14884" title="Tartary" label="Tartary"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="14889" end="14892" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862" start="14908" end="14912" title="Amur" label="Amur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332446" start="14993" end="15011" title="histological stain" label="histological stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="15067" end="15074" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q35045" start="15169" end="15175" title="Potosí" label="Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q43393" start="15183" end="15195" title="Robert Boyle" label="Robert Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q719162" start="15200" end="15219" title="Nicolaas Hartsoeker" label="Nicolaas Hartsoeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q244274" start="15261" end="15270" title="cochineal" label="cochineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="15298" end="15301" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q16128920" start="15314" end="15319" title="berry" label="berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441993" start="15449" end="15453" title="mite" label="mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q25327" start="15456" end="15469" title="coccinellidae" label="coccinellidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156807" start="15494" end="15503" title="Chelidonium majus" label="Celandine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160090" start="15509" end="15517" title="Cinchona" label="Cinchona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842999" start="15970" end="15977" title="midriff" label="midriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275" start="16004" end="16034" title="Van Leeuwenhoek&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Van Leeuwenhoek&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q612065" start="16125" end="16134" title="Oude Kerk (Delft)" label="Oude Kerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964156" start="16180" end="16193" title="Brian J. Ford" label="Brian J. Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646525" start="16795" end="16811" title="received opinion" label="received opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q178263" start="16821" end="16843" title="spontaneous generation" label="spontaneous generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027454" start="16992" end="17001" title="Nick Lane" label="Nick Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536586" start="17333" end="17364" title="Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital" label="Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q162555" start="17426" end="17434" title="oncology" label="oncology"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="17504" end="17512" title="Dutch people" label="Dutchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q430383" start="17520" end="17543" title="De Grootste Nederlander" label="De Grootste Nederlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q18156042" start="17714" end="17720" title="Google Doodle" label="Doodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q136733" start="17836" end="17853" title="Leeuwenhoek Medal" label="Leeuwenhoek Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516542" start="17855" end="17874" title="Leeuwenhoek Lecture" label="Leeuwenhoek Lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516541" start="17876" end="17894" title="Leeuwenhoek (crater)" label="Leeuwenhoek crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q908118" start="17902" end="17916" title="Leeuwenhoeckia" label="Leeuwenhoeckia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358645" start="17930" end="17941" title="Levenhookia" label="Levenhookia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26212633" start="17992" end="18008" title="Leeuwenhoekiella" label="Leeuwenhoekiella"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18082" end="18166" title="Antonie van Leeuwenhoek: International Journal of General and Molecular Microbiology" label="Antonie van Leeuwenhoek: International Journal of General and Molecular Microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429168" start="18237" end="18248" title="flea circus" label="flea circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q150471" start="18285" end="18300" title="E.T.A. Hoffmann" label="E.T.A. Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q837936" start="18314" end="18325" title="Master Flea" label="Master Flea"/>
<link wikidata="Q336794" start="18341" end="18355" title="Jan Swammerdam" label="Jan Swammerdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q737248" start="18373" end="18383" title="Animalcule" label="Animalcule"/>
<link wikidata="Q266995" start="18386" end="18402" title="Regnier de Graaf" label="Regnier de Graaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q661566" start="18405" end="18421" title="Dutch Golden Age" label="Dutch Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193" start="18424" end="18447" title="History of microbiology" label="History of microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074953" start="18450" end="18460" title="Microscopy" label="Microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q196538" start="18463" end="18473" title="Microscope" label="Microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q46830" start="18476" end="18488" title="Robert Hooke" label="Robert Hooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="18491" end="18530" title="Microscopic discovery of microorganisms" label="Microscopic discovery of microorganisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q38456" start="18533" end="18550" title="Microscopic scale" label="Microscopic scale"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18553" end="18597" title=":Category:Science and technology in the Dutch Republic" label="Science and technology in the Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="18600" end="18621" title="Scientific Revolution" label="Scientific Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q151722" start="18624" end="18637" title="Nicolas Steno" label="Nicolas Steno"/>
<link wikidata="Q336794" start="18640" end="18654" title="Jan Swammerdam" label="Jan Swammerdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q611618" start="18657" end="18690" title="Timeline of microscope technology" label="Timeline of microscope technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q41264" start="18693" end="18709" title="Johannes Vermeer" label="Johannes Vermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964156" start="19248" end="19262" title="Brian J. Ford" label="Ford, Brian J."/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="20274" end="20287" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964156" start="20588" end="20601" title="Brian J. Ford" label="Brian J. Ford"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42004" wikidata="Q445401" url="?curid=42004" title="Gretha Smit">
<text>Grietje &quot;Greta&quot; Smit (born 20 January 1976) is a Dutch former speed skater.

Smit won a surprising silver medal in the 2002 Winter Olympics in the 5000 metre event. She skated a world record broken in a later pair by Claudia Pechstein. Prior to that season, she had not competed in long track speed skating competitions for several years, and had only taken up practice again shortly before the Dutch trials in late 2001.

However, she had been a very successful marathon skater in the years before 2002. She had become Dutch marathon skating champion on natural ice in 1995, 1998, 2000 and 2001, and on artificial ice in 1999, 2000 and 2001. During the last held Elfstedentocht in 1997 she finished second. She also won the alternative Elfstedentocht - skated in Finland - in 1998, 2000 and 2001.

Smit&#x27;s two sisters, Jenita and Marianne, were also good (marathon) skaters; Jenita also took up long track skating in the 2002/2003 season.

==Personal records==



==References==
==External links==
*Official website (in Dutch) 

 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q445401" start="0" end="30" title="Gretha Smit" label="Grietje &amp;quot;Greta&amp;quot; Smit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192431" start="72" end="84" title="speed skating" label="speed skater"/>
<link wikidata="Q9668" start="129" end="149" title="2002 Winter Olympics" label="2002 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q57415" start="227" end="244" title="Claudia Pechstein" label="Claudia Pechstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165362" start="473" end="488" title="marathon skating" label="marathon skater"/>
<link wikidata="Q448936" start="674" end="688" title="Elfstedentocht" label="Elfstedentocht"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="774" end="781" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42005" wikidata="Q474157" url="?curid=42005" title="Collaborative software">
<text>Collaborative software or groupware is application software designed to help people working on a common task to attain their goals. One of the earliest definitions of groupware is &quot;intentional group processes plus software to support them.&quot;

Regarding available interaction, collaborative software may be divided into real-time collaborative editing platforms that allow multiple users to engage in live, simultaneous, and reversible editing of a single file (usually a document); and version control (also known as revision control and source control) platforms, which allow users to make parallel edits to a file, while preserving every saved edit by users as multiple files that are variants of the original file. 

Collaborative software is a broad concept that overlaps considerably with computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW). According to Carstensen and Schmidt (1999), groupware is part of CSCW. The authors claim that CSCW, and thereby groupware, addresses &quot;how collaborative activities and their coordination can be supported by means of computer systems.&quot;

The use of collaborative software in the work space creates a collaborative working environment (CWE).

Collaborative software relates to the notion of collaborative work systems, which are conceived as any form of human organization that emerges any time that collaboration takes place, whether it is formal or informal, intentional or unintentional. Whereas the groupware or collaborative software pertains to the technological elements of computer-supported cooperative work, collaborative work systems become a useful analytical tool to understand the behavioral and organizational variables that are associated to the broader concept of CSCW.

==History==
Douglas Engelbart first envisioned collaborative computing in 1951 and documented his vision in 1962, with working prototypes in full operational use by his research team by the mid-1960s. He held the first public demonstration of his work in 1968 in what is now referred to as &quot;The Mother of All Demos&quot;. The following year, Engelbart&#x27;s lab was hooked into the ARPANET, the first computer network, enabling them to extend services to a broader userbase.

Online collaborative gaming software began between early networked computer users. In 1975, Will Crowther created Colossal Cave Adventure on a DEC PDP-10 computer. As internet connections grew, so did the numbers of users and multi-user games. In 1978 Roy Trubshaw, a student at University of Essex in the United Kingdom, created the game MUD (Multi-User Dungeon).

The US Government began using truly collaborative applications in the early 1990s. One of the first robust applications was the Navy&#x27;s Common Operational Modeling, Planning and Simulation Strategy (COMPASS). The COMPASS system allowed up to 6 users to create point-to-point connections with one another; the collaborative session only remained while at least one user stayed active, and would have to be recreated if all six logged out. MITRE improved on that model by hosting the collaborative session on a server into which each user logged. Called the Collaborative Virtual Workstation (CVW), it allowed the session to be set up in a virtual file cabinet and virtual rooms, and left as a persistent session that could be joined later.

In 1996, Pavel Curtis, who had built MUDs at PARC, created PlaceWare, a server that simulated a one-to-many auditorium, with side chat between &quot;seat-mates&quot;, and the ability to invite a limited number of audience members to speak. In 1997, engineers at GTE used the PlaceWare engine in a commercial version of MITRE&#x27;s CVW, calling it InfoWorkSpace (IWS). In 1998, IWS was chosen as the military standard for the standardized Air Operations Center. The IWS product was sold to General Dynamics and then later to Ezenia.

===Groupware===
Collaborative software was originally designated as &quot;groupware&quot; and this term can be traced as far back as the late 1980s, when Richman and Slovak (1987) wrote: &quot;Like an electronic sinew that binds teams together, the new &quot;groupware&quot; aims to place the computer squarely in the middle of communications among managers, technicians, and anyone else who interacts in groups, revolutionizing the way they work.&quot;

In 1978, Peter and Trudy Johnson-Lenz coined the term groupware; their initial 1978 definition of groupware was, &quot;intentional group processes plus software to support them.&quot; Later in their article they went on to explain groupware as &quot;computer-mediated culture... an embodiment of social organization in hyperspace.&quot; Groupware integrates co-evolving human and tool systems, yet is simply a single system.

In the early 1990s the first commercial groupware products were delivered, and big companies such as Boeing and IBM started using electronic meeting systems for key internal projects. Lotus Notes appeared as a major example of that product category, allowing remote group collaboration when the internet was still in its infancy. Kirkpatrick and Losee (1992) wrote then: &quot;If really makes a difference in productivity long term, the very definition of an office may change. You will be able to work efficiently as a member of a group wherever you have your computer. As computers become smaller and more powerful, that will mean anywhere.&quot; In 1999, Achacoso created and introduced the first wireless groupware.

==Design and implementation==
The complexity of groupware development is still an issue. One reason is the socio-technical dimension of groupware. Groupware designers do not only have to address technical issues (as in traditional software development) but also consider the organizational aspects and the social group processes that should be supported with the groupware application. Some examples for issues in groupware development are:

*Persistence is needed in some sessions. Chat and voice communications are routinely non-persistent and evaporate at the end of the session. Virtual room and online file cabinets can persist for years. The designer of the collaborative space needs to consider the information duration needs and implement accordingly.
*Authentication has always been a problem with groupware. When connections are made point-to-point, or when log-in registration is enforced, it is clear who is engaged in the session. However, audio and unmoderated sessions carry the risk of unannounced &#x27;lurkers&#x27; who observe but do not announce themselves or contribute.
*Until recently, bandwidth issues at fixed location limited full use of the tools. These are exacerbated with mobile devices.
*Multiple input and output streams bring concurrency issues into the groupware applications.
*Motivational issues are important, especially in settings without pre-defined group processes in place.
*Closely related to the motivation aspect is the question of reciprocity. Ellis and others have shown that the distribution of efforts and benefits has to be carefully balanced in order to ensure that all required group members really participate.
*Real-time communication via groupware can lead to a lot of noise, over-communication, and information overload.

One approach for addressing these issues is the use of design patterns for groupware design. The patterns identify recurring groupware design issues and discuss design choices in a way that all stakeholders can participate in the groupware development process.

===Levels of collaboration===
Groupware can be divided into three categories depending on the level of collaboration:

# Communication can be thought of as unstructured interchange of information. A phone call and an instant messaging discussion are examples.
# Conferencing (or collaboration level, as it is called in academic papers) refers to interactive work toward a shared goal. Brainstorming and voting are examples.
# Coordination refers to complex interdependent work toward a shared goal. A good metaphor is to think about a sports team; everyone has to contribute the right play at the right time as well as adjust their play to the unfolding situation - but everyone is doing something different - in order for the team to win. It is complex interdependent work toward a shared goal.

===Collaborative management (coordination) tools===
Collaborative management tools facilitate and manage group activities. Examples include:
* Document collaboration systems — help people work together on a single document or file to achieve a single final version
* Electronic calendars (also called time management software) — schedule events and automatically notify and remind group members
* Project management systems — schedule, track, and chart the steps in a project as it is being completed
* Online proofing — share, review, approve, and reject web proofs, artwork, photos, or videos between designers, customers, and clients
* Workflow systems — collaborative management of tasks and documents within a knowledge-based business process
* Knowledge management systems — collect, organize, manage, and share various forms of information
* Enterprise bookmarking — collaborative bookmarking engine to tag, organize, share, and search enterprise data
* Extranet systems (sometimes also known as &#x27;project extranets&#x27;) — collect, organize, manage, and share information associated with the delivery of a project (e.g., the construction of a building)
* Intranet systems — quickly share company information via internet to members within a company (e.g., marketing and product info)
* Social software systems — organize social relations of groups
* Online spreadsheets — collaborate and share structured data and information
* Client portals — interact and share with clients in a private online environment

==Collaborative software and human interaction==

The design intent of collaborative software (groupware) is to transform the way documents and rich media are shared in order to enable more effective team collaboration.

Collaboration, with respect to information technology, seems to have several definitions. Some are defensible but others are so broad they lose any meaningful application. Understanding the differences in human interactions is necessary to ensure the appropriate technologies are employed to meet interaction needs.

There are three primary ways in which humans interact: conversations, transactions, and collaborations.

&quot;Conversational interaction&quot; is an exchange of information between two or more participants where the primary purpose of the interaction is discovery or relationship building. There is no central entity around which the interaction revolves but is a free exchange of information with no defined constraints, generally focused on personal experiences. Communication technology such as telephones, instant messaging, and e-mail are generally sufficient for conversational interactions.

&quot;Transactional interaction&quot; involves the exchange of transaction entities where a major function of the transaction entity is to alter the relationship between participants.

In &quot;collaborative interaction&quot;, the main function of the participants&#x27; relationship is to alter a collaboration entity (i.e., the converse of transactional). When teams collaborate on projects it is collaborative project management.

==See also==
* Collaboration technologies
* Enterprise portal
* Intranet portal
* List of collaborative software
* List of social bookmarking websites

=== Closely related terms ===
* Computer supported cooperative work
* Integrated collaboration environment

=== Type of applications ===
* Content management system
* Customer relationship management software
* Document management system
* Enterprise content management
* Intranet

=== Other related type of applications ===
* Massively distributed collaboration
* Online consultation
* Online deliberation

=== Other related terms ===
* Cloud collaboration
* Collaborative innovation network
* Commons-based peer production
* Electronic business
* Information technology management
* Management information systems
* Management
* MediaWiki
* Office of the future
* Operational transformation
* Organizational Memory System
* Remote work
* Wikipedia
* Worknet

== References ==

* Lockwood, A. (2008). The Project Manager&#x27;s Perspective on Project Management Software Packages. Avignon, France. Retrieved February 24, 2009.
* Pedersen, A.A. (2008). Collaborative Project Management. Retrieved February 25, 2009.
* Pinnadyne, Collaboration Made Easy. Retrieved November 15, 2009.
* Romano, N.C., Jr., Nunamaker, J.F., Jr., Fang, C., &amp; Briggs, R.O. (2003). A Collaborative Project Management Architecture. Retrieved February 25, 2009. System Sciences, 2003. Proceedings of the 36th Annual Hawaii International Conference on Volume, Issue, 6-9 Jan. 2003 Page(s): 12 pp
* M.Katerine (kit) Brown, Brenda Huetture, and Char James-Tanny (2007), &quot;Managing Virtual Teams: Getting the Most from Wikis, Blogs, and Other Collaborative Tools&quot;, Worldware Publishing, Plano. 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q474157" start="0" end="22" title="Collaborative software" label="Collaborative software"/>
<link wikidata="Q474157" start="26" end="35" title="Collaborative software" label="groupware"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="39" end="59" title="application software" label="application software"/>
<link wikidata="Q12313595" start="328" end="359" title="real-time collaborative editing" label="real-time collaborative editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q189439" start="495" end="510" title="version control" label="version control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461602" start="803" end="838" title="computer-supported cooperative work" label="computer-supported cooperative work"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055461" start="1154" end="1187" title="collaborative working environment" label="collaborative working environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055461" start="1244" end="1270" title="collaborative work systems" label="collaborative work systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q92614" start="1753" end="1770" title="Douglas Engelbart" label="Douglas Engelbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050365" start="1860" end="1878" title="NLS (computer system)" label="working prototypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521932" start="2037" end="2060" title="The Mother of All Demos" label="The Mother of All Demos"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="2129" end="2136" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344970" start="2315" end="2328" title="Will Crowther" label="Will Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q379904" start="2337" end="2360" title="Colossal Cave Adventure" label="Colossal Cave Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568240" start="2366" end="2376" title="DEC PDP-10" label="DEC PDP-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q6719039" start="2475" end="2487" title="Roy Trubshaw" label="Roy Trubshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075104" start="2502" end="2521" title="University of Essex" label="University of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="2593" end="2606" title="US Government" label="US Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155585" start="3342" end="3354" title="Pavel Curtis" label="Pavel Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="3378" end="3382" title="PARC (company)" label="PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759492" start="3595" end="3598" title="GTE" label="GTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q502940" start="3823" end="3839" title="General Dynamics" label="General Dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="4849" end="4855" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="4860" end="4863" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q60198" start="4932" end="4943" title="IBM Lotus Notes" label="Lotus Notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126510" start="6959" end="6964" title="Clarence Ellis (computer scientist)" label="Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130191" start="7224" end="7244" title="information overload" label="information overload"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145523" start="7612" end="7625" title="collaboration" label="collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="7726" end="7743" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287636" start="8449" end="8471" title="Document collaboration" label="Document collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933820" start="8573" end="8592" title="Electronic calendar" label="Electronic calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q355217" start="8607" end="8622" title="time management" label="time management"/>
<link wikidata="Q179012" start="8703" end="8721" title="Project management" label="Project management"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094113" start="8809" end="8824" title="Online proofing" label="Online proofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808660" start="8945" end="8960" title="Workflow system" label="Workflow system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427675" start="9056" end="9084" title="Knowledge management software" label="Knowledge management systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380370" start="9155" end="9177" title="Enterprise bookmarking" label="Enterprise bookmarking"/>
<link wikidata="Q373889" start="9267" end="9275" title="Extranet" label="Extranet"/>
<link wikidata="Q483426" start="9474" end="9482" title="Intranet" label="Intranet"/>
<link wikidata="Q615985" start="9605" end="9620" title="Social software" label="Social software"/>
<link wikidata="Q183197" start="9669" end="9687" title="Online spreadsheet" label="Online spreadsheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132487" start="9747" end="9760" title="Client portal" label="Client portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186952" start="9973" end="9983" title="rich media" label="rich media"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="10878" end="10895" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145523" start="11416" end="11442" title="Collaboration technologies" label="Collaboration technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671576" start="11445" end="11462" title="Enterprise portal" label="Enterprise portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058491" start="11465" end="11480" title="Intranet portal" label="Intranet portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553321" start="11483" end="11513" title="List of collaborative software" label="List of collaborative software"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639679" start="11516" end="11551" title="List of social bookmarking websites" label="List of social bookmarking websites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461602" start="11585" end="11620" title="Computer supported cooperative work" label="Computer supported cooperative work"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043044" start="11623" end="11659" title="Integrated collaboration environment" label="Integrated collaboration environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q131093" start="11692" end="11717" title="Content management system" label="Content management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q485643" start="11720" end="11761" title="Customer relationship management" label="Customer relationship management software"/>
<link wikidata="Q831677" start="11764" end="11790" title="Document management system" label="Document management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q247423" start="11793" end="11822" title="Enterprise content management" label="Enterprise content management"/>
<link wikidata="Q483426" start="11825" end="11833" title="Intranet" label="Intranet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748728" start="11880" end="11915" title="Massively distributed collaboration" label="Massively distributed collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094074" start="11918" end="11937" title="Online consultation" label="Online consultation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923938" start="11940" end="11959" title="Online deliberation" label="Online deliberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135693" start="11991" end="12010" title="Cloud collaboration" label="Cloud collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145839" start="12013" end="12045" title="Collaborative innovation network" label="Collaborative innovation network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116275" start="12048" end="12077" title="Commons-based peer production" label="Commons-based peer production"/>
<link wikidata="Q734253" start="12080" end="12099" title="Electronic business" label="Electronic business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473265" start="12102" end="12135" title="Information technology management" label="Information technology management"/>
<link wikidata="Q61905" start="12138" end="12168" title="Management information systems" label="Management information systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="12171" end="12181" title="Management" label="Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q83" start="12184" end="12193" title="MediaWiki" label="MediaWiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079428" start="12196" end="12216" title="Office of the future" label="Office of the future"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335231" start="12219" end="12245" title="Operational transformation" label="Operational transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727939" start="12248" end="12276" title="Organizational Memory System" label="Organizational Memory System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135326" start="12279" end="12290" title="Remote work" label="Remote work"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="12293" end="12302" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035039" start="12305" end="12312" title="Worknet" label="Worknet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42009" wikidata="Q43476" url="?curid=42009" title="Amedeo Avogadro">
<text>Lorenzo Romano Amedeo Carlo Avogadro, Count of [[Quaregna]] and [[Cerreto Castello|Cerreto]] (, , ; 9 August 17769 July 1856) was an Italian scientist, most noted for his contribution to molecular theory now known as Avogadro&#x27;s law, which states that equal volumes of gases under the same conditions of temperature and pressure will contain equal numbers of molecules. In tribute to him, the ratio of the number of elementary entities (atoms, molecules, ions or other particles) in a substance to its amount of substance (the latter having the unit mole), , is known as the Avogadro constant. This constant is denoted &quot;N&quot;A, and is one of the seven defining constants of the SI.

==Biography==
Amedeo Avogadro was born in Turin to a noble family of the Kingdom of Sardinia (now part of Italy) in the year 1776. He graduated in ecclesiastical law at the late age of 20 and began to practice. Soon after, he dedicated himself to physics and mathematics (then called &quot;positive philosophy&quot;), and in 1809 started teaching them at a &quot;liceo&quot; (high school) in Vercelli, where his family lived and had some property.

In 1811, he published an article with the title &quot;Essai d&#x27;une manière de déterminer les masses relatives des molécules élémentaires des corps, et les proportions selon lesquelles elles entrent dans ces combinaisons&quot; (&quot;Essay on a manner of Determining the Relative Masses of the Elementary Molecules of Bodies and the Proportions by Which They Enter These Combinations&quot;), which contains Avogadro&#x27;s hypothesis. Avogadro submitted this essay to Jean-Claude Delamétherie&#x27;s &quot;Journal de Physique, de Chimie et d&#x27;Histoire naturelle&quot; (&quot;Journal of Physics, Chemistry and Natural History&quot;).

In 1820, he became a professor of physics at the University of Turin. Turin was now the capital of the restored Savoyard Kingdom of Sardinia under Victor Emmanuel I. Avogadro was active in the revolutionary movement of March 1821. As a result, he lost his chair in 1823 (or, as the university officially declared, it was &quot;very glad to allow this interesting scientist to take a rest from heavy teaching duties, in order to be able to give better attention to his researches&quot;). Eventually, King Charles Albert granted a Constitution (&quot;Statuto Albertino&quot;) in 1848. Well before this, Avogadro had been recalled to the university in Turin in 1833, where he taught for another twenty years.

Little is known about Avogadro&#x27;s private life, which appears to have been sober and religious. He married Felicita Mazzé and had six children. Avogadro held posts dealing with statistics, meteorology, and weights and measures (he introduced the metric system into Piedmont) and was a member of the Royal Superior Council on Public Instruction.

He died on 9 July 1856.

==Accomplishments==

In honour of Avogadro&#x27;s contributions to molecular theory, the number of molecules per mole of a substance is named the Avogadro constant, &quot;N&quot;A. It is exactly The Avogadro constant is used to compute the results of chemical reactions. It allows chemists to determine the amounts of substances produced in a given reaction to a great degree of accuracy.

Johann Josef Loschmidt first calculated the value of the Avogadro constant, the number of particles in one mole, sometimes referred to as the Loschmidt number in German-speaking countries (Loschmidt constant now has another meaning).

Avogadro&#x27;s law states that the relationship between the masses of the same volume of all gases (at the same temperature and pressure) corresponds to the relationship between their respective molecular weights. Hence, the relative molecular mass of a gas can be calculated from the mass of a sample of known volume.

Avogadro developed this hypothesis after Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac published his law on volumes (and combining gases) in 1808. The greatest problem Avogadro had to resolve was the confusion at that time regarding atoms and molecules. One of his most important contributions was clearly distinguishing one from the other, stating that gases are composed of molecules, and these molecules are composed of atoms. (For instance, John Dalton did not consider this possibility.) Avogadro did not actually use the word &quot;atom&quot; as the words &quot;atom&quot; and &quot;molecule&quot; were used almost without difference. He believed that there were three kinds of &quot;molecules&quot;, including an &quot;elementary molecule&quot; (our &quot;atom&quot;). Also, he gave more attention to the definition of mass, as distinguished from weight.
In 1815, he published &quot;Mémoire sur les masses relatives des molécules des corps simples, ou densités présumées de leur gaz, et sur la constitution de quelques-uns de leur composés, pour servir de suite à l&#x27;Essai sur le même sujet, publié dans le Journal de Physique, juillet 1811&quot; (&quot;Note on the Relative Masses of Elementary Molecules, or Suggested Densities of Their Gases, and on the Constituents of Some of Their Compounds, As a Follow-up to the Essay on the Same Subject, Published in the Journal of Physics, July 1811&quot;) about gas densities.

In 1821 he published another paper, &quot;Nouvelles considérations sur la théorie des proportions déterminées dans les combinaisons, et sur la détermination des masses des molécules des corps&quot; (&quot;New Considerations on the Theory of Proportions Determined in Combinations, and on Determination of the Masses of Atoms&quot;) and shortly afterwards, &quot;Mémoire sur la manière de ramener les composès organiques aux lois ordinaires des proportions déterminées&quot; (&quot;Note on the Manner of Finding the Organic Composition by the Ordinary Laws of Determined Proportions&quot;).

In 1841, he published his work in &quot;Fisica dei corpi ponderabili, ossia Trattato della costituzione materiale de&#x27; corpi&quot;, 4 volumes.

==Response to the theory==
The scientific community did not give great attention to Avogadro&#x27;s theory, and it was not immediately accepted. André-Marie Ampère proposed a very similar theory three years later (in his &quot;&quot;; &quot;On the Determination of Proportions in which Bodies Combine According to the Number and the Respective Disposition of the Molecules by Which Their Integral Particles Are Made&quot;), but the same indifference was shown to his theory as well.

Only through studies by Charles Frédéric Gerhardt and Auguste Laurent on organic chemistry was it possible to demonstrate that Avogadro&#x27;s law explained why the same quantities of molecules in a gas have the same volume.

Unfortunately, related experiments with some inorganic substances showed seeming contradictions. This was finally resolved by Stanislao Cannizzaro, as announced at Karlsruhe Congress in 1860, four years after Avogadro&#x27;s death. He explained that these exceptions were due to molecular dissociations at certain temperatures, and that Avogadro&#x27;s law determined not only molecular masses but atomic masses as well.

In 1911, a meeting in Turin commemorated the hundredth anniversary of the publication of Avogadro&#x27;s classic 1811 paper. King Victor Emmanuel III attended, and Avogadro&#x27;s great contribution to chemistry was recognized.

Rudolf Clausius, with his kinetic theory on gases proposed in 1857, provided further evidence for Avogadro&#x27;s law. Jacobus Henricus van &#x27;t Hoff showed that Avogadro&#x27;s theory also held in dilute solutions.

Avogadro is hailed as a founder of the atomic-molecular theory.

==See also==
* Avogadrite (mineral)
* Avogadro (lunar crater)

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* Morselli, Mario. (1984). &quot;Amedeo Avogadro, a Scientific Biography.&quot; Kluwer. .
** Review of Morselli&#x27;s book: 
* Pierre Radvanyi, &quot;Two hypothesis of Avogadro&quot;, 1811 Avogadro&#x27;s article analyzed on &quot;BibNum &quot; (click &#x27;Télécharger&#x27;).

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43476" start="0" end="92" title="Amedeo Avogadro" label="Lorenzo Romano Amedeo Carlo Avogadro, Count of [[Quaregna]] and [[Cerreto Castello|Cerreto]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="133" end="140" title="Italian people" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="141" end="150" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="187" end="203" title="molecular theory" label="molecular theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q170431" start="217" end="236" title="Avogadro&amp;#x27;s law" label="Avogadro&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="441" end="445" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="448" end="456" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="459" end="462" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q104946" start="506" end="525" title="amount of substance" label="amount of substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q41509" start="554" end="558" title="mole (unit)" label="mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6203" start="579" end="596" title="Avogadro constant" label="Avogadro constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="689" end="691" title="SI" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="736" end="741" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="767" end="786" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720–1861)" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="800" end="805" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="841" end="859" title="ecclesiastical law" label="ecclesiastical law"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="941" end="948" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="953" end="964" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990" start="1086" end="1094" title="Vercelli" label="Vercelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q653453" start="1614" end="1638" title="Jean-Claude Delamétherie" label="Jean-Claude Delamétherie"/>
<link wikidata="Q499911" start="1833" end="1852" title="University of Turin" label="University of Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="1905" end="1924" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720–1861)" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q175250" start="1931" end="1948" title="Victor Emmanuel I of Sardinia" label="Victor Emmanuel I"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="1977" end="1999" title="Piedmont insurrection" label="revolutionary movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q181261" start="2288" end="2302" title="Charles Albert of Savoy" label="Charles Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q598854" start="2333" end="2350" title="Statuto Albertino" label="Statuto Albertino"/>
<link wikidata="Q232405" start="2741" end="2754" title="metric system" label="metric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6203" start="3012" end="3029" title="Avogadro constant" label="Avogadro constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q93496" start="3256" end="3278" title="Johann Josef Loschmidt" label="Johann Josef Loschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q903271" start="3445" end="3463" title="Loschmidt constant" label="Loschmidt constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q170431" start="3491" end="3510" title="Avogadro&amp;#x27;s law" label="Avogadro&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q153185" start="3853" end="3876" title="Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac" label="Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac"/>
<link wikidata="Q41284" start="4235" end="4246" title="John Dalton" label="John Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="4616" end="4620" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q25288" start="4644" end="4650" title="weight" label="weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q675" start="6108" end="6126" title="André-Marie Ampère" label="André-Marie Ampère"/>
<link wikidata="Q446900" start="6471" end="6496" title="Charles Frédéric Gerhardt" label="Charles Frédéric Gerhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q766718" start="6501" end="6516" title="Auguste Laurent" label="Auguste Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="6520" end="6537" title="organic chemistry" label="organic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q128759" start="6799" end="6819" title="Stanislao Cannizzaro" label="Stanislao Cannizzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q903554" start="6837" end="6855" title="Karlsruhe Congress" label="Karlsruhe Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="7225" end="7244" title="Victor Emmanuel III of Italy" label="Victor Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693" start="7324" end="7339" title="Rudolf Clausius" label="Rudolf Clausius"/>
<link wikidata="Q102822" start="7443" end="7476" title="Jacobus Henricus van &amp;#x27;t Hoff" label="Jacobus Henricus van &amp;#x27;t Hoff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7583" end="7606" title="Atomic theory#Avogadro" label="atomic-molecular theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q412913" start="7624" end="7634" title="Avogadrite" label="Avogadrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q137367" start="7647" end="7655" title="Avogadro (crater)" label="Avogadro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="7657" end="7669" title="lunar crater" label="lunar crater"/>
</links>
</doc>
