<doc id="44534" wikidata="Q99717" url="?curid=44534" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre">
<text>The Tiananmen Square protests, known within China as the June Fourth Incident, were student-led demonstrations held in Tiananmen Square in Beijing, China, lasting from 15 April to 4 June 1989. After weeks of unsuccessful attempts between the demonstrators and the Chinese government to find a peaceful resolution, the Chinese government deployed troops to occupy the square on the night of 3 June in what is referred to as the Tiananmen Square massacre. The events are sometimes called the&#x27;89 Democracy Movement, the Tiananmen Square Incident, or the Tiananmen uprising.

The protests were precipitated by the death of pro-reform Chinese Communist Party (CCP) general secretary Hu Yaobang in April 1989 amid the backdrop of rapid economic development and social change in post-Mao China, reflecting anxieties among the people and political elite about the country&#x27;s future. The reforms of the 1980s had led to a nascent market economy that benefited some people but seriously disadvantaged others, and the one-party political system also faced a challenge to its legitimacy. Common grievances at the time included inflation, corruption, limited preparedness of graduates for the new economy, and restrictions on political participation. Although they were highly disorganised and their goals varied, the students called for things like rollback of the removal of &quot;iron rice bowl&quot; jobs, greater accountability, constitutional due process, democracy, freedom of the press, and freedom of speech. Workers&#x27; protests were generally focused on inflation and the erosion of welfare. These groups united around anti-corruption demands, adjusting economic policies, and protecting social security. At the height of the protests, about one million people assembled in the square.

As the protests developed, the authorities responded with both conciliatory and hardline tactics, exposing deep divisions within the party leadership. By May, a student-led hunger strike galvanised support around the country for the demonstrators, and the protests spread to some 400 cities. On 20 May, the State Council declared martial law, and as many as 300,000 troops were mobilised to Beijing.

After several weeks of standoffs and violent confrontations between the army and demonstrators left many on both sides severely injured, a meeting held among the CCP&#x27;s top leadership on 1 June concluded with a decision to clear the square. The troops advanced into central parts of Beijing on the city&#x27;s major thoroughfares in the early morning hours of 4 June and engaged in bloody clashes with demonstrators attempting to block them, in which many people – demonstrators, bystanders, and soldiers – were killed. Estimates of the death toll vary from several hundred to several thousand, with thousands more wounded.

The event had both short and long term consequences. Western countries imposed arms embargoes on China, and various Western media outlets labeled the crackdown a &quot;massacre&quot;. In the aftermath of the protests, the Chinese government suppressed other protests around China, carried out mass arrests of protesters which catalysed Operation Yellowbird, strictly controlled coverage of the events in the domestic and foreign affiliated press, and demoted or purged officials it deemed sympathetic to the protests. The government also invested heavily into creating more effective police riot control units. More broadly, the suppression ended the political reforms begun in 1986 as well as the New Enlightenment movement, and halted the policies of liberalisation of the 1980s, which were only partly resumed after Deng Xiaoping&#x27;s Southern Tour in 1992. Considered a event, reaction to the protests set limits on political expression in China that have lasted up to the present day. The events remain one of the most sensitive and most widely censored topics in China.

==Naming==

The Chinese government has used numerous names for the event since 1989. As the events unfolded, it was labeled a &quot;counter revolutionary rebellion&quot;, which was later changed to simply &quot;riot&quot;, followed by &quot;political turmoil&quot; and &quot;1989 storm&quot;.

Outside mainland China, and among circles critical of the crackdown within mainland China, the crackdown is commonly referred to in Chinese as &quot;June Fourth Massacre&quot; () and &quot;June Fourth Crackdown&quot; (). To bypass censorship by the Great Firewall, alternative names have sprung up to describe the events on the Internet, such as May 35th, VIIV (Roman numerals for 6 and 4), Eight Squared (since 82=64) and 8964 (in yymd format).

In English, the terms &quot;Tiananmen Square Massacre&quot;, &quot;Tiananmen Square Protests&quot;, and &quot;Tiananmen Square Crackdown&quot; are often used to describe the series of events. However, much of the violence in Beijing did not actually happen in Tiananmen, but outside the square along a stretch of Chang&#x27;an Avenue only a few miles long, and especially near the Muxidi area. The term also gives a misleading impression that demonstrations only happened in Beijing, when in fact, they occurred in many cities throughout China.

==Background==

=== &quot;Boluan Fanzheng&quot; and economic reforms ===

The Cultural Revolution ended with chairman Mao Zedong&#x27;s death in 1976 and the arrest of the Gang of Four. That movement, spearheaded by Mao, had caused severe damage to the country&#x27;s initially diverse economic and social fabric. As a result, the country was now mired in poverty as economic production slowed or came to a halt. Political ideology was paramount in the lives of ordinary people as well as the inner workings of the party itself.

In September 1977, Deng Xiaoping proposed the idea of &quot;Boluan Fanzheng&quot; (&quot;bringing order out of chaos&quot;) to correct the mistakes of the Cultural Revolution. At the Third Plenum of the 11th Central Committee, in December 1978, Deng emerged as China&#x27;s &quot;de facto&quot; leader. He launched a comprehensive programme to reform the Chinese economy (Reforms and Opening-up). Within several years, the country&#x27;s focus on ideological purity was replaced by a concerted attempt to achieve material prosperity.

To oversee his reform agenda, Deng promoted his allies to top government and party posts. Zhao Ziyang was named Premier, the head of government, in September 1980, and Hu Yaobang became CCP General Secretary in 1982.

===Challenges to Reforms and Opening-up===
Deng&#x27;s reforms aimed to decrease the state&#x27;s role in the economy and gradually allow private production in agriculture and industry. By 1981, roughly 73% of rural farms had been de-collectivized, and 80% of state-owned enterprises were permitted to retain their profits.

While the reforms were generally well received by the public, concerns grew over a series of social problems which the changes brought about, including corruption and nepotism on the part of elite party bureaucrats. The state-mandated pricing system, in place since the 1950s, had long kept prices fixed at low levels. The initial reforms created a two-tier system where some prices were fixed while others were allowed to fluctuate. In a market with chronic shortages, price fluctuation allowed people with powerful connections to buy goods at low prices and sell at market prices. Party bureaucrats in charge of economic management had enormous incentives to engage in such arbitrage. Discontent over corruption reached a fever pitch with the public; and many, particularly intellectuals, began to believe that only democratic reform and the rule of law could cure the country&#x27;s ills.

Following the 1988 meeting at their summer retreat of Beidaihe, the party leadership under Deng agreed to implement a transition to a market-based pricing system. News of the relaxation of price controls triggered waves of cash withdrawals, buying, and hoarding all over China. The government panicked and rescinded the price reforms in less than two weeks, but there was a pronounced impact for much longer. Inflation soared; official indices reported that the Consumer Price Index increased by 30% in Beijing between 1987 and 1988, leading to panic among salaried workers that they could no longer afford staple goods. Moreover, in the new market economy, unprofitable state-owned enterprises were pressured to cut costs. This threatened a vast proportion of the population that relied on the &quot;iron rice bowl&quot;, i.e., social benefits such as job security, medical care, and subsidised housing.

===Social disenfranchisement and legitimacy crisis===
In 1978, reformist leaders had envisioned that intellectuals would play a leading role in guiding the country through reforms, but this did not happen as planned. On one hand, the massive New Enlightenment movement led by intellectuals promoted a variety of liberal philosophies and values that challenged the socialist ideology, ranging from democracy, humanism, universal values such as freedom and human rights, to Total Westernisation; as response, since the beginning of the reforms, Deng Xiaoping in 1979 proposed the &quot;Four Cardinal Principles&quot; to limit the political liberalisation. On the other hand, despite the opening of new universities and increased enrollment, the state-directed education system did not produce enough graduates to meet increased demand in the areas of agriculture, light industry, services, and foreign investment. The job market was especially limited for students specializing in social sciences and the humanities. Moreover, private companies no longer needed to accept students assigned to them by the state, and many high-paying jobs were offered based on nepotism and favoritism. Gaining a good state-assigned placement meant navigating a highly inefficient bureaucracy that gave power to officials who had little expertise in areas under their jurisdiction. Facing a dismal job market and limited chances of going abroad, intellectuals and students had a greater vested interest in political issues. Small study groups, such as the &quot;Democracy Salon&quot; () and the &quot;Lawn Salon&quot; (), began appearing on Beijing university campuses. These organisations motivated the students to get involved politically.

Simultaneously, the party&#x27;s nominally socialist ideology faced a legitimacy crisis as it gradually adopted capitalist practices. Private enterprise gave rise to profiteers who took advantage of lax regulations and who often flaunted their wealth in front of those who were less well off. Popular discontent was brewing over unfair wealth distribution. Greed, not skill, appeared to be the most crucial factor in success. There was widespread public disillusionment concerning the country&#x27;s future. People wanted change, yet the power to define &quot;the correct path&quot; continued to rest solely in the unelected government&#x27;s hands.

The comprehensive and wide-ranging reforms created political differences over the pace of marketisation and the control over the ideology that came with it, opening a deep chasm within the central leadership. The reformers (&quot;the right&quot;, led by Hu Yaobang) favored political liberalisation and a plurality of ideas as a channel to voice popular discontent and pressed for further reforms. The conservatives (&quot;the left&quot;, led by Chen Yun) said that the reforms had gone too far and advocated a return to greater state control to ensure social stability and to better align with the party&#x27;s socialist ideology. Both sides needed the backing of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping to carry out important policy decisions.
===1986 student demonstrations===
In mid-1986, astrophysics professor Fang Lizhi returned from a position at Princeton University and began a personal tour of universities in China, speaking about liberty, human rights, and the separation of powers. Fang was part of a wide undercurrent within the elite intellectual community that thought China&#x27;s poverty and underdevelopment, and the disaster of the Cultural Revolution, were a direct result of China&#x27;s authoritarian political system and rigid command economy. The view that political reform was the only answer to China&#x27;s ongoing problems gained widespread appeal among students, as Fang&#x27;s recorded speeches became widely circulated throughout the country. In response, Deng Xiaoping warned that Fang was blindly worshipping Western lifestyles, capitalism, and multi-party systems while undermining China&#x27;s socialist ideology, traditional values, and the party&#x27;s leadership.

In December 1986, inspired by Fang and other &quot;people-power&quot; movements worldwide, student demonstrators staged protests against the slow pace of reform. The issues were wide-ranging and included demands for economic liberalisation, democracy, and the rule of law. While the protests were initially contained in Hefei, where Fang lived, they quickly spread to Shanghai, Beijing, and other major cities. This alarmed the central leadership, who accused the students of instigating Cultural Revolution-style turmoil.

General Secretary Hu Yaobang was blamed for showing a &quot;soft&quot; attitude and mishandling the protests, thus undermining social stability. He was denounced thoroughly by conservatives and was forced to resign as general secretary on 16 January 1987. The party began the &quot;Anti-bourgeois liberalisation campaign&quot;, aiming at Hu, political liberalisation, and Western-inspired ideas in general. The campaign stopped student protests and restricted political activity, but Hu remained popular among intellectuals, students, and Communist Party progressives.

=== Political reforms ===

On 18 August 1980, Deng Xiaoping gave a speech titled &quot;On the Reform of the Party and State Leadership System&quot; (&quot;&quot;) at a full meeting of the CCP Politburo in Beijing, launching political reforms in China. He called for a systematic revision of China&#x27;s constitution, criticizing bureaucracy, centralistion of power, and patriarchy, while proposing term limits for the leading positions in China and advocating &quot;democratic centralism&quot; and &quot;collective leadership.&quot; In December 1982, the fourth and current Constitution of China, known as the &quot;1982 Constitution&quot;, was passed by the 5th National People&#x27;s Congress.

In the first half of 1986, Deng repeatedly called for the revival of political reforms, as further economic reforms were hindered by the original political system with an increasing trend of corruption and economic inequality. A five-man committee to study the feasibility of political reform was established in September 1986; the members included Zhao Ziyang, Hu Qili, Tian Jiyun, Bo Yibo and Peng Chong. Deng&#x27;s intention was to boost administrative efficiency, further separate responsibilities of the Party and the government, and eliminate bureaucracy. Although he spoke in terms of the rule of law and democracy, Deng delimited the reforms within the one-party system and opposed the implementation of Western-style constitutionalism.

In October 1987, at the 13th National Congress of the CCP, Zhao Ziyang gave a report drafted by Bao Tong on the political reforms. In his speech titled &quot;Advance Along the Road of Socialism with Chinese characteristics&quot; (&quot;&quot;), Zhao argued that socialism in China was still in its primary stage and, taking Deng&#x27;s speech in 1980 as a guideline, detailed steps to be taken for political reform, including promoting the rule of law and the separation of powers, imposing de-centralisation, and improving the election system. At this Congress, Zhao was elected to be the CCP General Secretary.

== Funding and support ==
During the demonstrations, protesters received a significant amount of support from domestic and outside sources. The Chinese University in Hong Kong donated HK$10,000 by early May, and groups such as the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements of China were founded in support of the protests. Funding also came from the United States, Canada, Japan, Taiwan, Australia, and countries across Europe.

==Beginning of the 1989 protests==

===Death of Hu Yaobang===

When Hu Yaobang suddenly died of a heart attack on 15 April 1989, students reacted strongly, most of them believing that his death was related to his forced resignation. Hu&#x27;s death provided the initial impetus for students to gather in large numbers. On university campuses, many posters appeared eulogizing Hu, calling for honouring Hu&#x27;s legacy. Within days, most posters were about broader political issues, such as corruption, democracy, and freedom of the press. Small, spontaneous gatherings to mourn Hu began on 15 April around the Monument to the People&#x27;s Heroes at Tiananmen Square. On the same day, many students at Peking University (PKU) and Tsinghua University erected shrines and joined the gathering in Tiananmen Square in a piecemeal fashion. Small, organised student gatherings also took place in Xi&#x27;an and Shanghai on 16 April. On 17 April, students at the China University of Political Science and Law (CUPL) made a large wreath to commemorate Hu Yaobang. Its wreath-laying ceremony was on 17 April, and a larger-than-expected crowd assembled. At 5 pm, 500 CUPL students reached the eastern gate of the Great Hall of the People, near Tiananmen Square, to mourn Hu. The gathering featured speakers from various backgrounds who gave public orations commemorating Hu and discussed social problems. However, it was soon deemed obstructive to the Great Hall&#x27;s operation, so police tried to persuade the students to disperse.

Starting on the night of 17 April, three thousand PKU students marched from the campus towards Tiananmen Square, and soon nearly a thousand students from Tsinghua joined. Upon arrival, they soon joined forces with those already gathered at the square. As its size grew, the gathering gradually evolved into a protest, as students began to draft a list of pleas and suggestions (the Seven Demands) for the government:
# Affirm Hu Yaobang&#x27;s views on democracy and freedom as correct.
# Admit that the campaigns against spiritual pollution and bourgeois liberalisation had been wrong.
# Publish information on the income of state leaders and their family members.
# Allow privately run newspapers and stop press censorship.
# Increase funding for education and raise intellectuals&#x27; pay.
# End restrictions on demonstrations in Beijing.
# Provide objective coverage of students in official media.

On the morning of 18 April, students remained in the square. Some gathered around the Monument to the People&#x27;s Heroes, singing patriotic songs and listening to student organizers&#x27; impromptu speeches. Others gathered at the Great Hall. Meanwhile, a few thousand students gathered at Xinhua Gate, the entrance to Zhongnanhai, the seat of the party leadership, where they demanded dialogue with the administration. After police restrained the students from entering the compound, they staged a sit-in. On 19 April, students hold aloft a banner &quot;Freedom &amp; Democracy Enlightenment&quot; on the Monument, under a giant portrait of Hu Yaobang.

On 20 April, most students had been persuaded to leave Xinhua Gate. To disperse about 200 students that remained, police used batons; minor clashes were reported. Many students felt abused by the police, and rumors about police brutality spread quickly. The incident angered students on campus, where those who were not politically active decided to join the protests. Additionally, a group of workers calling themselves the Beijing Workers&#x27; Autonomous Federation issued two handbills challenging the central leadership.

Hu&#x27;s state funeral took place on 22 April. On the evening of 21 April, some 100,000 students marched on Tiananmen Square, ignoring orders from Beijing municipal authorities that the square was to be closed for the funeral. The funeral, which took place inside the Great Hall and was attended by the leadership, was broadcast live to the students. General Secretary Zhao Ziyang delivered the eulogy. The funeral seemed rushed, lasting only 40 minutes, as emotions ran high in the square.

Security cordoned off the east entrance to the Great Hall of the People, but several students pressed forward. A few were allowed to cross the police line. Three of these students, Zhou Yongjun, Guo Haifeng, and Zhang Zhiyong, knelt on the steps of the Great Hall to present a petition and demanded to see Premier Li Peng. Standing beside them, a fourth student (Wu&#x27;erkaixi) made a brief, emotional speech begging for Li Peng to come out and speak with them. The larger number of students still in the square but outside the cordon were at times emotional, shouting demands or slogans and rushing toward police. Wu&#x27;erkaixi calmed the crowd as they waited for the Premier to emerge. However, no leaders emerged from the Great Hall, leaving the students disappointed and angry; some called for a classroom boycott.

On 21 April, students began organizing under the banners of formal organisations. On 23 April, in a meeting of around 40 students from 21 universities, the Beijing Students&#x27; Autonomous Federation (also known as the Union) was formed. It elected CUPL student Zhou Yongjun as chair. Wang Dan and Wu&#x27;erkaixi also emerged as leaders. The Union then called for a general classroom boycott at all Beijing universities. Such an independent organisation operating outside of party jurisdiction alarmed the leadership.

===Rioting on 22 April===
On 22 April, near dusk, serious rioting broke out in Changsha and Xi&#x27;an. In Xi&#x27;an, arson by rioters destroyed cars and houses, and looting occurred in shops near the city&#x27;s Xihua Gate. In Changsha, 38 stores were ransacked by looters. Over 350 people were arrested in both cities for looting. In Wuhan, university students organised protests against the provincial government. As the situation became more volatile nationally, Zhao Ziyang called numerous meetings of the Politburo Standing Committee (PSC). Zhao stressed three points: discourage students from further protests and ask them to go back to class, use all measures necessary to combat rioting, and open forms of dialogue with students at different levels of government. Premier Li Peng called upon Zhao to condemn protestors and recognize the need to take more serious action. Zhao dismissed Li&#x27;s views. Despite calls for him to remain in Beijing, Zhao left for a scheduled state visit to North Korea on 23 April.

===26 April Editorial===

Zhao&#x27;s departure to North Korea left Li Peng as the acting executive authority in Beijing. On 24 April, Li Peng and the PSC met with Beijing Party Secretary Li Ximing and mayor Chen Xitong to gauge the situation at the square. The municipal officials wanted a quick resolution to the crisis and framed the protests as a conspiracy to overthrow China&#x27;s political system and prominent party leaders, including Deng Xiaoping. In Zhao&#x27;s absence, the PSC agreed to take firm action against the protesters. On the morning of 25 April, President Yang Shangkun and Premier Li Peng met with Deng at the latter&#x27;s residence. Deng endorsed a hardline stance and said an appropriate warning must be disseminated via mass media to curb further demonstrations. The meeting firmly established the first official evaluation of the protests, and highlighted Deng&#x27;s having &quot;final say&quot; on important issues. Li Peng subsequently ordered Deng&#x27;s views to be drafted as a communique and issued to all high-level Communist Party officials to mobilize the party apparatus against protesters.

On 26 April, the party&#x27;s official newspaper &quot;People&#x27;s Daily&quot; issued a front-page editorial titled &quot;It is necessary to take a clear-cut stand against disturbances&quot;. The language in the editorial effectively branded the student movement to be an anti-party, anti-government revolt. The editorial invoked memories of the Cultural Revolution, using similar rhetoric that had been used during the 1976 Tiananmen Incident—an event that was initially branded an anti-government conspiracy but was later rehabilitated as &quot;patriotic&quot; under Deng&#x27;s leadership. The article enraged students, who interpreted it as a direct indictment of the protests and its cause. The editorial backfired: instead of scaring students into submission, it antagonised the students and put them squarely against the government. The editorial&#x27;s polarizing nature made it a major sticking point for the remainder of the protests.

===27 April demonstrations===

Organized by the Union on 27 April, some 50,000–100,000 students from all Beijing universities marched through the streets of the capital to Tiananmen Square, breaking through lines set up by police, and receiving widespread public support along the way, particularly from factory workers. The student leaders, eager to show the patriotic nature of the movement, also toned down anti-Communist slogans, choosing to present a message of &quot;anti-corruption&quot; and &quot;anti-cronyism&quot;, but &quot;pro-party&quot;. In a twist of irony, student factions who genuinely called for the overthrow of the Communist Party gained traction due to the 26 April editorial.

The stunning success of the march forced the government into making concessions and meeting with student representatives. On 29 April, State Council spokesman Yuan Mu met with appointed representatives of government-sanctioned student associations. While the talks discussed a wide range of issues, including the editorial, the Xinhua Gate incident, and freedom of the press, they achieved few substantive results. Independent student leaders such as Wu&#x27;erkaixi refused to attend.

The government&#x27;s tone grew increasingly conciliatory when Zhao Ziyang returned from Pyongyang on 30 April and reasserted his authority. In Zhao&#x27;s view, the hardliner approach was not working, and the concession was the only alternative. Zhao asked that the press be allowed to positively report the movement and delivered two sympathetic speeches on 3–4 May. In the speeches, Zhao said that the students&#x27; concerns about corruption were legitimate and that the student movement was patriotic in nature. The speeches essentially negated the message presented by 26 April Editorial. While some 100,000 students marched on the streets of Beijing on 4 May to commemorate the May Fourth Movement and repeated demands from earlier marches, many students were satisfied with the government&#x27;s concessions. On 4 May, all Beijing universities except PKU and BNU announced the end of the classroom boycott. Subsequently, most students began to lose interest in the movement.

==Escalation of the protests==

===Preparing for dialogue===
The government was divided on how to respond to the movement as early as mid-April. After Zhao Ziyang&#x27;s return from North Korea, tensions between the progressive camp and the conservative camp intensified. Those who supported continued dialogue and a soft approach with students rallied behind Zhao Ziyang, while hardliner conservatives opposed the movement rallied behind Premier Li Peng. Zhao and Li clashed at a PSC meeting on 1 May. Li maintained that the need for stability overrode all else, while Zhao said that the party should show support for increased democracy and transparency. Zhao pushed the case for further dialogue.

In preparation for dialogue, the Union elected representatives to a formal delegation. However, there was some friction as the Union leaders were reluctant to let the delegation unilaterally take control of the movement. The movement was slowed by a change to a more deliberate approach, fractured by internal discord, and increasingly diluted by declining engagement from the student body at large. In this context, a group of charismatic leaders, including Wang Dan and Wu&#x27;erkaixi, desired to regain momentum. They also distrusted the government&#x27;s offers of dialogue, dismissing them as merely a ploy designed to play for time and pacify the students. To break from the moderate and incremental approach now adopted by other major student leaders, these few began calling for a return to more confrontational tactics. They settled on a plan of mobilizing students for a hunger strike that would begin on 13 May. Early attempts to mobilize others to join them met with only modest success until Chai Ling made an emotional appeal on the night before the strike was scheduled to begin.

===Hunger strikes begin===

Students began the hunger strike on 13 May, two days before the highly publicised state visit by Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev. Knowing that Gorbachev&#x27;s welcoming ceremony was scheduled to be held on the square, student leaders wanted to use the hunger strike to force the government into meeting their demands. Moreover, the hunger strike gained widespread sympathy from the population at large and earned the student movement the moral high ground that it sought. By the afternoon of 13 May, some 300,000 were gathered at the square.

Inspired by the events in Beijing, protests and strikes began at universities in other cities, with many students travelling to Beijing to join the demonstration. Generally, the Tiananmen Square demonstration was well ordered, with daily marches of students from various Beijing-area colleges displaying their support of the classroom boycott and the protesters&#x27; demands. The students sang &quot;The Internationale&quot;, the world socialist anthem, on their way to, and while at, the square.

Afraid that the movement would spin out of control, Deng Xiaoping ordered the square to be cleared for Gorbachev&#x27;s visit. Executing Deng&#x27;s request, Zhao again used a soft approach and directed his subordinates to coordinate negotiations with students immediately. Zhao believed he could appeal to the students&#x27; patriotism. The students understood that signs of internal turmoil during the Sino-Soviet summit would embarrass the nation and not just the government. On the morning of 13 May, Yan Mingfu, head of the Communist Party&#x27;s United Front, called an emergency meeting, gathering prominent student leaders and intellectuals, including Liu Xiaobo, Chen Ziming, and Wang Juntao. Yan said that the government was prepared to hold an immediate dialogue with student representatives. The Tiananmen welcoming ceremony for Gorbachev would be canceled whether or not the students withdrew—in effect removing the bargaining power the students thought they possessed. The announcement sent the student leadership into disarray.

===Mikhail Gorbachev&#x27;s visit===
Press restrictions were loosened significantly from early to mid-May. State media began broadcasting footage sympathetic to protesters and the movement, including the hunger strikers. On 14 May, intellectuals led by Dai Qing gained permission from Hu Qili to bypass government censorship and air the progressive views of the nation&#x27;s intellectuals in the &quot;Guangming Daily&quot;. The intellectuals then issued an urgent appeal for the students to leave the square in an attempt to deescalate the conflict. However, many students believed that the intellectuals were speaking for the government and refused to move. That evening, formal negotiations took place between government representatives led by Yan Mingfu and student representatives led by Shen Tong and Xiang Xiaoji. Yan affirmed the student movement&#x27;s patriotic nature and pleaded for the students to withdraw from the square. While Yan&#x27;s apparent sincerity for compromise satisfied some students, the meeting grew increasingly chaotic as competing student factions relayed uncoordinated and incoherent demands to the leadership. Shortly after student leaders learned that the event had not been broadcast nationally, as initially promised by the government, the meeting fell apart. Yan then personally went to the square to appeal to the students, even offering himself to be held hostage. Yan also took the student&#x27;s pleas to Li Peng the next day, asking Li to consider formally retracting the 26 April Editorial and rebranding the movement as &quot;patriotic and democratic&quot;; Li refused.

The students remained in the square during the Gorbachev visit; his welcoming ceremony was held at the airport. The Sino-Soviet summit, the first of its kind in some 30 years, marked the normalisation of Sino-Soviet relations and was seen as a breakthrough of tremendous historical significance for China&#x27;s leaders. However, its smooth proceedings were derailed by the student movement; this created a major embarrassment (&quot;loss of face&quot;) for the leadership on the global stage and drove many moderates in government onto a more hardline path. The summit between Deng and Gorbachev took place at the Great Hall of the People amid the backdrop of commotion and protest in the square. When Gorbachev met with Zhao on 16 May, Zhao told him, and by extension the international press, that Deng was still the &quot;paramount authority&quot; in China. Deng felt that this remark was Zhao&#x27;s attempt to shift blame for mishandling the movement to him. Zhao&#x27;s defence against this accusation was that privately informing world leaders that Deng was the true centre of power was standard operating procedure; Li Peng had made nearly identical private statements to US president George H. W. Bush in February 1989. Nevertheless, the statement marked a decisive split between the country&#x27;s two most senior leaders.

===Gathering momentum===
The hunger strikes galvanised support for the students and aroused sympathy across the country. Around a million Beijing residents from all walks of life demonstrated in solidarity from 17 to 18 May. These included PLA personnel, police officers, and lower party officials. Many grassroots Party and Youth League organisations, as well as government-sponsored labour unions, encouraged their membership to demonstrate. In addition, several of China&#x27;s non-Communist parties sent a letter to Li Peng to support the students. The Chinese Red Cross issued a special notice and sent in many personnel to provide medical services to the hunger strikers on the square. After the departure of Mikhail Gorbachev, many foreign journalists remained in the Chinese capital to cover the protests, shining an international spotlight on the movement. Western governments urged Beijing to exercise restraint.

The movement, on the wane at the end of April, now regained momentum. By 17 May, as students from across the country poured into the capital to join the movement, protests of various sizes occurred in some 400 Chinese cities. Students demonstrated at provincial party headquarters in Fujian, Hubei, and Xinjiang. Without a clearly articulated official position from the Beijing leadership, local authorities did not know how to respond. Because the demonstrations now included a wide array of social groups, each having its own set of grievances, it became increasingly unclear with whom the government should negotiate and what the demands were. The government, still split on how to deal with the movement, saw its authority and legitimacy gradually erode as the hunger strikers took the limelight and gained widespread sympathy. These combined circumstances put immense pressure on the authorities to act, and martial law was discussed as an appropriate response.

The situation seemed intractable, and the weight of taking decisive action fell on paramount leader Deng Xiaoping. Matters came to a head on 17 May during a Politburo Standing Committee meeting at Deng&#x27;s residence. At the meeting, Zhao Ziyang&#x27;s concessions-based strategy, which called for the retraction of the 26 April Editorial, was thoroughly criticised. Li Peng, Yao Yilin, and Deng asserted that by making a conciliatory speech to the Asian Development Bank, on 4 May, Zhao had exposed divisions within the top leadership and emboldened the students. Deng warned that &quot;there is no way to back down now without the situation spiraling out of control&quot;, and so &quot;the decision is to move troops into Beijing to declare martial law&quot; as a show of the government&#x27;s no-tolerance stance. To justify martial law, the demonstrators were described as tools of &quot;bourgeois liberalism&quot; advocates who were pulling strings behind the scenes, as well as tools of elements within the party who wished to further their personal ambitions. For the rest of his life, Zhao Ziyang maintained that the decision was ultimately in Deng&#x27;s hands: among the five PSC members present at the meeting, he and Hu Qili opposed the imposition of martial law, Li Peng and Yao Yilin firmly supported it, and Qiao Shi remained carefully neutral and noncommittal. Deng appointed the latter three to carry out the decision.

On the evening of 17 May, the PSC met at Zhongnanhai to finalize plans for martial law. At the meeting, Zhao announced that he was ready to &quot;take leave&quot;, citing he could not bring himself to carry out martial law. The elders in attendance at the meeting, Bo Yibo and Yang Shangkun, urged the PSC to follow Deng&#x27;s orders. Zhao did not consider the inconclusive PSC vote to have legally binding implications for martial law; Yang Shangkun, in his capacity as Vice Chairman of the Central Military Commission, mobilised the military to move into the capital.

Li Peng met with students for the first time on 18 May in an attempt to placate public concern over the hunger strike. During the talks, student leaders again demanded that the government rescind the 26 April Editorial and affirm the student movement as &quot;patriotic&quot;. Li Peng said the government&#x27;s main concern was sending the hunger strikers to hospitals. The discussions were confrontational and yielded little substantive progress, but gained student leaders prominent airtime on national television. By this point, those calling for the overthrow of the party and Li Peng and Deng became prominent both in Beijing and in other cities.

In the early morning of 19 May, Zhao Ziyang went to Tiananmen in what became his political swan song. He was accompanied by Wen Jiabao. Li Peng also went to the square but left shortly thereafter. At 4:50am Zhao made a speech with a bullhorn to a crowd of students, urging them to end the hunger strike. He told the students that they were still young and urged them to stay healthy and not to sacrifice themselves without due concern for their futures. Zhao&#x27;s emotional speech was applauded by some students. It would be his last public appearance.

===Surveillance of protesters===
Student leaders were put under close surveillance by the authorities; traffic cameras were used to perform surveillance on the square; and nearby restaurants, and wherever students gathered, were wiretapped. This surveillance led to the identification, capture, and punishment of protest participants. After the massacre, the government did thorough interrogations at work units, institutions, and schools to identify who had been at the protest.

===Outside Beijing===
On 19 April, the editors of the &quot;World Economic Herald&quot;, a magazine close to reformists, decided to publish a commemorative section on Hu. Inside was an article by Yan Jiaqi, which commented favorably on the Beijing student protests, and called for a reassessment of Hu&#x27;s 1987 purge. Sensing the conservative political trends in Beijing, Jiang Zemin demanded that the article be censored, and many newspapers were printed with a blank page. Jiang then suspended lead editor Qin Benli, his decisive action earning the trust of conservative party elders, who praised Jiang&#x27;s loyalty.

On 27 May, over 300,000 people in Hong Kong gathered at Happy Valley Racecourse for a gathering called the Concert for Democracy in China (). Many Hong Kong celebrities sang songs and expressed their support for the students in Beijing. The following day, a procession of 1.5 million people, one fourth of Hong Kong&#x27;s population, led by Martin Lee, Szeto Wah, and other organisation leaders, paraded through Hong Kong Island. Across the world, especially where ethnic Chinese lived, people gathered and protested. Many governments, including those of the United States and Japan, issued travel warnings against travelling to China.

==Military action==
===Martial law===
The Chinese government declared martial law on 20 May and mobilised at least 30 divisions from five of the country&#x27;s seven military regions. At least 14 of the PLA&#x27;s 24 army corps contributed troops. Guangzhou&#x27;s civil aviation authorities suspended civil airline travel to prepare for transporting military units.

The army&#x27;s initial entry into the capital was blocked in the suburbs by throngs of protesters. Seeing no way forward, the authorities ordered the army to withdraw on 24 May. All government forces then retreated to bases outside the city.

At the same time, internal divisions intensified within the student movement itself. By late May, the students became increasingly disorganised with no clear leadership or unified course of action. Moreover, Tiananmen Square was overcrowded and facing serious hygiene problems. Hou Dejian suggested an open election of the student leadership to speak for the movement but was met with opposition. Meanwhile, Wang Dan moderated his position, ostensibly sensing the impending military action and its consequences. He advocated for a temporary withdrawal from Tiananmen Square to re-group on campus, but this was opposed by hardline student factions who wanted to hold the square. The increasing internal friction would lead to struggles for control of the loudspeakers in the middle of the square in a series of &quot;mini-coups&quot;: whoever controlled the loudspeakers was &quot;in charge&quot; of the movement. Some students would wait at the train station to greet arrivals of students from other parts of the country in an attempt to enlist factional support. Student groups began accusing each other of ulterior motives, such as collusion with the government and trying to gain personal fame from the movement. Some students even tried to oust Chai Ling, and Feng Congde from their leadership positions in an attempted kidnapping, an action Chai called a &quot;well-organised and premeditated plot&quot;.

Unlike more moderate student leaders, Chai seemed willing to allow the student movement to end in a violent confrontation. In an interview given in late May, Chai stated:
However, she felt that she was unable to convince her fellow students of this. She also claimed that her expectation of a violent crackdown was something she had heard from Li Lu and not an idea of her own.

===1 June===
==== Li Peng&#x27;s Report====
On 1 June, Li Peng issued a report titled &quot;On the True Nature of the Turmoil&quot;, which was circulated to every member of the Politburo. The report concludes that the demonstrators&#x27; leadership, referred to as a &quot;tiny minority&quot;, had &quot;organised and plotted the turmoil&quot;, and that they were using the square as a base to provoke conflict in order to create an international impact. It also maintains that they had formed connections with criminal elements and used funding from foreign and domestic sources to improve their communications equipment and procure weapons.

==== MSS Report====
On the same day, another report, issued by Ministry of State Security chief Jia Chunwang, was submitted to the party leadership, and likewise sent to every member of the Politburo, as well as to senior Party elders, including Deng Xiaoping, Li Xiannian and Chen Yun.
The report emphasized the danger of infiltration of bourgeois liberalism into China and the negative effect that Western ideological influence, particularly from the United States, had on the students. The MSS had determined that the United States had infiltrated the student movement by various means, including the use of the U.S. government-owned VOA radio station as an instrument of psychological warfare, as well as the cultivation of pro-American ideologies among Chinese students studying abroad as a long-term strategy. Furthermore, the report also resolved that U.S. intelligence had made efforts to get close to leaders of several Chinese institutions; According to the report, a CIA agent from the U.S. Embassy had nearly fifty contacts between 1981 and 1988, fifteen of whom were associated with the Economic Restructuring Commission. The report advocated for immediate military action, and was viewed as providing one of the best justifications for it.

===2–3 June===

In conjunction with the plan to clear the square by force, the Politburo received word from army headquarters stating that troops were ready to help stabilize the capital and that they understood the necessity and legality of martial law to overcome the turmoil.

On 2 June, with increasing action on the part of protesters, the government saw that it was time to act. Protests broke out as newspapers published articles that called for the students to leave Tiananmen Square and end the movement. Many of the students in the square were not willing to leave and were outraged by the articles. They were also outraged by the &quot;Beijing Daily&quot;″s 1 June article &quot;Tiananmen, I Cry for You&quot;, which was written by a fellow student who had become disillusioned with the movement, as he thought it was chaotic and disorganised. In response to the articles, thousands of students lined the streets of Beijing to protest against leaving the square.

Three intellectuals—Liu Xiaobo, Zhou Duo, and Gao Xin—and Taiwanese singer Hou Dejian declared a second hunger strike to revive the movement. After weeks of occupying the square, the students were tired, and internal rifts opened between moderate and hardline student groups. In their declaration speech, the hunger strikers openly criticised the government&#x27;s suppression of the movement, to remind the students that their cause was worth fighting for and pushing them to continue their occupation of the square.

On 2 June, Deng Xiaoping and several party elders met with the three PSC members—Li Peng, Qiao Shi, and Yao Yilin—who remained after Zhao Ziyang and Hu Qili had been ousted. The committee members agreed to clear the square so &quot;the riot can be halted and order be restored to the Capital&quot;. They also agreed that the square needed to be cleared as peacefully as possible; but if protesters did not cooperate, the troops would be authorised to use force to complete the job. That day, state-run newspapers reported that troops were positioned in ten key areas in the city. Units of the 27th, 65th, and 24th armies were secretly moved into the Great Hall of the People on the west side of the square and the Ministry of Public Security compound east of the square.

On the evening of 2 June, an accident occurred in which a PAP jeep ran onto a sidewalk, civilians, killing three pedestrians and injuring a fourth. This incident sparked fear that the army and the police were trying to advance into Tiananmen Square. Student leaders issued emergency orders to set up roadblocks at major intersections to prevent the entry of troops into the centre of the city.

On the morning of 3 June, students and citizens intercepted and questioned a busload of plainclothed soldiers at Xinjiekou. Isolated pockets of soldiers were similarly surrounded and interrogated.

The soldiers were beaten by the crowd, as were Beijing security personnel who attempted to aid the soldiers. Some of the soldiers were kidnapped when they attempted to head for the hospital. Several other buses carrying weapons, gear, and supplies were intercepted and boarded around Tiananmen.

At 1 pm, a crowd intercepted one of these buses at Liubukou, and several men raised military helmets on bayonets to show the rest of the crowd. 
At 2:30 pm, a clash broke out between protesters and police. The police attempted to disperse the crowd with tear gas, but demonstrators counterattacked and threw rocks, forcing them to retreat inside the Zhongnanhai compound through the west gate.

At 5:30 pm, several thousand troops awaiting orders began to retreat from the Great Hall of the People. That evening, the government leaders continued to monitor the situation.

===3–4 June ===

In the evening on 3 June, the government issued an emergency announcement urging citizens to &quot;stay off the streets and away from Tiananmen Square&quot;. Meanwhile, protesters made their own broadcasts across various university campuses in Beijing to call for students and citizens to arm themselves and assemble at intersections and the Square.

====Chang&#x27;an Avenue====


On 3 June, at 8:00 p.m., the 38th Army, led by interim commander Zhang Meiyuan, began to advance from military office compounds in Shijingshan and Fentai District in western Beijing along the western extension of Chang&#x27;an Avenue toward the square to the east. At 9:30 p.m, this army encountered a blockade set up by protesters at Gongzhufen in Haidian District, and made an attempt to break through. Troops armed with anti-riot gear clashed with the protesters, firing rubber bullets and tear gas, while the protesters threw rocks, bricks, and bottles at them. Other troops fired warning shots into the air, which was ineffective. At 10:10 pm, an army officer picked up a megaphone and urged the protesters to disperse.

At about 10:30 p.m., still being pummeled by rocks thrown by protesters, the 38th Army troops opened fire. The crowds were stunned that the army was using live ammunition and fell back towards Muxidi Bridge. The troops used expanding bullets, prohibited by international law for use in warfare between countries but not for other uses.
The advance of the army was again halted by another blockade at Muxidi, about 5 km west of the square. After protesters repelled an attempt by an anti-riot brigade to storm the bridge, regular troops advanced on the crowd and turned their weapons on them. Soldiers alternated between shooting into the air and firing directly at protesters. Soldiers raked apartment buildings with gunfire, and some people inside or on their balconies were shot. As the army advanced, fatalities were recorded along Chang&#x27;an Avenue. By far, the largest number occurred in the two-mile stretch of road running from Muxidi to Xidan, where &quot;65 PLA trucks and 47 APCs ... were totally destroyed, and 485 other military vehicles were damaged.&quot;

Demonstrators attacked troops with poles, rocks, and molotov cocktails; Jeff Widener reported witnessing rioters setting fire to military vehicles and beating the soldiers inside them to death. On one avenue in western Beijing, anti-government protestors torched a military convoy of more than 100 trucks and armored vehicles. They also hijacked an armored personnel carrier, taking it on a joy ride. These scenes were captured on camera and broadcast by Chinese state television.

In the evening, a firefight broke out between soldiers and demonstrators at Shuangjing.

On 5 June 1989, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; reported on the fighting: &quot;As columns of tanks and tens of thousands of soldiers approached Tiananmen, many troops were set on by angry mobs who screamed, &#x27;Fascists&#x27;. Dozens of soldiers were pulled from trucks, severely beaten, and left for dead. At an intersection west of the square, the body of a young soldier, who had been beaten to death, was stripped naked and hung from the side of a bus. Another soldier&#x27;s corpse was strung up at an intersection east of the square.&quot;

====Clearing the square====
At the Square, soldiers and students initially attempted to show restraint, but that residents refused to follow student orders. Soldiers did not fight back at first after some citizens threw rocks at them.

In the early morning on 4 June, the first APC entered Tiananmen Square from Chang&#x27;an West Boulevard. Demonstrators attacked the APC with molotov cocktails and immobilised it with a traffic divider, before covering it with gasoline-doused blankets and setting it on fire. Wu Renhua claims that after the three occupants were forced out of the vehicle by the heat, students escorted the three men to a medic station. However, according to other accounts, including an eyewitness account of a Chinese-American reporter, the soldiers were attacked by the crowd: Two soldiers were burned alive inside the APC, and a third was beaten to death in full view of other soldiers. Larry Wortzel, a military intelligence officer at the U.S. Embassy at the time, noted that the demonstrators&#x27; swarming tactics were clearly rehearsed and practiced, having been used similarly in other places around the city. 
The reporter noted that APC incident &quot;appeared to have sparked the shooting that followed&quot;.

Troops from the west arrived at the square at about 1:30 am, and troops from other directions gradually arrived as well, blocking main roads to the square to prevent entry. A second emergency announcement from the government was broadcast on loudspeakers: 
After the announcement, most people in the square began to leave, and by 2:00 am, there were only a few thousand demonstrators in the square. North of the square, a dozen students and citizens attempted to torch army trucks with cans of gasoline but were arrested.

At 3:00 am, Hou Dejian, Liu Xiaobo, Zhou
Duo, and Gao Xin decided to convince the students to evacuate the square; Chai Ling, however, insisted that &quot;those who wish to leave may leave, and those who don&#x27;t may stay.&quot; The group asked Chai Ling and other student leaders to negotiate a peaceful evacuation. Hou Dejian addressed the students by loudspeaker, urging them to leave the square and surrender their rifles and other weapons, before leaving with Zhou Duo in an ambulance to meet the government troops.

Between 3:30 and 3:45 am, the ambulance arrived at the Museum of Chinese History in the northeast corner of the square, and Hou Dejian and Zhou Duo met with Ji Xinguo, a regimental political commissar. They requested that the army give them time to evacuate, and to open a path for them to leave. Ji Xinguo relayed their request to Martial Law Headquarters, who agreed to the students&#x27; request. Ji Xinguo informed them of this and told them to exit to the south. After Hou and Zhou returned to the square, they called for an immediate evacuation, and the Martial Law Headquarters announced, &quot;Students, we appreciate that you will leave the Square voluntarily. Students, please leave in the southeastern direction.&quot;

There was initial reluctance among the students to leave, but as the deadline approached, Feng Congde asked students for a voice vote on whether to stay or leave. Although the vote&#x27;s results were inconclusive, Feng said the vote to leave was louder. The demonstrators began to evacuate, with students leaving under their school banners, heading southeast. At about 4:35am, a few minutes after the demonstrators started to retreat, the lights in the square were turned on, and troops began to advance. A squad of commandos charged up the monument and shot out the students&#x27; loudspeaker. According to Hou Dejian, tear gas was used during the operation to clear the square.

At 5:23am, a Chinese unit crushed the Goddess of Democracy statue, removing its severed torch first as a memento.

Having removed the students from the square, soldiers were ordered to relinquish their ammunition, after which they were allowed a short reprieve, from 7am to 9am. The debris left over from the student occupation was either piled and burnt on the square or placed in large plastic bags that were then airlifted away by military helicopters. After the cleanup, the troops stationed at The Great Hall of the People remained confined within for the next nine days. During this time, the soldiers were apparently left to sleep on the floors and were daily supplied a single packet of instant noodles shared between three men.

====In the city====
Just past 6am on 4 June, as a convoy of students who had vacated the square were walking westward in the bicycle lane along Chang&#x27;an Avenue back to campus, three tanks pursued them from the square, firing tear gas. One tank was said to have driven through the crowd, killing 11 students and injuring scores of others.

By dawn, the sky was enveloped with smoke rising from the centre of the city, and the streets were filled with burned-out vehicles. Skirmishes between protesters and troops continued sporadically in the city. Some demonstrators regrouped and attempted to re-enter the square from the northeast on East Chang&#x27;an Avenue, but were driven off by gunfire. The square remained closed to the public for two weeks.

At 17:00, a sitrep from the U.S. State Department to the U.S. Embassy indicated that the PLA was &quot;mopping up isolated resistance&quot;.

===5 June and the Tank Man===
On June 5, having secured the square, the military began to reassert control over thoroughfares through the city, especially Chang&#x27;an Avenue. A column of tanks of the 1st Armored Division left the square and, heading east on Chang&#x27;an Avenue, came upon a lone protester standing in the middle of the avenue. The brief standoff between the man and the tanks was captured by Western media atop the Beijing Hotel. After returning to his position in front of the tanks, the man was pulled aside by a group of people. Charlie Cole, who was there for &quot;Newsweek&quot;, claimed that the men were Chinese government agents, while Jan Wong, who was there for &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot;, thought that they were concerned bystanders.

Although the fate of Tank Man following the demonstration is not known, paramount Chinese leader Jiang Zemin stated in 1990 that he did not think the man was killed. &quot;Time&quot; later named him one of the 100 most influential people of the 20th century.

A stopped convoy of 37 APCs on Changan Boulevard at Muxidi was forced to abandon their vehicles after becoming stuck among an assortment of burned-out buses and military vehicles. In addition to occasional incidents of soldiers opening fire on civilians in Beijing, Western news outlets reported clashes between units of the PLA. Late in the afternoon, 26 tanks, three armored personnel carriers, and supporting infantry took up defensive positions facing east at Jianguomen and Fuxingmen overpasses. Shellfire was heard throughout the night, and the next morning a United States Marine in the eastern part of the city reported spotting a damaged armored vehicle that an armor-piercing shell had disabled. The ongoing turmoil in the capital disrupted everyday life flow. No editions of the &quot;People&#x27;s Daily&quot; were available in Beijing on 5 June, despite assurances that they had been printed. Many shops, offices, and factories were not able to open, as workers remained in their homes, and public transit services were limited to the subway and suburban bus routes.

By and large, the government regained control in the week following the square&#x27;s military seizure. A political purge followed in which officials responsible for organizing or condoning the protests were removed, and protest leaders were jailed.

===Protests outside Beijing===
After order was restored in Beijing on 4 June, protests of various sizes continued in some 80 other Chinese cities outside the international press&#x27;s spotlight. In the British colony of Hong Kong, people again took to wearing black in solidarity with the demonstrators in Beijing. There were also protests in other countries, where many adopted the wearing of black armbands as well.

In Shanghai, students marched on the streets on 5 June and erected roadblocks on major thoroughfares. Public transport including railway traffic was blocked. On 6 June, the municipal government tried to clear the rail blockade, but it was met with fierce resistance from the crowds. Several people were killed from being run over by a train. On 7 June, students from major Shanghai universities stormed various campus facilities to erect biers. Although there were rumors of possible martial law in the city, the situation was gradually brought under control without deadly force. The municipal government gained recognition from the top leadership in Beijing for averting a major upheaval.

In the interior cities of Xi&#x27;an, Wuhan, Nanjing, and Chengdu, many students continued protests after 4 June, often erecting roadblocks. In Xi&#x27;an, students stopped workers from entering factories. In Wuhan, students blocked the Yangtze River Railway bridge and another 4,000 gathered at the railway station. About one thousand students staged a railroad &quot;sit-in&quot;, and rail traffic on the Beijing-Guangzhou and Wuhan-Dalian lines was interrupted. The students also urged employees of major state-owned enterprises to go on strike. In Wuhan, the situation was so tense that residents reportedly began a bank run and resorted to panic buying.

===Government&#x27;s pronouncements===
At a news conference on 6 June, State Council spokesperson Yuan Mu announced that based on &quot;preliminary statistics&quot;, &quot;nearly 300 people died ... includ[ing] soldiers&quot;, 23 students, &quot;bad elements who deserve[d] this because of their crimes, and people who were killed by mistake.&quot; He said the wounded included &quot;5,000 [police] officers and [soldiers]&quot; and over &quot;2,000 civilians, including the handful of lawless ruffians and the onlooking masses who do understand the situation.&quot; Military spokesperson Zhang Gong stated that no one was killed in Tiananmen Square and no one was run over by tanks in the square.

On 9 June, Deng Xiaoping, appearing in public for the first time since the protests began, delivered a speech praising the &quot;martyrs&quot; (PLA soldiers who had died). Deng stated that the goal of the student movement was to overthrow the party and the state. Of the protesters, Deng said: &quot;Their goal is to establish a totally Western-dependent bourgeois republic.&quot; Deng argued that protesters had complained about corruption to cover their real motive, replacing the socialist system. He said that &quot;the entire imperialist Western world plans to make all socialist countries discard the socialist road and then bring them under the monopoly of international capital and onto the capitalist road.&quot;

==Death toll==
The number of deaths and the extent of bloodshed in the square itself have been in dispute since the events. The government actively suppressed discussion of casualty figures immediately after the events, and estimates rely heavily on eyewitness testimony, hospital records, and organised efforts by victims&#x27; relatives. As a result, large discrepancies exist among various casualty estimates. Initial estimates ranged from the official figure of a few hundred to several thousand.

===Official figures===
Official government announcements shortly after the event put the number who died at around 300. At the State Council press conference on 6 June, spokesman Yuan Mu said that &quot;preliminary tallies&quot; by the government showed that about 300 civilians and soldiers died, including 23 students from universities in Beijing, along with some people he described as &quot;ruffians&quot;. Yuan also said some 5,000 soldiers and police were wounded, along with 2,000 civilians. On 19 June, Beijing Party Secretary Li Ximing reported to the Politburo that the government&#x27;s confirmed death toll was 241, including 218 civilians (of which 36 were students), 10 PLA soldiers, and 13 People&#x27;s Armed Police, along with 7,000 wounded. On 30 June, Mayor Chen Xitong said that the number of injured was around 6,000.

===Other estimates===
On the morning of 4 June, many estimates of deaths were reported, including from government-affiliated sources. Peking University leaflets circulated on campus suggested a death toll of between two and three thousand. The Chinese Red Cross had given a figure of 2,600 deaths but later denied having given such a figure. The Swiss Ambassador had estimated 2,700. Nicholas D. Kristof of &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote on 21 June that &quot;it seems plausible that about a dozen soldiers and policemen were killed, along with 400 to 800 civilians.&quot; United States ambassador James Lilley said that, based on visits to hospitals around Beijing, a minimum of several hundred had been killed. A declassified National Security Agency cable filed on the same day estimated 180–500 deaths up to the morning of 4 June. Beijing hospital records compiled shortly after the events recorded at least 478 dead and 920 wounded. Amnesty International&#x27;s estimates put the number of deaths at between several hundred and close to 1,000, while a Western diplomat who compiled estimates put the number at 300 to 1,000.

In a disputed cable sent in the aftermath of the events at Tiananmen, British Ambassador Alan Donald initially claimed, based on information from a &quot;good friend&quot; in the State Council of China, that a minimum of 10,000 civilians died, claims which were repeated in a speech by Australian Prime Minister Bob Hawke, but which is an estimated number much higher than other sources provided. After the declassification, former student protest leader Feng Congde pointed out that Donald later revised his estimate to 2,700–3,400 deaths, a number closer to, but still much higher than, other estimates.

===Identifying the dead===
The Tiananmen Mothers, a victims&#x27; advocacy group co-founded by Ding Zilin and Zhang Xianling, whose children were killed by the government during the crackdown, have identified 202 victims . In the face of government interference, the group has worked painstakingly to locate victims&#x27; families and collect information about the victims. Their tally had grown from 155 in 1999 to 202 in 2011. The list includes four individuals who committed suicide on or after 4 June for reasons related to their involvement in the demonstrations.

Former protester Wu Renhua of the Chinese Alliance for Democracy, an overseas group agitating for democratic reform in China, said that he was only able to identify and verify 15 military deaths. Wu asserts that if deaths from events unrelated to demonstrators were removed from the count, only seven deaths among military personnel might be counted as from being &quot;killed in action&quot; by rioters.

===Deaths around and in Tiananmen Square itself===
Government officials have long asserted that no one died in the square in the early morning hours of 4 June, during the &quot;hold-out&quot; of students&#x27; last batch in the south part of the square. Initially, foreign media reports of a &quot;massacre&quot; on the square were prevalent, though subsequently, journalists have acknowledged that most of the deaths occurred outside of the square in western Beijing. Several people who were situated around the square that night, including former Beijing bureau chief of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; Jay Mathews and CBS correspondent Richard Roth reported that while they had heard sporadic gunfire, they could not find enough evidence to suggest that a massacre took place on the square.

Student leader Chai Ling claimed in a speech broadcast on Hong Kong television that she witnessed tanks arrive at the square and crush students who were sleeping in their tents, and added that between 200 and 4000 students died at the square. Ling was joined by fellow student leader Wu&#x27;er Kaixi who said he had witnessed 200 students being cut down by gunfire; however, according to Mathews, it was later proven that he had already left the square several hours before the events he claimed to have happened. Taiwan-born Hou Dejian was present in the square to show solidarity with the students and said that he did not see any massacre occurring in the square. He was quoted by Xiaoping Li, a former China dissident to have stated: &quot;Some people said 200 died in the square, and others claimed that as many as 2,000 died. There were also stories of tanks running over students who were trying to leave. I have to say I did not see any of that. I was in the square until 6:30 in the morning.&quot;

In 2011, three secret cables from the United States embassy in Beijing agreed there was no bloodshed inside Tiananmen Square. Instead, they said Chinese soldiers opened fire on protesters outside the square as they fought their way from the west towards the centre. A Chilean diplomat who had been positioned next to a Red Cross station inside the square told his US counterparts that he did not observe any mass firing of weapons into the crowds in the square itself, although sporadic gunfire was heard. He said that most of the troops who entered the square were armed only with anti-riot gear.

==Immediate aftermath==

===Arrests, punishments, and evacuations ===

On 13 June 1989, the Beijing Public Security Bureau released an order for the arrest of 21 students they identified as the protest leaders. These 21 most-wanted student leaders were part of the Beijing Students Autonomous Federation, which had been instrumental in the Tiananmen Square protests. Though decades have passed, this most-wanted list has never been retracted by the Chinese government.

On 17 June, two individuals were captured after exchanging gunfire with soldiers. The same day, a woman who had been visiting a Western diplomat at Jianguomenwai diplomatic compound was observed being arrested by plainclothes policemen.

The 21 most-wanted student leaders&#x27; faces and descriptions were often broadcast on television. Photographs with biographies of the leaders followed in this order: Wang Dan,
Wuer Kaixi, Liu Gang, Chai Ling, Zhou Fengsuo, Zhai Weimin, Liang Qingdun, Wang Zhengyun, Zheng Xuguang, Ma Shaofang, Yang Tao, Wang Zhixing, Feng Congde, Wang Chaohua, Wang Youcai, Zhang Zhiqing, Zhang Boli, Li Lu, Zhang Ming, Xiong Wei, and Xiong Yan.

Each of the 21 students faced diverse experiences after their arrests or escapes; while some remain abroad with no intent to return, others have chosen to stay indefinitely, such as Zhang Ming. Only 7 of the 21 were able to escape. Some student leaders, such as Chai Ling and Wuer Kaixi, were able to escape to the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and other Western nations under Operation Yellowbird, which was organised by Western intelligence agencies such as MI6 and CIA from Hong Kong, a British territory at the time. According to &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, the operation involved more than 40 people and had its roots in the Alliance in Support of Democratic Movements in China formed in May 1989. After the Beijing protest crackdown, this group drew up an initial list of 40 dissidents they believed could form the nucleus of a &quot;Chinese democracy movement in exile&quot;.

The remaining student leaders were apprehended and incarcerated. Those who escaped, whether in 1989 or after, generally have had difficulty re-entering China up to this day. The Chinese government has preferred to leave the dissidents in exile. Those who attempt to re-enter, such as Wu&#x27;er Kaixi, have been simply sent back but not arrested.

Chen Ziming and Wang Juntao were arrested in late 1989 for their involvement in the protests. Chinese authorities alleged they were the &quot;black hands&quot; behind the movement. Both Chen and Wang rejected the allegations made against them. They were put on trial in 1990 and sentenced to 13 years in prison. Others, such as Zhang Zhiqing, have essentially disappeared. After his initial arrest in January 1991 and subsequent release, nothing further is known about his situation and where he lives now. Zhang Zhiqing&#x27;s role and reason for being listed on the 21 most wanted is generally unknown; this is the case for many others on the list, such as Wang Chaohua.

According to the Dui Hua Foundation, citing a provincial government, 1,602 individuals were imprisoned for protest-related activities in early 1989. , at least two remain incarcerated in Beijing, and five others remain unaccounted for. In June 2014, it was reported that Miao Deshun was believed to be the last known prisoner incarcerated for their participation in the protests; he was last heard from a decade ago. All are reported to have mental illnesses.

===Leadership changes===

The party leadership expelled Zhao Ziyang from the Politburo Standing Committee (PSC). Hu Qili, another PSC member who opposed martial law but abstained from voting, was also removed from the committee. However, he was able to retain his party membership, and after &quot;changing his opinion&quot;, he was reassigned as deputy minister in the Ministry for Machinery and Electronics Industry. Another reform-minded Chinese leader, Wan Li, was also put under house arrest immediately after he stepped out of his plane at Beijing Capital Airport upon returning from a shortened trip abroad; the authorities declared his detention to be on health grounds. When Wan Li was released from his house arrest after he finally &quot;changed his opinion&quot;, he, like Qiao Shi, was transferred to a different position with equal rank but a mostly ceremonial role. Several Chinese ambassadors abroad claimed political asylum.

Jiang Zemin, the Party Secretary of Shanghai, was promoted to General Secretary of the Communist Party. Jiang&#x27;s decisive actions in Shanghai involving the &quot;World Economic Herald&quot; and his having prevented deadly violence in the city won him support from party elders in Beijing. Having put the new leadership team in place and recognizing his weakened position, Deng Xiaoping himself also bowed out of the party leadership—at least officially—by resigning his last leadership position as Chairman of the Central Military Commission later that year. He kept a low profile until 1992. According to diplomatic cables de-classified by Canada, the Swiss ambassador informed Canadian diplomats in confidence that over several months following the massacre, &quot;every member of the Politburo Standing Committee has approached him about transferring very significant amounts of money to Swiss bank accounts.&quot;

Bao Tong, Zhao Ziyang&#x27;s aide, was the highest-ranking official to be formally charged with a crime connected with 1989 demonstrations. He was convicted in 1992 of &quot;revealing state secrets and counter-revolutionary propagandizing&quot; and served seven years in prison. To purge sympathizers of Tiananmen demonstrators from among the party&#x27;s rank-and-file, the party leadership initiated a one-and-a-half-year-long rectification programme to &quot;deal strictly with those inside the party with serious tendencies toward bourgeois liberalisation&quot;. Four million people were reportedly investigated for their role in the protests. More than 30,000 Communist officers were deployed to assess the &quot;political reliability&quot; of more than one million government officials. The authorities arrested tens if not hundreds of thousands of people across the country. Some were seized in broad daylight while they walked in the street; others were arrested at night. Many were jailed or sent to labour camps. They were often denied access to see their families and often put in cells so crowded that not everyone had space to sleep. Dissidents shared cells with murderers and rapists, and torture was not uncommon.

===Media coverage===

==== Official narrative ====
The official narrative constructed by the Chinese Communist Party on 4 June Incident states that the use of force was necessary to control &quot;political turmoil&quot;, and this also ensures the stable society that is necessary for successful economic development. Chinese leaders—including Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao, who were general secretaries of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party—consistently reiterated the official narrative of the Chinese Communist Party when being asked about the protests by foreign journalists.

Print media were required to be consistent with the Chinese government&#x27;s account of the 4 June Incident. The Chinese government prepared a white paper to explain the government&#x27;s views on the protests. Later, anonymous people within the Chinese government shipped the files overseas and published the &quot;Tiananmen Papers&quot; in 2001. At the 30th anniversary of the 4 June Incident, Wei Fenghe, a general of the Chinese People&#x27;s Liberation Army, said in the Shangri-La Dialogue: &quot;The 4 June Incident was a turmoil and unrest. The Central Government took decisive measures to calm the unrest and stop the turmoil, and it is because of this decision that the stability within the country can be established. For the past three decades, China has undergone tremendous changes under the leadership of the Communist Party.&quot;

====Chinese media====
The suppression of 4 June marked the end of a period of relative press freedom in China, and media workers—both foreign and domestic—faced heightened restrictions and punishment in the aftermath of the crackdown. State media reports in the immediate aftermath were sympathetic to the students. As a result, those responsible were all later removed from their posts. Two news anchors, Du Xian and Xue Fei, who reported this event on 4 and 5 June, respectively in the daily &quot;Xinwen Lianbo&quot; broadcast on China Central Television, were fired because they openly emoted in sympathy with the protesters. Wu Xiaoyong, the son of the former foreign minister Wu Xueqian, was removed from the English Programme Department of Chinese Radio International, ostensibly for his sympathies towards protesters. Editors and other staff at the &quot;People&#x27;s Daily&quot;, including director Qian Liren and Editor-in-Chief Tan Wenrui, were also sacked because of reports in the paper that were sympathetic towards the protesters.

The restrictions were loosened after a few years had passed, especially after Deng Xiaoping&#x27;s southern tour. Privately run print media then again flourished. Private newspapers increased from 250 in the 1980s to over 7,000 by 2003. Provincially-run, satellite TV stations sprang up all over the country and challenged the market share of state-run CCTV. The leadership also stepped away from promoting communism as an all-encompassing belief system. State-approved religious organisations increased their membership significantly, and traditional beliefs suppressed during the Mao era re-appeared. This state-sanctioned plurality also created an environment for unsanctioned forms of spirituality and worship to grow. To reduce the need for controversial methods of state control, Protestants, Buddhists, and Taoists were often used by the state as &quot;approved&quot; denominations to &quot;fight against cults&quot; such as Falun Gong, playing the sects against each other.

====Foreign media====
With the imposition of martial law, the Chinese government cut off Western broadcasters&#x27; satellite transmissions such as CNN and CBS. Broadcasters tried to defy these orders by reporting via telephone. Video footage was smuggled out of the country, although the only network that was able to record video during the night of 4 June was of Spain (TVE). During the military action, some foreign journalists faced harassment from authorities. CBS correspondent Richard Roth and his cameraman were taken into custody while filing a report from the square via mobile phone.

Several foreign journalists who had covered the crackdown were expelled in the weeks that followed, while others were harassed by authorities or blacklisted from reentering the country. Some were reportedly beaten.

Some Western outlets withheld certain images from viewers; Graham Earnshaw, a Reuters correspondent at the time, stated that a photo of a soldier who was &quot;burnt to a crisp&quot; was not sent to subscribers.

==Reactions==

The Chinese government&#x27;s response was widely denounced by Western governments and media. 

According to Suisheng Zhao, Asian countries generally remained silent throughout the protests. India&#x27;s government under Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi responded to the massacre by ordering the state television to offer only the absolute minimum coverage of the incident so as not to jeopardize a thawing in relations with China and to empathize with the Chinese government. The Communist Party of India (Marxist) was the only political party in the world to pass a resolution supporting the crackdown on the Tiananmen Square protests, calling them &quot;an imperialist attempt to internally subvert socialism, [which] was successfully thwarted by the CPC and the PLA.&quot; South Korea was in the midst of efforts to develop relations with the People&#x27;s Republic of China and President Roh Tae-woo remained quiet in the aftermath of the crackdown.

Former United Nations Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar expressed great sadness over the event. In 1992, he however stated that the crackdown had been exaggerated, and that he received no convincing evidence of widespread killing.

Cuba, Czechoslovakia, and East Germany, under the Soviet sphere of influence at the time, supported the Chinese government and denounced the protests.

==Longer-term impact==

===Politics===
As the party departed from the orthodox communism it was founded upon, much of its attention was focused on the cultivation of nationalism as an alternative ideology. This policy largely succeeded in tying the party&#x27;s legitimacy to China&#x27;s &quot;national pride&quot;, turning domestic public opinion back in its favor.

The protests highlighted severe inadequacies in riot control equipment and training among both the Chinese military and police. The PLA was not trained or equipped to handle riots, and the few PAP riot control units that were dispatched were insufficient in crowd control. Since 1989, efforts have been made to create effective riot control units in Chinese cities increased spending on internal security and to an expanded role for the People&#x27;s Armed Police in handling protests.

===Economy===
After the Tiananmen Square protests, many business analysts downgraded their outlook for China&#x27;s economic future. The violent response to the protests was one of the factors that led to a delay in China&#x27;s acceptance in the World Trade Organization, which was not completed until twelve years later, in 2001. Furthermore, bilateral aid to China decreased from $3.4 billion in 1988 to $700 million in 1990. Loans to China were suspended by the World Bank, Asian Development Bank, and foreign governments; China&#x27;s credit rating was lowered; tourism revenue decreased from US$2.2 billion to US$1.8 billion; and foreign direct investment commitments were canceled. However, there was a rise in government defence spending from 8.6% in 1986, to 15.5% in 1990, reversing a previous 10-year decline.

In the aftermath of the protests, the government sought again to centralize control over the economy, though the changes were short-lived. Sensing that conservative policies had again taken a foothold within the party, Deng, now retired from all of his official positions, launched his southern tour in 1992, visiting various cities in the country&#x27;s most prosperous regions while advocating for further economic reforms. Partly in response to Deng, by the mid-1990s the country was again pursuing market liberalisation on a scale even greater than those seen in the initial stages of the reforms in the 1980s. Although political liberals were purged from within the party, many of those who were economically liberal remained. The economic shocks caused by the events of 1989, in retrospect, had only a minor and temporary effect on China&#x27;s economic growth. Indeed, with many previously aggrieved groups now regarding political liberalisation as a lost cause, more of their energy was spent on economic activities. The economy would quickly regain momentum into the 1990s.

===Hong Kong===
In Hong Kong, the Tiananmen Square protests led to fears that China would renege on its commitments under one country, two systems, following the impending handover of Hong Kong from the United Kingdom in 1997. In response, Governor Chris Patten tried to expand the franchise for the Legislative Council of Hong Kong, which led to friction with Beijing. For many Hongkongers, Tiananmen served as the turning point when they lost trust in the Beijing government. The event, coupled with general uncertainty about the status of Hong Kong after the transfer of sovereignty, led to a sizable exodus of Hong Kongers to Western countries such as Canada and Australia before 1997.

There have been large candlelight vigils attended by tens of thousands in Hong Kong every year since 1989, even after the transfer of power to China in 1997. Despite that, the June 4th Museum closed in July 2016, after only two years in its location. The group that runs the museum, the Hong Kong Alliance, has started to crowdfund money to open the museum in a new location. A virtual version of the museum released online in August 2021 has also been blocked by Chinese telecom companies.

The events continue to strongly impact perceptions of China, its government, attitudes towards democracy, and the extent to which Hong Kongers should identify as &quot;Chinese&quot;. The events of 4 June are seen as representative of the Chinese brand of authoritarianism, and they are often invoked by pro-democracy politicians in Hong Kong, especially in relation to democratic reform in Hong Kong and the territory&#x27;s relationship with Beijing. Academic studies indicate that those who supported the Tiananmen Square movement&#x27;s rehabilitation had a tendency to support democratisation in the territory and the election of pro-democracy parties.

In memory of the events among other monuments at 1997 &quot;Pillar of Shame&quot; with height of 8 meters performed by sculptor Jens Galschiøt was placed in the University of Hong Kong. On 22 December 2021, it was removed by the university authorities, a move that was condemned by survivors of the massacre.

===China&#x27;s image internationally===
The Chinese government drew widespread condemnation for its suppression of the protests. In the immediate aftermath, China seemed to be becoming a pariah state, increasingly isolated internationally. This was a significant setback for the leadership, who had courted international investment for much of the 1980s, as the country emerged from the chaos of the Cultural Revolution; however, Deng Xiaoping and the core leadership vowed to continue economic liberalisation policies after 1989. From there on, China would work domestically and internationally to reshape its national image from that of a repressive regime to that of a benign global economic and military partner.

Although the crackdown hurt relations with Western countries, it had relatively little impact on China&#x27;s relations with its Asian neighbors. Professor Suisheng Zhao, Director of the Centre for China-US Cooperation at the University of Denver, attributes the slight impact to the fact that &quot;the human rights records in most of these countries were not better than China&#x27;s. To a certain extent, they were sympathetic to China&#x27;s struggle against pressures from Western countries.&quot; Even in the wake of the crackdown, China&#x27;s foreign relations with its neighbors generally improved.

The government signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1992, the Convention on Chemical Weapons in 1993, and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty in 1996. Whereas China had been a member of only 30 international organisations in 1986, it was a member of over 50 by 1997. China also sought to diversify its external partnerships, establishing good diplomatic relations with post-Soviet Russia, and welcoming Taiwanese business in lieu of Western investment. China expedited negotiations with the World Trade Organisation and established relations with Indonesia, Israel, South Korea, and others in 1992.

Furthermore, the government has successfully promoted China as an attractive destination for investment by emphasizing its skilled workers, comparatively low wages, established infrastructure, and sizable consumer base. At the same time, the explosion of commercial interest in the country opened the way for multinational corporations to turn a blind eye to politics and human rights in favor of focusing on business interests. Since then, Western leaders who were previously critical of China have sometimes paid lip service to the legacy of Tiananmen in bilateral meetings, but the substance of discussions revolved around business and trade interests.

===European Union and the United States arms embargo===
The European Union and United States embargo on armament sales to China, put in place due to the violent suppression of the Tiananmen Square protests, remains in place today. China has been calling for a lift of the ban for years and has had a varying amount of support from European Union members. Since 2004, China has portrayed the ban as &quot;outdated&quot; and damaging to China–European Union relations. In early 2004, French President Jacques Chirac spearheaded a movement within the European Union to lift the ban, his efforts being supported by German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder. However, the passing of the Anti-Secession Law of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, in March 2005, increased tensions between mainland China and Taiwan, damaging attempts to lift the ban; and several European Union Council members retracted their support for a lift of the ban. Moreover, Schröder&#x27;s successor Angela Merkel opposed lifting the ban. Members of the United States Congress had also proposed restrictions on the transfer of military technology to the European Union if the latter lifted the ban. The United Kingdom also opposed the embargo lifting when it took charge of the European Union presidency in July 2005.

The European Parliament has consistently opposed the lifting of the arms embargo to China. Though its agreement is not necessary for lifting the ban, many argue it reflects the will of the European people better as it is the only directly elected European body. The arms embargo has limited China&#x27;s options in seeking military hardware. Among the sources that were sought included the former Soviet bloc that it had a strained relationship with as a result of the Sino-Soviet split. Other willing suppliers have previously included Israel and South Africa, but American pressure has restricted this co-operation.

==Contemporary issues==

===Censorship in China===

The Chinese government continues to forbid discussions about the Tiananmen Square protests and has taken measures to block or censor related information, in an attempt to suppress the public&#x27;s memory of the Tiananmen Square protests. Textbooks contain little, if any, information about the protests. After the protests, officials banned controversial films and books and shut down many newspapers. Within a year, 12% of all newspapers, 8% of all publishing companies, 13% of all social science periodicals, and more than 150 films were either banned or shut down. The government also announced that it had seized 32 million contraband books and 2.4 million video and audio cassettes. Access to media and Internet resources about the subject are either restricted or blocked by censors. Banned literature and films include &quot;Summer Palace&quot;, &quot;Forbidden City&quot;, &quot;Collection of June Fourth Poems&quot;, &quot;The Critical Moment: Li Peng diaries&quot; and any writings of Zhao Ziyang or his aide Bao Tong, including Zhao&#x27;s memoirs.

Print media that contain references to the protests must be consistent with the government&#x27;s version of events. Domestic and foreign journalists are detained, harassed, or threatened, as are their Chinese colleagues and any Chinese citizens who they interview. Thus, Chinese citizens are typically reluctant to speak about the protests because of potentially negative repercussions. Many young people who were born after 1980 are unfamiliar with the events and are therefore apathetic about politics. Youth in China are sometimes unaware of the events, the symbols which are associated with them such as the Tank Man, or the significance of the date of the massacre 4 June itself. Some older intellectuals no longer aspire to implement political change. Instead, they focus on economic issues. Some political prisoners have refused to talk to their children about their involvement in the protests out of fear of putting them at risk.

While public discussions about the events have become socially taboo, private discussions about them continue to occur despite frequent interference and harassment by the authorities. Nobel Peace Prize laureate Liu Xiaobo remained in China in order to speak out about Tiananmen in the 1990s despite the fact that he received offers of asylum; he faced constant surveillance. Zhang Xianling and Ding Zilin, the mothers of victims who died in 1989, founded the Tiananmen Mothers organisation and were particularly outspoken about the humanitarian aspects of the protests. The authorities mobilize security forces, including members of the People&#x27;s Armed Police, every year on 4 June in order to prevent public displays of remembrance, with an especially heavy security presence on the anniversaries of major events such as the 20th anniversary of the protests in 2009 and the 25th anniversary of the protests in 2014. On the 30th anniversary of the protests in 2019, the renowned Chinese artist Ai Weiwei wrote that &quot;autocratic and totalitarian regimes fear facts because they have built their power on unjust foundations&quot; and he also wrote that memory is important: &quot;without it there is no such thing as a civilised society or nation&quot; because &quot;our past is all we have.&quot;

Journalists have frequently been denied entry to the square on the anniversaries of the massacre. Also, the authorities are known to have detained foreign journalists and increase surveillance of prominent human rights activists during this time of year. Internet searches on &quot;4 June Tiananmen Square&quot; made within China return censored results or result in temporarily severed server connections. Specific web pages with select keywords are censored while other websites, such as those which support the overseas Chinese democracy movement, are blocked wholesale. The policy is much more stringent with regard to Chinese-language sites than it is with regard to foreign-language ones. Social media censorship is more stringent in the weeks leading up to the anniversaries of the massacre; even oblique references to the protests and seemingly unrelated terms are usually very aggressively patrolled and censored. In January 2006, Google agreed to censor their mainland China site to remove information about Tiananmen and other subjects which are considered sensitive by the authorities. Google withdrew its cooperation on censorship in January 2010.

===Calls for the government to reassess===
Zhang Shijun, a former soldier who was involved in the military crackdown, published an open letter to President Hu Jintao that sought to have the government reevaluate its position on the protests. He was subsequently arrested and taken from his home.

Although the Chinese government never officially acknowledged relevant accusations when it came to the incident, in 2005 a payment was made to one of the victims&#x27; mothers, the first publicised case of the government offering redress to a Tiananmen-related victim&#x27;s family. The payment was termed a &quot;hardship assistance&quot; and was given to Tang Deying (), whose son Zhou Guocong () died at age 15 while in police custody in Chengdu on 6 June 1989, two days after the Chinese Army dispersed the Tiananmen protesters. She was reportedly paid CNY70,000 (approximately US$10,250). This has been welcomed by various Chinese activists.

===Chinese leaders voicing regret===
Before his death in 1998, Yang Shangkun told army doctor Jiang Yanyong that 4 June was the most serious mistake committed by the Communist Party in its history, a mistake that Yang himself could not correct, but one that certainly will eventually be corrected. Zhao Ziyang remained under house arrest until his death in 2005. Zhao&#x27;s aide Bao Tong has repeatedly called on the government to reverse its verdict on the demonstrations. Chen Xitong, the mayor of Beijing, who read the martial law order and was later disgraced by a political scandal, expressed regret in 2012, a year before his death, for the death of innocent civilians. Premier Wen Jiabao reportedly suggested reversing the government&#x27;s position on Tiananmen in party meetings before he departed from politics in 2013, only to be rebuffed by his colleagues.

===United Nations report===
During its 41st session, from 3–21 November 2008, the UN Committee Against Torture expressed concern over the lack of investigations into the reports of people &quot;killed, arrested or disappeared on or following the 4 June 1989 Beijing suppression.&quot; It stated that the Chinese government had also failed to inform relatives of those individuals&#x27; fate, despite relatives&#x27; numerous requests. Meanwhile, those responsible for the use of excessive force had not &quot;faced any sanction, administrative or criminal.&quot; The Committee recommended that the Chinese government should take all of those steps, plus &quot;offer apologies and reparation as appropriate and prosecute those found responsible for excessive use of force, torture and other ill-treatment.&quot;

In December 2009, the Chinese government responded to the committee&#x27;s recommendations by saying that the government had closed the case concerning the &quot;political turmoil in the spring and summer of 1989&quot;. It also stated that the &quot;practice of the past 20 years has made it clear that the timely and decisive measures taken by the Chinese Government at the time were necessary and correct&quot;. It said that the labeling of the &quot;incident as &#x27;the Democracy Movement is a &quot;distortion in the nature of the incident&quot;. According to the Chinese government, such observations were &quot;inconsistent with the Committee&#x27;s responsibilities&quot;.

==Gallery==
==See also==

* 1981 Inner Mongolia student protest
* 1987–1989 Tibetan unrest
* December 9th Movement
* Chinese Student Protection Act of 1992
* Executive Order 12711
* Human rights in China
* List of massacres in China
* Mass incidents in China
* Mass killings under communist regimes
* Mass surveillance in China
* &quot;Moving the Mountain (1994 film)&quot;
* Protest and dissent in China

; Other protests in the 1980s
* 8888 Uprising, Burma, 1988
* Gwangju uprising, South Korea, 1980
* June Struggle, South Korea, 1987
* People Power Revolution, Manila, 1986

; Similar student killings
*2024 Bangladesh quota reform movement

==Notes==
==References==

===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* Includes footage of the shutting down of CNN, and interviews with Al Pessin (VOA) and John Pomfret (AP), both of whom were expelled soon after the protests.
* Tiananmen Square, 1989 from Indiana University Indianapolis University Archive Digital Collections
:Over 400 black and white photographs taken Dr. Edgar Huang, a faculty member at IUI. He was then a university instructor and a documentary photographer in Beijing.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="4" end="29" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="Tiananmen Square protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="57" end="77" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="June Fourth Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="96" end="110" title="Demonstration (people)" label="demonstrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q164055" start="119" end="135" title="Tiananmen Square" label="Tiananmen Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="139" end="146" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165608" start="337" end="373" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army at the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="deployed troops to occupy the square"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="427" end="452" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="Tiananmen Square massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="489" end="516" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="&amp;#x27;89 Democracy Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="522" end="547" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="Tiananmen Square Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="556" end="574" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="Tiananmen uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q51885025" start="615" end="620" title="Death of Hu Yaobang" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="635" end="658" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="665" end="682" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="general secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q99850" start="683" end="693" title="Hu Yaobang" label="Hu Yaobang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870187" start="777" end="791" title="History of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China (1976–89)" label="post-Mao China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="888" end="908" title="Chinese economic reform" label="reforms of the 1980s"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="930" end="944" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q74279" start="1379" end="1393" title="iron rice bowl" label="iron rice bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="1458" end="1467" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="1469" end="1489" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="1495" end="1512" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q191355" start="1969" end="1982" title="hunger strike" label="hunger strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="2103" end="2116" title="State Council of China" label="State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="2126" end="2137" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199915" start="2994" end="3002" title="massacre" label="massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q55601342" start="3078" end="3105" title="1989 Chinese protests by region" label="other protests around China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097727" start="3162" end="3182" title="Operation Yellowbird" label="Operation Yellowbird"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3234" end="3242" title="#Official narrative" label="domestic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16924652" start="3247" end="3271" title="Foreign media at the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="foreign affiliated press"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630185" start="3277" end="3342" title="Political purges during and after the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="demoted or purged officials it deemed sympathetic to the protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q160146" start="3417" end="3429" title="riot control" label="riot control"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3477" end="3508" title="History of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China#Political reforms" label="political reforms begun in 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q116770900" start="3524" end="3550" title="New Enlightenment (China)" label="New Enlightenment movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799880" start="3645" end="3679" title="Deng Xiaoping&amp;#x27;s Southern Tour" label="Deng Xiaoping&amp;#x27;s Southern Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385874" start="3878" end="3902" title="Censorship in China" label="censored topics in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q12716225" start="4037" end="4058" title="Counter-revolutionary" label="counter revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370363" start="4448" end="4462" title="Great Firewall" label="Great Firewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="4561" end="4575" title="Roman numerals" label="Roman numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061850" start="4959" end="4979" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an Avenue" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q842107" start="5027" end="5033" title="Muxidi" label="Muxidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="5270" end="5289" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="5310" end="5320" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q196341" start="5364" end="5376" title="Gang of Four" label="Gang of Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="5741" end="5754" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q11077566" start="5782" end="5797" title="Boluan Fanzheng" label="Boluan Fanzheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148996" start="5905" end="5947" title="Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee" label="Third Plenum of the 11th Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="5996" end="6023" title="Paramount leader" label="&amp;quot;de facto&amp;quot; leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="6053" end="6092" title="Chinese economic reform" label="programme to reform the Chinese economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="6094" end="6116" title="Reforms and Opening Up" label="Reforms and Opening-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q99829" start="6347" end="6358" title="Zhao Ziyang" label="Zhao Ziyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122271" start="6369" end="6376" title="Premier of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q99850" start="6425" end="6435" title="Hu Yaobang" label="Hu Yaobang"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="6443" end="6464" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q779313" start="6952" end="6962" title="Corruption in China" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="6967" end="6975" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q273088" start="7476" end="7485" title="arbitrage" label="arbitrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q814657" start="7747" end="7755" title="Beidaihe" label="Beidaihe"/>
<link wikidata="Q180687" start="8155" end="8175" title="Consumer Price Index" label="Consumer Price Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="8364" end="8386" title="state-owned enterprise" label="state-owned enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q74279" start="8494" end="8508" title="iron rice bowl" label="iron rice bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q116770900" start="8841" end="8867" title="New Enlightenment (China)" label="New Enlightenment movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540892" start="8911" end="8918" title="Liberalism in China" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="9007" end="9015" title="humanism" label="humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373899" start="9017" end="9033" title="Universal value" label="universal values"/>
<link wikidata="Q10891680" start="9071" end="9091" title="Total Westernization" label="Total Westernisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q118886" start="9183" end="9207" title="Four Cardinal Principles" label="Four Cardinal Principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064441" start="9227" end="9251" title="political liberalisation" label="political liberalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481003" start="11063" end="11076" title="Marketization" label="marketisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q557233" start="11419" end="11427" title="Chen Yun" label="Chen Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q445635" start="11780" end="11790" title="Fang Lizhi" label="Fang Lizhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="11819" end="11839" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="11938" end="11958" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q645029" start="12885" end="12908" title="economic liberalization" label="economic liberalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185684" start="12989" end="12994" title="Hefei" label="Hefei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950159" start="13480" end="13504" title="bourgeois liberalization" label="bourgeois liberalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076970" start="13951" end="13964" title="Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193852" start="14230" end="14251" title="democratic centralism" label="democratic centralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146169" start="14268" end="14289" title="collective leadership" label="collective leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q200800" start="14380" end="14397" title="Constitution of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="1982 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057682" start="14423" end="14458" title="5th National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="5th National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q779313" start="14652" end="14662" title="Corruption in China" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="14667" end="14686" title="economic inequality" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q99829" start="14810" end="14821" title="Zhao Ziyang" label="Zhao Ziyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189319" start="14823" end="14830" title="Hu Qili" label="Hu Qili"/>
<link wikidata="Q986606" start="14832" end="14842" title="Tian Jiyun" label="Tian Jiyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q553682" start="14844" end="14851" title="Bo Yibo" label="Bo Yibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q986124" start="14856" end="14866" title="Peng Chong" label="Peng Chong"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="15058" end="15069" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="15074" end="15083" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="15123" end="15139" title="One-party state" label="one-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194747" start="15188" end="15205" title="constitutionalism" label="constitutionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q14788573" start="15232" end="15265" title="13th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="13th National Congress of the CCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529263" start="15304" end="15312" title="Bao Tong" label="Bao Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301091" start="15392" end="15430" title="Socialism with Chinese characteristics" label="Socialism with Chinese characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15908597" start="15506" end="15519" title="Primary stage of socialism" label="primary stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="15668" end="15688" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q835349" start="16053" end="16125" title="Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements of China" label="Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q536955" start="16884" end="16920" title="Monument to the People&amp;#x27;s Heroes" label="Monument to the People&amp;#x27;s Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q164055" start="16924" end="16940" title="Tiananmen Square" label="Tiananmen Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952" start="16976" end="16993" title="Peking University" label="Peking University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955" start="17004" end="17023" title="Tsinghua University" label="Tsinghua University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5826" start="17164" end="17174" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q833961" start="17230" end="17275" title="China University of Political Science and Law" label="China University of Political Science and Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201922" start="17296" end="17302" title="wreath" label="wreath"/>
<link wikidata="Q72891" start="17477" end="17501" title="Great Hall of the People" label="Great Hall of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q855947" start="18322" end="18341" title="Anti-Spiritual Pollution Campaign" label="spiritual pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q197889" start="18996" end="19007" title="Xinhua Gate" label="Xinhua Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q197889" start="19025" end="19036" title="Zhongnanhai" label="Zhongnanhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147337" start="19205" end="19211" title="sit-in" label="sit-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881211" start="19786" end="19829" title="Beijing Workers&amp;#x27; Autonomous Federation" label="Beijing Workers&amp;#x27; Autonomous Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="19898" end="19911" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q99829" start="20258" end="20269" title="Zhao Ziyang" label="Zhao Ziyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071074" start="20562" end="20574" title="Zhou Yongjun" label="Zhou Yongjun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20576" end="20587" title="Guo Haifeng" label="Guo Haifeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q18301" start="20695" end="20702" title="Li Peng" label="Li Peng"/>
<link wikidata="Q610164" start="20744" end="20759" title="Wu&amp;#x27;erkaixi" label="Wu&amp;#x27;erkaixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10902479" start="21361" end="21405" title="Beijing Students&amp;#x27; Autonomous Federation" label="Beijing Students&amp;#x27; Autonomous Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071074" start="21468" end="21480" title="Zhou Yongjun" label="Zhou Yongjun"/>
<link wikidata="Q610054" start="21491" end="21499" title="Wang Dan (dissident)" label="Wang Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q610164" start="21504" end="21519" title="Wu&amp;#x27;erkaixi" label="Wu&amp;#x27;erkaixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q174091" start="21805" end="21813" title="Changsha" label="Changsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5826" start="21818" end="21828" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q197542" start="22238" end="22266" title="Politburo Standing Committee" label="Politburo Standing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="22724" end="22735" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q703434" start="22938" end="22947" title="Li Ximing" label="Li Ximing"/>
<link wikidata="Q707099" start="22958" end="22969" title="Chen Xitong" label="Chen Xitong"/>
<link wikidata="Q377935" start="23330" end="23343" title="Yang Shangkun" label="Yang Shangkun"/>
<link wikidata="Q18301" start="23356" end="23363" title="Li Peng" label="Li Peng"/>
<link wikidata="Q54340" start="23938" end="23957" title="People&amp;#x27;s Daily" label="People&amp;#x27;s Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q836295" start="24007" end="24069" title="April 26 Editorial" label="It is necessary to take a clear-cut stand against disturbances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191151" start="24305" end="24328" title="1976 Tiananmen Incident" label="1976 Tiananmen Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="25667" end="25680" title="State Council of China" label="State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q9082392" start="25691" end="25698" title="Yuan Mu" label="Yuan Mu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="26108" end="26117" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q279790" start="26704" end="26723" title="May Fourth Movement" label="May Fourth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q610332" start="28710" end="28719" title="Chai Ling" label="Chai Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324916" start="28911" end="28922" title="state visit" label="state visit"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="28940" end="28957" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q49617" start="29774" end="29792" title="The Internationale" label="The Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q8296591" start="30377" end="30387" title="Yan Mingfu" label="Yan Mingfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q835396" start="30424" end="30436" title="United Front (China)" label="United Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q41617" start="30532" end="30542" title="Liu Xiaobo" label="Liu Xiaobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q99146411" start="30544" end="30555" title="Chen Ziming" label="Chen Ziming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462045" start="30561" end="30572" title="Wang Juntao" label="Wang Juntao"/>
<link wikidata="Q445304" start="31169" end="31177" title="Dai Qing" label="Dai Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189319" start="31201" end="31208" title="Hu Qili" label="Hu Qili"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102631" start="31319" end="31334" title="Guangming Daily (China)" label="Guangming Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494132" start="31710" end="31719" title="Shen Tong" label="Shen Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="32695" end="32708" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="some 30 years"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503480" start="32976" end="32980" title="Face (sociological concept)" label="face"/>
<link wikidata="Q72891" start="33149" end="33173" title="Great Hall of the People" label="Great Hall of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="33727" end="33744" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071253" start="34193" end="34205" title="Communist Youth League" label="Youth League"/>
<link wikidata="Q908277" start="34425" end="34442" title="Red Cross Society of China" label="Chinese Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="34583" end="34600" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q197542" start="35917" end="35945" title="Politburo Standing Committee" label="Politburo Standing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q622826" start="36138" end="36147" title="Yao Yilin" label="Yao Yilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="36211" end="36233" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="36505" end="36516" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950159" start="36654" end="36674" title="bourgeois liberalism" label="bourgeois liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189319" start="36991" end="36998" title="Hu Qili" label="Hu Qili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326536" start="37085" end="37093" title="Qiao Shi" label="Qiao Shi"/>
<link wikidata="Q553682" start="37464" end="37471" title="Bo Yibo" label="Bo Yibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22098497" start="37671" end="37719" title="Vice Chairman of the Central Military Commission" label="Vice Chairman of the Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37779" end="37796" title="Student and Government Dialogue during the 1989 Student Movement#May 18: meeting with Li Peng" label="met with students"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509918" start="38516" end="38525" title="swan song" label="swan song"/>
<link wikidata="Q16628" start="38549" end="38559" title="Wen Jiabao" label="Wen Jiabao"/>
<link wikidata="Q10869134" start="39522" end="39543" title="World Economic Herald" label="World Economic Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q837334" start="39658" end="39667" title="Yan Jiaqi" label="Yan Jiaqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="39837" end="39848" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920475" start="39973" end="39982" title="Qin Benli" label="Qin Benli"/>
<link wikidata="Q837662" start="40143" end="40166" title="Happy Valley Racecourse" label="Happy Valley Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11128819" start="40194" end="40224" title="Concert for Democracy in China" label="Concert for Democracy in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q696659" start="40429" end="40439" title="Martin Lee" label="Martin Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19152" start="40441" end="40450" title="Szeto Wah" label="Szeto Wah"/>
<link wikidata="Q19483" start="40500" end="40516" title="Hong Kong Island" label="Hong Kong Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="40795" end="40806" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40821" end="40852" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army at Tiananmen Square protests of 1989#Mobilization" label="mobilised at least 30 divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663913" start="40885" end="40907" title="PLA Military Region" label="seven military regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141228" start="41615" end="41625" title="Hou Dejian" label="Hou Dejian"/>
<link wikidata="Q610054" start="41745" end="41753" title="Wang Dan (dissident)" label="Wang Dan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42871" end="42904" title="Chai Ling#The Gate of Heavenly Peace documentary" label="In an interview given in late May"/>
<link wikidata="Q707343" start="43092" end="43097" title="Li Lu" label="Li Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18301" start="43182" end="43189" title="Li Peng" label="Li Peng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068951" start="43834" end="43860" title="Ministry of State Security of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministry of State Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q716939" start="43867" end="43879" title="Jia Chunwang" label="Jia Chunwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466972" start="43993" end="44005" title="Eight Elders" label="Party elders"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="44017" end="44030" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q311413" start="44032" end="44043" title="Li Xiannian" label="Li Xiannian"/>
<link wikidata="Q557233" start="44048" end="44056" title="Chen Yun" label="Chen Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950159" start="44110" end="44130" title="bourgeois liberalism" label="bourgeois liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="44408" end="44411" title="Voice of America" label="VOA"/>
<link wikidata="Q163698" start="44446" end="44467" title="psychological warfare" label="psychological warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q41617" start="46021" end="46031" title="Liu Xiaobo" label="Liu Xiaobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141228" start="46076" end="46086" title="Hou Dejian" label="Hou Dejian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466972" start="46557" end="46569" title="Eight Elders" label="party elders"/>
<link wikidata="Q18301" start="46601" end="46608" title="Li Peng" label="Li Peng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326536" start="46610" end="46618" title="Qiao Shi" label="Qiao Shi"/>
<link wikidata="Q622826" start="46624" end="46633" title="Yao Yilin" label="Yao Yilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632585" start="47113" end="47117" title="27th Army (People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China)" label="27th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642121" start="47119" end="47123" title="65th Army (People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China)" label="65th"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47146" end="47160" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army at Tiananmen Square protests of 1989#Enforcement of martial law" label="secretly moved"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346285" start="47234" end="47261" title="Ministry of Public Security of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ministry of Public Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440398" start="47350" end="47353" title="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Police" label="PAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635999" start="49182" end="49191" title="38th Army (People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China)" label="38th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8293680" start="49218" end="49231" title="Zhang Meiyuan" label="Zhang Meiyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581818" start="49488" end="49498" title="Gongzhufen" label="Gongzhufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q393454" start="49502" end="49518" title="Haidian District" label="Haidian District"/>
<link wikidata="Q842107" start="50072" end="50078" title="Muxidi" label="Muxidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163838" start="50103" end="50120" title="expanding bullets" label="expanding bullets"/>
<link wikidata="Q842107" start="50279" end="50285" title="Muxidi" label="Muxidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q839262" start="50827" end="50832" title="Xidan" label="Xidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q167096" start="51006" end="51023" title="molotov cocktails" label="molotov cocktails"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122902" start="51025" end="51037" title="Jeff Widener" label="Jeff Widener"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="51546" end="51569" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18130712" start="52988" end="53001" title="Larry Wortzel" label="Larry Wortzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666655" start="57971" end="57983" title="Charlie Cole (photographer)" label="Charlie Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="58009" end="58017" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q10902223" start="58059" end="58076" title="Beijing Municipal Public Security Bureau" label="government agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q710973" start="58084" end="58092" title="Jan Wong" label="Jan Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="58118" end="58136" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="" start="58400" end="58447" title="Time 100: The Most Important People of the Century" label="100 most influential people of the 20th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270485" start="58914" end="58924" title="Jianguomen (Beijing)" label="Jianguomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567932" start="58929" end="58938" title="Fuxingmen" label="Fuxingmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q546377" start="60640" end="60644" title="bier" label="bier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039097" start="61131" end="61159" title="Wuhan Yangtze River Bridge" label="Yangtze River Railway bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q806663" start="61514" end="61522" title="bank run" label="bank run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036897" start="61539" end="61551" title="panic buying" label="panic buying"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="62264" end="62277" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q9082392" start="63657" end="63664" title="Yuan Mu" label="Yuan Mu"/>
<link wikidata="Q703434" start="64013" end="64022" title="Li Ximing" label="Li Ximing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64249" end="64254" title="Politics of Beijing#List of Mayors" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q707099" start="64255" end="64266" title="Chen Xitong" label="Chen Xitong"/>
<link wikidata="Q908277" start="64562" end="64579" title="Red Cross Society of China" label="Chinese Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q972107" start="64702" end="64721" title="Nicholas D. Kristof" label="Nicholas D. Kristof"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="64731" end="64749" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141673" start="64922" end="64934" title="James Lilley" label="James Lilley"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="65052" end="65076" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="65262" end="65283" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706593" start="65543" end="65554" title="Alan Donald" label="Alan Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="65633" end="65655" title="State Council of China" label="State Council of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q269372" start="65766" end="65775" title="Bob Hawke" label="Bob Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443367" start="65909" end="65920" title="Feng Congde" label="Feng Congde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273696" start="66092" end="66109" title="Tiananmen Mothers" label="Tiananmen Mothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279786" start="66156" end="66166" title="Ding Zilin" label="Ding Zilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273696" start="66171" end="66185" title="Zhang Xianling" label="Zhang Xianling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9120144" start="66648" end="66657" title="Wu Renhua" label="Wu Renhua"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66665" end="66695" title="Chinese Alliance for Democracy" label="Chinese Alliance for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210392" start="67001" end="67017" title="killed in action" label="killed in action"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166900" start="67642" end="67653" title="Jay Mathews" label="Jay Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q610332" start="67847" end="67856" title="Chai Ling" label="Chai Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q610164" start="68116" end="68132" title="Wu&amp;#x27;erkaixi" label="Wu&amp;#x27;er Kaixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141228" start="68359" end="68369" title="Hou Dejian" label="Hou Dejian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12057126" start="68879" end="68911" title="Embassy of the United States, Beijing" label="United States embassy in Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q10902223" start="69532" end="69562" title="Beijing Public Security Bureau" label="Beijing Public Security Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q10902479" start="69705" end="69743" title="Beijing Students&amp;#x27; Autonomous Federation" label="Beijing Students Autonomous Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q610054" start="70316" end="70324" title="Wang Dan (dissident)" label="Wang Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q610164" start="70326" end="70336" title="Wu&amp;#x27;erkaixi" label="Wuer Kaixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8460832" start="70338" end="70346" title="Liu Gang" label="Liu Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q610332" start="70348" end="70357" title="Chai Ling" label="Chai Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089930" start="70359" end="70371" title="Zhou Fengsuo" label="Zhou Fengsuo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70373" end="70384" title="Zhai Weimin" label="Zhai Weimin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70386" end="70399" title="Liang Qingdun" label="Liang Qingdun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70401" end="70414" title="Wang Zhengyun" label="Wang Zhengyun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70416" end="70429" title="Zheng Xuguang" label="Zheng Xuguang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70431" end="70442" title="Ma Shaofang" label="Ma Shaofang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70444" end="70452" title="Yang Tao (dissident)" label="Yang Tao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443367" start="70468" end="70479" title="Feng Congde" label="Feng Congde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072767" start="70481" end="70493" title="Wang Chaohua" label="Wang Chaohua"/>
<link wikidata="Q712070" start="70495" end="70506" title="Wang Youcai" label="Wang Youcai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070143" start="70523" end="70533" title="Zhang Boli" label="Zhang Boli"/>
<link wikidata="Q707343" start="70535" end="70540" title="Li Lu" label="Li Lu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70542" end="70552" title="Zhang Ming (activist)" label="Zhang Ming"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70554" end="70563" title="Xiong Wei (dissident)" label="Xiong Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044721" start="70569" end="70578" title="Xiong Yan (dissident)" label="Xiong Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q610332" start="70843" end="70852" title="Chai Ling" label="Chai Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q610164" start="70857" end="70867" title="Wuer Kaixi" label="Wuer Kaixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097727" start="70971" end="70991" title="Operation Yellowbird" label="Operation Yellowbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="71054" end="71057" title="MI6" label="MI6"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="71062" end="71065" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054923" start="71071" end="71080" title="British Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="71134" end="71153" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q835349" start="71229" end="71281" title="Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements of China" label="Alliance in Support of Democratic Movements in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795912" start="71831" end="71872" title="Arrest and Trial of Chen Ziming and Wang Juntao" label="Chen Ziming and Wang Juntao were arrested"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72522" end="72540" title="Dui Hua Foundation" label="Dui Hua Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q197542" start="73043" end="73071" title="Politburo Standing Committee" label="Politburo Standing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189319" start="73079" end="73086" title="Hu Qili" label="Hu Qili"/>
<link wikidata="Q983676" start="73423" end="73429" title="Wan Li" label="Wan Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q32190" start="73512" end="73535" title="Beijing Capital International Airport" label="Beijing Capital Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326536" start="73751" end="73759" title="Qiao Shi" label="Qiao Shi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="73909" end="73920" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="73971" end="74011" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="General Secretary of the Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q190338" start="74427" end="74454" title="Central Military Commission (China)" label="Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529263" start="74832" end="74840" title="Bao Tong" label="Bao Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="76155" end="76178" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="76405" end="76416" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="76421" end="76430" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q223729" start="76800" end="76811" title="white paper" label="white paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q835967" start="76973" end="76989" title="The Tiananmen Papers" label="Tiananmen Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929529" start="77053" end="77063" title="Wei Fenghe" label="Wei Fenghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488585" start="77133" end="77152" title="Shangri-La Dialogue" label="Shangri-La Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q8950368" start="77911" end="77918" title="Du Xian (news anchor)" label="Du Xian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710447" start="77923" end="77930" title="Xue Fei (host)" label="Xue Fei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196286" start="78005" end="78018" title="Xinwen Lianbo" label="Xinwen Lianbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207936" start="78038" end="78062" title="China Central Television" label="China Central Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q463688" start="78187" end="78197" title="Wu Xueqian" label="Wu Xueqian"/>
<link wikidata="Q375117" start="78252" end="78279" title="Chinese Radio International" label="Chinese Radio International"/>
<link wikidata="Q54340" start="78368" end="78387" title="People&amp;#x27;s Daily" label="People&amp;#x27;s Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267613" start="78414" end="78424" title="Qian Liren" label="Qian Liren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799880" start="78631" end="78665" title="Deng Xiaoping&amp;#x27;s southern tour" label="Deng Xiaoping&amp;#x27;s southern tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q185802" start="79485" end="79495" title="Falun Gong" label="Falun Gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="80003" end="80006" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150475" start="80021" end="80033" title="Richard Roth (journalist)" label="Richard Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="80427" end="80434" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022399" start="80686" end="80699" title="Suisheng Zhao" label="Suisheng Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593" start="80813" end="80825" title="Rajiv Gandhi" label="Rajiv Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q234277" start="81053" end="81087" title="Communist Party of India (Marxist)" label="Communist Party of India (Marxist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q242651" start="81465" end="81476" title="Roh Tae-woo" label="Roh Tae-woo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259" start="81568" end="81591" title="Javier Pérez de Cuéllar" label="Javier Pérez de Cuéllar"/>
<link wikidata="Q160146" start="82337" end="82349" title="riot control" label="riot control"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="83023" end="83047" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="83242" end="83252" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="83254" end="83276" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q723713" start="84804" end="84828" title="one country, two systems" label="one country, two systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q23368" start="84931" end="84943" title="Chris Patten" label="Chris Patten"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081023" start="84964" end="85014" title="1994 Hong Kong electoral reform" label="franchise for the Legislative Council of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142927" start="85061" end="85072" title="Hongkongers" label="Hongkongers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975544" start="85276" end="85308" title="Waves of mass migrations from Hong Kong" label="a sizable exodus of Hong Kongers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10893159" start="85389" end="85478" title="Memorials for the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989" label="large candlelight vigils attended by tens of thousands in Hong Kong every year since 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q10893166" start="85549" end="85564" title="June 4th Museum" label="June 4th Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q835349" start="85660" end="85678" title="Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements in China" label="Hong Kong Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307544" start="86583" end="86598" title="Pillar of Shame" label="Pillar of Shame"/>
<link wikidata="Q469665" start="86651" end="86665" title="Jens Galschiøt" label="Jens Galschiøt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15568" start="86680" end="86707" title="the University of Hong Kong" label="the University of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303230" start="87021" end="87033" title="pariah state" label="pariah state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022399" start="87708" end="87721" title="Suisheng Zhao" label="Suisheng Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q519427" start="87778" end="87798" title="University of Denver" label="University of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q186444" start="88187" end="88211" title="Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons" label="Non-Proliferation Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q547896" start="88225" end="88255" title="Chemical Weapons Convention" label="Convention on Chemical Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q521306" start="88273" end="88302" title="Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty" label="Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="88652" end="88676" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="89917" end="89931" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530" start="90047" end="90063" title="Gerhard Schröder" label="Gerhard Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q574556" start="90093" end="90150" title="Anti-Secession Law of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Anti-Secession Law of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q567" start="90382" end="90395" title="Angela Merkel" label="Angela Merkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="90705" end="90724" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="91098" end="91109" title="Soviet bloc" label="Soviet bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="91170" end="91187" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="Sino-Soviet split"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757025" start="92205" end="92218" title="Summer Palace (2006 film)" label="Summer Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467322" start="92232" end="92246" title="Forbidden City (novel)" label="Forbidden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q10893170" start="92260" end="92291" title="Collection of June Fourth Poems" label="Collection of June Fourth Poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q11098383" start="92305" end="92324" title="The Critical Moment" label="The Critical Moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529263" start="92392" end="92400" title="Bao Tong" label="Bao Tong"/>
<link wikidata="" start="92412" end="92431" title="Prisoner of the State: The Secret Journal of Premier Zhao Ziyang" label="Zhao&amp;#x27;s memoirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q58682" start="93047" end="93055" title="Tank Man" label="Tank Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q41617" start="93586" end="93596" title="Liu Xiaobo" label="Liu Xiaobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273696" start="93750" end="93764" title="Zhang Xianling" label="Zhang Xianling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279786" start="93769" end="93779" title="Ding Zilin" label="Ding Zilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273696" start="93834" end="93851" title="Tiananmen Mothers" label="Tiananmen Mothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440398" start="94012" end="94038" title="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Police" label="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630834" start="94205" end="94245" title="20th anniversary of the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="20th anniversary of the protests in 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q160115" start="94373" end="94382" title="Ai Weiwei" label="Ai Weiwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="94400" end="94410" title="Autocracy" label="autocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="94415" end="94427" title="Totalitarianism" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246994" start="95620" end="95643" title="Censorship by Google" label="Google agreed to censor"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="96580" end="96587" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q472942" start="96881" end="96894" title="Jiang Yanyong" label="Jiang Yanyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529263" start="97167" end="97175" title="Bao Tong" label="Bao Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16628" start="97472" end="97482" title="Wen Jiabao" label="Wen Jiabao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709362" start="97740" end="97768" title="UN Committee Against Torture" label="UN Committee Against Torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q98971180" start="99181" end="99216" title="1981 Inner Mongolia student protest" label="1981 Inner Mongolia student protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q843513" start="99219" end="99243" title="1987–1989 Tibetan unrest" label="1987–1989 Tibetan unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q697547" start="99246" end="99267" title="December 9th Movement" label="December 9th Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100624" start="99270" end="99308" title="Chinese Student Protection Act of 1992" label="Chinese Student Protection Act of 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419868" start="99311" end="99332" title="Executive Order 12711" label="Executive Order 12711"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072770" start="99335" end="99356" title="Human rights in China" label="Human rights in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627237" start="99359" end="99385" title="List of massacres in China" label="List of massacres in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646269" start="99388" end="99411" title="Mass incidents in China" label="Mass incidents in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235125" start="99414" end="99451" title="Mass killings under communist regimes" label="Mass killings under communist regimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113427" start="99454" end="99480" title="Mass surveillance in China" label="Mass surveillance in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927162" start="99489" end="99520" title="Moving the Mountain (1994 film)" label="Moving the Mountain (1994 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251588" start="99529" end="99557" title="Protest and dissent in China" label="Protest and dissent in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q274365" start="99591" end="99604" title="8888 Uprising" label="8888 Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="99606" end="99611" title="Myanmar" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q174990" start="99620" end="99636" title="Gwangju uprising" label="Gwangju uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="99638" end="99649" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q497194" start="99658" end="99671" title="June Struggle" label="June Struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274389" start="99693" end="99716" title="People Power Revolution" label="People Power Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="99718" end="99724" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q127378229" start="99760" end="99797" title="2024 Bangladesh quota reform movement" label="2024 Bangladesh quota reform movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q123207578" start="100261" end="100292" title="Indiana University Indianapolis" label="Indiana University Indianapolis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44538" wikidata="Q64995229" url="?curid=44538" title="The Kids in the Hall">
<text>The Kids in the Hall is a Canadian sketch comedy troupe formed in 1984 in Calgary and Toronto, consisting of comedians Dave Foley, Bruce McCulloch, Kevin McDonald, Mark McKinney, and Scott Thompson. Their eponymous television show ran from 1989 to 1995, on CBC, in Canada. It also appeared on CBS, HBO, and Comedy Central in the United States.

The Kids made one film, &quot;Brain Candy&quot;, which was released in 1996. They reformed for various tours and comedy festivals in 2000. They later reunited for an eight-part miniseries, &quot;Death Comes to Town&quot;, in January 2010. An eight-episode revival season was released on May 13, 2022, on Amazon Prime Video. Their name came from 1950s TV comedian Sid Caesar, who would attribute a joke that did not go over well (or played worse than expected) to &quot;the kids in the hall&quot;, referring to a group of young writers hanging around the studio.

== Early history ==
Bruce McCulloch and Mark McKinney were working together doing Theatresports in Calgary, performing in a group named &quot;The Audience&quot;. Norm Hiscock, Garry Campbell and Frank Van Keeken were co-members, and they later became writers on the show. At the same time, Dave Foley and Kevin McDonald were performing around Toronto (along with Luciano Casimiri) as The Kids in the Hall (KitH). In 1984, the two pairs met in Toronto and began performing regularly as KitH, with a rotating band of members, including Paul Bellini for a short time. When McKinney met Scott Thompson, he invited him to join in January 1985 and the group had found its final form. The same year, McCulloch and Foley appeared in &quot;Anne of Green Gables: The Sequel&quot;, as Diana Barry&#x27;s husband (McCulloch) and a former classmate of Anne&#x27;s from the fictional Queen&#x27;s College (Foley).

Not long afterwards, the Kids broke up for a short time when scouts for &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; invited McKinney and McCulloch to New York to become writers for that show, and Foley made a poorly received film debut with &quot;High Stakes&quot;, while Thompson and McDonald worked with the Second City touring group. They were reunited in 1986. After &quot;SNL&quot;&#x27;s Lorne Michaels saw them perform as a troupe, plans began for a TV show. In 1987, Michaels sent them to New York to what was essentially a &quot;Comedy Boot Camp&quot;. In 1988, their pilot special aired on CBC Television, and in the United States on HBO, before debuting as a series in 1989.

== Television show ==

The series &quot;The Kids in the Hall&quot; debuted as a one-hour pilot special which aired on HBO and CBC Television in 1988 and began airing as a regular weekly series on both services in 1989. The regular series premiered July 21, 1989, on HBO, and September 14 on CBC. In the United States, the first three seasons were on HBO before it moved to CBS in 1993, where it stayed for two more seasons airing late Friday nights. CBC aired the show for the whole duration of its run.

In March 2020, it was announced that the series would return with an eight-episode season, on Amazon Prime Video. The series features all five members, bringing back some of the show&#x27;s classic characters and skits, and is executive-produced by Lorne Michaels. The revived series is billed as &quot;the first Canadian Amazon Original series&quot;. The revival was released on May 13, 2022.

== &quot;Brain Candy&quot; ==
After the show ended its run, the troupe came together to produce a film, &quot;Brain Candy&quot;, featuring a few characters from the show and many new ones. Although not a commercial success, the film developed a cult following with their devoted fans.

== Tours ==
=== 2000 North American Tour ===
In 2000, the troupe reformed for a successful North American tour, reprising many sketches from the show. The sketch line-up for the 2000 show was:

# AT &amp; Love Reunion
# Mr. Heavyfoot Finds His Seat
# Buddy Cole – The Year 2000
# Cops!
# Daddy&#x27;s Dyin&#x27;
# Head Crusher / Face Pincher
# Jesus 2000!
# Sir Simon Milligan &amp; Hecubus in: The Pit of Ultimate Darkness
# Gavin: Painting a chair
# Comfortable
# Sandwich People
# Chicken Lady&#x27;s Date
# Power of the Suburbs
# Bloody Salty Ham
# Monologue by Brian on having a party when Fran and Gordon go on Vacation
# Love Me
# Fran: Brian&#x27;s Bombshell
# Jesus Christ Superstar
# Encore: To Reg

At some shows:

# Running Faggot
# The Poker Game

The tour was chronicled in a documentary, &quot;Kids in the Hall: Same Guys, New Dresses&quot;, which followed the next year. This was then followed by the &quot;Tour of Duty&quot;, and a DVD based on those performances, released in 2002.

=== &quot;Just for Laughs&quot; (&quot;Juste Pour Rire&quot;) Comedy Festival ===
In July 2007, the Kids reunited to perform at the 25th Annual &quot;Just for Laughs&quot; (&quot;Juste Pour Rire&quot;) Comedy Festival in Montreal.

The Just For Laughs show premiered about 90 minutes of new material. While certain characters made reappearances (Buddy Cole, Mr. Tyzik and McKinney and McCulloch&#x27;s &quot;smooth-talking&quot; salesmen), the rest of the show revolved around entirely new material. Typically good-humored, the group poked numerous jokes at their own recent weight gain, and the state of their post-Kids acting careers.

Among the sketches:
* The Kids plan a new show. For the opening, they rape McDonald to the theme from &quot;Footloose&quot;.
* Salesmen (McCulloch and McKinney) promote a device which can siphon fat from the American gut and use it to power SUVs.
* &quot;Carfuckers&quot;: a group of mechanics who share a &quot;love for which there is no name&quot;. The sketch was produced by an internet studio called &quot;60Frames Entertainment&quot;.
* Gavin encounters Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses (one of two sketches recreated from the television show).
* Foley and McDonald get drunk; Foley tells McDonald he has created a time machine with which he can &quot;defeat last call&quot;.
* Foley travels back in time to receive oral sex from his wife (McCulloch), who would only perform the act on his birthday.
* Foley travels back in time to kill Adolf Hitler (Thompson) but instead accidentally inspires his antisemitism.
* Two exceptionally literate rat-catchers (McCulloch and McKinney) look for a used futon.
* Buddy Cole speculates that Jesus was homosexual.
* Kathy (McCulloch) and Cathy (Thompson) reunite for lunch in a restaurant, where Kathy extols the virtues of &quot;tweeking&quot; with methamphetamine.
* Foley is approached by a &quot;fan&quot; (Thompson) while waiting for the subway.
* A McCulloch monologue about how skinny Nicole Richie is.
* Foley and McCulloch fight over an imaginary girlfriend.
* The Chicken Lady has phone sex (one of two sketches recreated from the television show).
* The relationship woes of a gay couple (Foley and Thompson) are placated with the help of another married gay couple known as Peter and the Professor (McDonald and McKinney).
* Superdrunk: a superhero who stops crimes by drinking (McCulloch), assisted by his trusty sidekick, the bartender (Foley).
* The show finished with Mr. Tyzik (McKinney) mocking the mannerisms and careers of each member of the troupe, after which he promptly crushed their heads.

The group also performed on January 26–27, 2008, at the SF Sketchfest. On January 26, there was a retrospective and Q&amp;A with the group.

=== 2008 North American Tour ===
On April 4, 2008, The Kids in the Hall embarked on their first major national tour in six years. The tour ran through early June 2008, and included more than 30 cities in the US and Canada. The tour featured some material from the 2007 &quot;Just for Laughs&quot; performance, along with new material.

The 2008 tour closely mirrored the &quot;Just for Laughs&quot; performance, excluding the rat catchers, subway fan and Nicole Ritchie sketches. In their stead, Mark McKinney performed the monologue titled &quot;The Modern Hero&quot; from Season 1 of the show, and the entire cast performed the sketch &quot;This Is How I Danced in Tenth Grade.&quot;

== Other appearances ==
The cast members have reunited, in whole or in part, in numerous film and television works.

Kevin McDonald guest starred alongside Dave Foley, in a 1997 episode of Foley&#x27;s sitcom, &quot;NewsRadio.&quot;

Dave Foley and Kevin McDonald performed with the Barenaked Ladies on their &quot;Ships and Dip V&quot; cruise, along with other bands and comics, on February 1–6, 2009.

All members of the Kids in the Hall voiced characters in the &quot;Lilo &amp; Stitch: The Series&quot; episode &quot;Fibber&quot;, with Kevin McDonald voicing Pleakley and the other members voicing his family.

Dave Foley and Kevin McDonald later appeared as Jonathan Boy / All-American Boy and Professor Medula in the superhero film &quot;Sky High&quot;.

In 2006, three of the members (McDonald, McCulloch and McKinney) appeared in the Christmas comedy &quot;Unaccompanied Minors&quot;, as The Guards in the Hall.

The group appeared on the front cover of &quot;Naked Eye&quot;″s summer 2008 edition.

The Kids performed at the 2008 Comedy Festival in Las Vegas on November 22.

On August 6, 2010, all five Kids made an appearance on &quot;The Soup&quot; on E!, to promote their miniseries &quot;Death Comes to Town&quot;. Four of the members appeared on-screen in drag (as girls), who had grown up as beauty pageant contestants (parodying &quot;Toddlers &amp; Tiaras&quot;). McKinney&#x27;s voice was heard off-screen as their mother.

Foley was a voice actor on the 2011–2013 animated series &quot;Dan Vs.&quot;, which aired on The Hub. McDonald was a guest voice actor in one episode, &quot;Dan Vs. Technology&quot;, in which he played technology guru Barry Ditmer (a parody of Steve Jobs).

In 2014, the cast reunited on Foley&#x27;s sitcom &quot;Spun Out&quot;, appearing as Dave&#x27;s high school goth friends who had made a suicide pact. That year, Thompson also did a week-long stint as Buddy Cole (a producer Colbert doesn&#x27;t know is gay) on &quot;The Colbert Report&quot;, acting as the program&#x27;s correspondent to the 2014 Winter Olympics who covered LGBT rights protests surrounding the 2014 Winter Olympics. In the same year, the troupe performed a live reading of the screenplay for &quot;Brain Candy&quot; at the Toronto Sketch Comedy Festival.

In December 2014, McDonald, McKinney and Thompson appeared in an episode of the TVO&#x27;s children&#x27;s television series &quot;Odd Squad&quot;. The episode was entitled &quot;Crime at Shapely Manor&quot;. McDonald appeared as Lord Rectangle, McKinney as General Pentagon, and Thompson as Professor Square.

McDonald, Foley and Thompson appeared on Chris Hardwick&#x27;s game show &quot;@midnight&quot;, which aired August 2, 2017 (season 4: episode 139).

&quot;The Kids in the Hall: Comedy Punks&quot;, a documentary film by Reginald Harkema, premiered at the 2022 Hot Docs Canadian International Documentary Festival.

The group appeared on &quot;The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon&quot; on May 10, 2022. They discussed the revival of their show on Amazon Prime Video.

== &quot;Death Comes to Town&quot; ==
In July 2008, Telefilm Canada announced that there would be a new The Kids in the Hall television series, titled &quot;Death Comes to Town&quot;. Kevin McDonald stated that it would be an eight-part miniseries, airing first on CBC in Canada, and then on US television. Principal photography took place from August 2009, in Ontario. Several characters from the original &quot;The Kids in the Hall&quot; series made an appearance, including the OPP Officers and Chicken Lady. The first episode of the new series aired in Canada, on CBC Television on January 13, 2010. In the United States, the first episode aired on IFC on August 20, 2010.

== Awards and honors ==
The group&#x27;s 1988–1995 TV series won a number of awards, including the 1993 Rose d&#x27;Or and the Gemini Award for Best Comedy Series in 1992 and 1993. It was nominated for various other awards, including the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Variety Series in 1993, 1994 and 1995.

In 2008, the group received a star on Canada&#x27;s Walk of Fame.

The group won the Canadian Screen Awards Icon Award in 2019.

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* Interview with Foley on the history of the group, on public radio show / podcast The Sound of Young America</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q64995229" start="0" end="20" title="The Kids in the Hall" label="The Kids in the Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="35" end="48" title="sketch comedy" label="sketch comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18510489" start="49" end="55" title="comedy troupe" label="troupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="74" end="81" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="86" end="93" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q245068" start="109" end="117" title="comedian" label="comedian"/>
<link wikidata="Q607793" start="119" end="129" title="Dave Foley" label="Dave Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926445" start="131" end="146" title="Bruce McCulloch" label="Bruce McCulloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q853018" start="148" end="162" title="Kevin McDonald" label="Kevin McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294171" start="164" end="177" title="Mark McKinney" label="Mark McKinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q324114" start="183" end="197" title="Scott Thompson (actor)" label="Scott Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560903" start="205" end="230" title="The Kids in the Hall (TV series)" label="eponymous television show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="257" end="260" title="CBC Television" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="293" end="296" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="298" end="301" title="Home Box Office" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="307" end="321" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="" start="375" end="386" title="Kids in the Hall: Brain Candy" label="Brain Candy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="540" end="559" title="The Kids in the Hall: Death Comes to Town" label="Death Comes to Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q112206009" start="601" end="615" title="The Kids in the Hall (season 6)" label="revival season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="649" end="667" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q555226" start="708" end="718" title="Sid Caesar" label="Sid Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926445" start="928" end="943" title="Bruce McCulloch" label="Bruce McCulloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294171" start="948" end="961" title="Mark McKinney" label="Mark McKinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568285" start="990" end="1003" title="Theatresports" label="Theatresports"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="1007" end="1014" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051496" start="1070" end="1082" title="Norm Hiscock" label="Norm Hiscock"/>
<link wikidata="Q607793" start="1198" end="1208" title="Dave Foley" label="Dave Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q853018" start="1213" end="1227" title="Kevin McDonald" label="Kevin McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="1251" end="1258" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370608" start="1442" end="1454" title="Paul Bellini" label="Paul Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q324114" start="1491" end="1505" title="Scott Thompson (actor)" label="Scott Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1639" end="1671" title="Anne of Green Gables: The Sequel" label="Anne of Green Gables: The Sequel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1682" end="1693" title="Anne of Green Gables#Characters" label="Diana Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="1887" end="1906" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777200" start="2107" end="2118" title="The Second City" label="Second City"/>
<link wikidata="Q521221" start="2191" end="2205" title="Lorne Michaels" label="Lorne Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="2397" end="2411" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="2441" end="2444" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560903" start="2524" end="2544" title="The Kids in the Hall (TV series)" label="The Kids in the Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="2573" end="2578" title="pilot episode" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="2602" end="2605" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="2857" end="2860" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="3083" end="3101" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3494" end="3505" title="Kids in the Hall: Brain Candy" label="Brain Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362509" start="4821" end="4836" title="Just for Laughs" label="Just for Laughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="4892" end="4900" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q627533" start="5417" end="5426" title="Footloose" label="Footloose"/>
<link wikidata="Q192152" start="5550" end="5553" title="SUV" label="SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="5768" end="5792" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122" start="6022" end="6030" title="oral sex" label="oral sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="6143" end="6155" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="6205" end="6217" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295373" start="6248" end="6259" title="rat-catcher" label="rat-catcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="6338" end="6343" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="6496" end="6511" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q232495" start="6638" end="6651" title="Nicole Richie" label="Nicole Richie"/>
<link wikidata="Q640990" start="6737" end="6746" title="phone sex" label="phone sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="6997" end="7006" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8261" end="8275" title="NewsRadio season 4#Stupid Holiday Charity Talent Show" label="a 1997 episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q427583" start="8306" end="8315" title="NewsRadio" label="NewsRadio"/>
<link wikidata="Q371997" start="8373" end="8389" title="Barenaked Ladies" label="Barenaked Ladies"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8561" end="8590" title="Lilo &amp;amp; Stitch: The Series" label="Lilo &amp;amp; Stitch: The Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q13586554" start="8653" end="8661" title="Pleakley" label="Pleakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q858508" start="8834" end="8842" title="Sky High (2005 film)" label="Sky High"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003337" start="8955" end="8975" title="Unaccompanied Minors" label="Unaccompanied Minors"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109690" start="9058" end="9067" title="Naked Eye (magazine)" label="Naked Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="9148" end="9157" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894963" start="9236" end="9244" title="The Soup" label="The Soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q830215" start="9254" end="9256" title="E!" label="E!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530299" start="9442" end="9463" title="Toddlers &amp;amp; Tiaras" label="Toddlers &amp;amp; Tiaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338473" start="9596" end="9603" title="Dan Vs." label="Dan Vs."/>
<link wikidata="Q565847" start="9626" end="9633" title="Discovery Family" label="The Hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="9777" end="9787" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15714104" start="9847" end="9855" title="Spun Out" label="Spun Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130799" start="10058" end="10076" title="The Colbert Report" label="The Colbert Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q9678" start="10134" end="10154" title="2014 Winter Olympics" label="2014 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15727453" start="10167" end="10224" title="LGBT rights protests surrounding the 2014 Winter Olympics" label="LGBT rights protests surrounding the 2014 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q112030074" start="10333" end="10363" title="Toronto Sketch Comedy Festival" label="Toronto Sketch Comedy Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q18152960" start="10497" end="10506" title="Odd Squad (TV series)" label="Odd Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q313049" start="10718" end="10732" title="Chris Hardwick" label="Chris Hardwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863715" start="10756" end="10765" title="@midnight" label="@midnight"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10832" end="10866" title="The Kids in the Hall: Comedy Punks" label="The Kids in the Hall: Comedy Punks"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665442" start="10896" end="10912" title="Reginald Harkema" label="Reginald Harkema"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909927" start="10936" end="10988" title="Hot Docs Canadian International Documentary Festival" label="Hot Docs Canadian International Documentary Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303732" start="11019" end="11057" title="The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon" label="The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q112206009" start="11100" end="11121" title="The Kids in the Hall season 6" label="revival of their show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546604" start="11198" end="11213" title="Telefilm Canada" label="Telefilm Canada"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11303" end="11322" title="The Kids in the Hall: Death Comes to Town" label="Death Comes to Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="11453" end="11474" title="Principal photography" label="Principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="11507" end="11514" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="11714" end="11728" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150514" start="11799" end="11802" title="Independent Film Channel" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q684965" start="11928" end="11942" title="Rose d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Rose d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q923408" start="11951" end="11963" title="Gemini Award" label="Gemini Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265782" start="12062" end="12127" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Variety Series" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Variety Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q857933" start="12191" end="12217" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s Walk of Fame" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459735" start="12238" end="12260" title="Canadian Screen Awards" label="Canadian Screen Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788233" start="12275" end="12279" title="7th Canadian Screen Awards" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997054" start="12406" end="12432" title="The Sound of Young America" label="The Sound of Young America"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44541" wikidata="Q465026" url="?curid=44541" title="Phoolan Devi">
<text>Phoolan Devi (, 10 August 1963 25 July 2001), popularly known as the Bandit Queen, was an Indian dacoit (bandit) who became a politician, serving as a member of parliament until her assassination. She was a woman of the Mallah subcaste who grew up in poverty in a village in the state of Uttar Pradesh, where her family was on the losing side of a land dispute which caused them many problems. After being married off at the age of eleven and being sexually abused by various people, she joined a gang of dacoits. Her gang robbed higher-caste villages and held up trains and vehicles. When she punished her rapists and evaded capture by the authorities, she became a heroine to the Other Backward Classes who saw her as a Robin Hood figure. Phoolan Devi was charged &quot;in absentia&quot; for the 1981 Behmai massacre, in which twenty Thakur men were killed, allegedly on her command. After this event, the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh resigned, and calls to apprehend her were amplified. She surrendered two years later in a carefully negotiated settlement and spent eleven years in Gwalior prison, awaiting trial.

Phoolan Devi was released in 1994 after her charges were set aside. She subsequently became a politician and was elected as a member of parliament for the Samajwadi Party in 1996. She lost her seat in 1998, but regained it the following year. She was the incumbent at the time of her death in 2001. She was assassinated outside her house by Sher Singh Rana, who was convicted for the murder in 2014. At the time of her death, she was still fighting against the reinstituted criminal charges, having lost a 1996 appeal to the Supreme Court to have the charges dropped. Phoolan Devi&#x27;s worldwide fame grew after the release of the controversial 1994 film &quot;Bandit Queen&quot;, which told her life story in a way she did not approve of. Her life has also inspired several biographies and her dictated autobiography was entitled &quot;I, Phoolan Devi&quot;. There are varying accounts of her life because she told differing versions to suit her changing circumstances.

==Early life==

Phoolan Devi was born on 10 August 1963, in the village of Gorha Ka Purwa in Jalaun district, Uttar Pradesh, India. The land is crossed by the Yamuna and Chambal rivers and is filled with gorges and ravines, making it suitable terrain for dacoits (bandits). Her family was poor and from the Mallah subcaste, which lies towards the bottom of the Hindu caste system in India, with Mallahs being Shudras who traditionally work as fishermen. Phoolan Devi and her sisters made dung cakes to burn as fuel, as is common practice in the region; her family grew chickpeas, sunflowers and pearl millet.
Phoolan Devi&#x27;s mother was called Moola and her father Devidin; she had four sisters and one brother. Devidin had one brother, Biharilal, who had a son called Maiyadin. Biharilal and Maiyadin stole land from Phoolan Devi&#x27;s father by bribing the village leader to change the land records. Her family was compelled to live in a small house on the edge of the village; the uncle and his son continued to harass the family and steal their crops, aiming to drive them away from the village. At the age of 10, Phoolan Devi decided to protest against the injustice. With her older sister Rukhmini, she sat in the disputed land and ate the chickpeas growing there, saying the crop belonged to her family. Maiyadin ordered her to leave and when she did not, he beat her into unconsciousness; the village leader then decreed that her parents should also be beaten. In 2018, Phoolan Devi&#x27;s mother told &quot;The Asian Age&quot; that she was still fighting to regain the land which Maiyadin had stolen from the family.

Following these events, Phoolan Devi&#x27;s parents decided to arrange a marriage for her. She was married to a man called Puttilal, who offered 100 Indian rupees (equivalent to ₹400 or £4.20 in 2023), a cow and a bicycle to her parents. According to the version related by her to her biographer Mala Sen, it was agreed that Phoolan Devi would start living with him after three years, but Puttilal came back within three months and took her away. He was three times her age; she refused his sexual advances and fell sick. When her parents came and collected her, they took her to a doctor who diagnosed measles. For a wife to leave her husband was scandalous; preying on Phoolan Devi&#x27;s parents&#x27; fears of disgrace, Maiyadin offered to ensure that Puttilal took her back if they signed a document. The family was illiterate and the parents were warned that it contained a clause giving Maiyadin legal rights to their land, so they refused to sign. Phoolan Devi was sent to stay with a distant relative in the village of Teoga, where she met her recently married cousin Kailash, who ran errands for dacoits (also known locally as bahghis). They became close and had an affair, which resulted in Phoolan Devi being ordered by Kailash&#x27;s wife to go back to her own village.

Once Phoolan Devi was back in Gorha Ka Purwa, the second son of the village leader became infatuated with her and when she did not reciprocate his affections, he attacked her. Again, Phoolan Devi needed to leave the village and Maiyadin pressured the family to ask Puttilal to take her back, which he did. In the meantime, Puttilal had taken another wife who often mistreated Phoolan Devi. After several years, Puttilal abandoned Phoolan Devi beside the Yamuna River and she again returned to the parental home. In January 1979, Maiyadin destroyed the family&#x27;s crops and began to chop down a neem tree on their land. When Phoolan Devi threw stones at him and wounded his face, she was arrested by the local police and detained for one month. She later told &quot;The Atlantic&quot; that she was arrested because Maiyadin accused her of robbing him. Mala Sen asked her if she had been raped at the police station and Phoolan Devi replied: &quot;They had plenty of fun at my expense and beat the hell out of me too.&quot; Sen notes that it is common for victims of sexual assault to avoid or repress talking about what happened to them. Sen also observes that from the mid-1970s onwards, Indian feminist groups recorded many instances of women being attacked and murdered by men. The director of the &quot;Women&#x27;s Feature Service&quot; commented regarding the case of Phoolan Devi that &quot;quite often rape is used as a method of control and punishment to keep women in their place&quot;.

==Banditry==
===Bandit Queen===
In July 1979, a gang of bandits led by Babu Gujjar kidnapped Phoolan Devi from her family&#x27;s home, for reasons she explained in multiple ways. Gujjar took her as his property and raped her repeatedly. Vikram Mallah, the second in command, became fond of Phoolan Devi and objected to her mistreatment, so he killed Gujjar and became leader of the gang. He trained Phoolan Devi to use a rifle and the two fell in love. Over the following year, the group robbed vehicles and looted higher caste villages, sometimes disguising themselves using stolen police uniforms. The gang lived in the ravines, constantly moving between places such as Devariya, Kanpur and Orai. They located Puttilal and punished him violently. As news of Phoolan Devi&#x27;s exploits spread, she became popular with the lower castes, who called her Dasyu Sundari (Beautiful Bandit) and celebrated her as a Robin Hood figure, who robbed from the rich to give to the poor. She was seen as an incarnation of the Hindu goddess Durga and a doll was produced of her in police uniform wearing a bandoleer.

A former leader of the gang, Sri Ram Singh, was released from prison together with his brother Lalla Ram Singh in 1980; they were Thakur men (Thakurs being a subcaste of the Kshatriya caste) and thus a higher caste than the other members. After they rejoined the bandits, a power struggle ensued and Sri Ram murdered Vikram Mallah. Without the latter&#x27;s protection, Phoolan Devi was a prisoner of Sri Ram; he took her to the remote village of Behmai where she was repeatedly raped by other Thakurs. In a final indignity, she was forced to collect water for him from the well whilst naked, in front of the villagers.

===Behmai massacre===
Phoolan Devi managed to escape and met Man Singh, a bandit with whom she formed a new gang. They became lovers, living on wild berries and produce stolen from cultivated fields. She returned to Behmai with her gang on 14 February 1981; speaking through a loudhailer, she demanded that the villagers hand over Sri Ram Singh and his brother, then the bandits went from house to house looting valuables. When the two men could not be found, twenty-two men were lined up at the Yamuna River and shot from behind; twenty died and two survived. Since all the dead were at the time thought to be Thakur, Thakur farmers pressured Prime Minister Indira Gandhi to impose the rule of law. When Phoolan Devi was arrested in 1983, she claimed that she had not been present at the time of the shooting. This was corroborated by the evidence of the two men who survived, who stated that they had not seen her and that a man called Ram Avtar was giving orders. By other accounts, such as that of journalist Khushwant Singh, it was Phoolan Devi who put the men to death. She was celebrated among Dalits (people at the bottom of the caste system) for fighting back against her abuse by men of a higher caste and when she eluded capture by the authorities her fame grew. The killings prompted the resignation of V. P. Singh, the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh. It was later clarified that the dead men were seventeen Thakurs, one Muslim, one Dalit and one member of Other Backward Classes. Phoolan Devi was charged &quot;in absentia&quot; with 48 crimes, which included kidnapping, looting and murder.

===Surrender===
After the massacre, Phoolan Devi remained on the run and was nearly caught by the police on 31 March 1981. Her mother was held for five months in Kalpi prison to pressure Phoolan Devi to give herself up. In 1983, Phoolan Devi surrendered to the authorities after long negotiations led by Rajendra Chaturvedi, a police officer from Bhind who gained the trust of local dacoits after arresting Malkhan Singh Rajpoot. Dressed in a police uniform and wearing a red bandanna on her head, she bowed before representations of the goddess Durga and Mahatma Gandhi, then prostrated herself in front of Arjun Singh, the Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh, with approximately 8,000 people watching. Phoolan Devi had set conditions regarding her surrender, which included: no death penalty for anyone from her gang; a maximum custodial sentence of eight years; no use of handcuffs; being imprisoned as a group; being imprisoned in Madhya Pradesh and not Uttar Pradesh; her family being given land with space for her goat and cow; and her brother getting a government job. She and seven men, including Man Singh, surrendered. Mala Sen records that the male journalists gathered in Bhind to watch her surrender were unimpressed with her plain appearance. 

Phoolan Devi faced the 48 criminal charges and the gang was incarcerated at Gwalior, in Madhya Pradesh. Despite the prior agreement that she would not spend more than eight years in prison, she spent over ten years on remand. During this time, she had tuberculosis and was diagnosed with two stomach tumours. Whilst receiving hospital treatment, she received a hysterectomy without her consent. The others, including Man Singh, agreed to trials in Uttar Pradesh and were all acquitted, but Phoolan Devi refused to make a deal and remained convinced she would be murdered if she went there.

==Political career==
Charges against Phoolan Devi were dropped in 1994 by order of Mulayam Singh Yadav, the leader of the Samajwadi Party and Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh. After her release from prison, she joined the Samajwadi Party and in the 1996 general election took a seat in the Indian lower legislative body, the Lok Sabha, as the Member of Parliament (MP) for Mirzapur in Uttar Pradesh. She won with a margin of 37,000 and had more than 300,000 votes in total. She was not the only illiterate MP, joining others such as Bhagwati Devi and Shobhawati Devi. Phoolan Devi campaigned with limited success for the rights of women and to provide better amenities for the poor. She told author Roy Moxham &quot;I want to bring hospitals, schools, electricity and clean water to the poor in the villages. To stop child marriage and to improve life for women.&quot; Mallah people were happy to have someone of their caste representing them in parliament for the first time and she was generally popular among Other Backward Classes.

The Kanpur District Court set aside Yadav&#x27;s pronouncement, which reinstated the charges against her in connection with the Behmai massacre. This decision was upheld by the Allahabad High Court. In 1996, Phoolan Devi lost a Supreme Court appeal to have the charges against her dropped. The following year, the court approved a request from Uttar Pradesh to arraign her on charges related to the Behmai massacre and she did not attend the court hearing in Kanpur. After several months of legal machinations, the Supreme Court ruled that Phoolan Devi did not need to be jailed before trial. She lost her seat to Virendra Singh, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) candidate in the 1998 elections, then regained it the following year.

Phoolan Devi married Umed Singh in 1994; they appeared together in a film, called &quot;Sholay Aur Chingari&quot; (&quot;Blazing Fires and Sparks&quot;). Together with her new husband, she became a Buddhist, aiming to evade the Hindu caste system. According to Moxham, she later renounced Buddhism.

== &quot;Bandit Queen&quot; film==
The 1994 film &quot;Bandit Queen&quot; was loosely based on Mala Sen&#x27;s biography; it was directed by Shekhar Kapur and starred Seema Biswas as Phoolan Devi. After it received acclaim at Cannes Film Festival, Kapur asked for permission from the Central Board of Film Certification to screen the film at cinemas in India. Phoolan Devi attempted to block the release, commenting &quot;It&#x27;s simply not the story of my life&quot;. She was supported by the feminist and novelist Arundhati Roy, who wrote a critique of the film (entitled &quot;The great Indian rape trick&quot;), arguing that whilst Sen&#x27;s book presented a complex story with different perspectives, Kapur portrayed Phoolan Devi as a victim without having met her. In his 2021 autobiography Farrukh Dhondy, the former commissioning editor at Channel 4, described how he rushed to Delhi in order to enlist Umed Singh&#x27;s aid in persuading Phoolan Devi to drop her complaint. When Phoolan Devi discovered this, the couple became estranged, before later reconciling. A court case was brought against screening the film by lawyer Indira Singh and Arundhati Roy at the Delhi High Court. Ultimately, Phoolan Devi received £40,000 from Channel 4 and dropped the complaint. Later in 1994, she dictated her autobiography &quot;I, Phoolan Devi&quot; which was published first in French in 1996 and then in other languages, including English, Japanese and Malay. The income from book sales supported Phoolan Devi and enabled her to pay her legal fees.

== Assassination ==
At 13:30 (IST) on 25 July 2001, Phoolan Devi was shot dead by three unknown assailants outside her house at 44 Ashoka Road in New Delhi. She was shot nine times and her bodyguard was hit twice; he returned fire as the attackers escaped by car. She was rushed to Lohia Hospital and was pronounced dead on arrival. She was aged 37 when she died and serving as an MP. All business of both houses of Parliament was adjourned for two days and the funeral took place in Mirzapur. Umed Singh commented &quot;No one likes it when someone, especially a woman, from the lower classes rises and makes a name for herself&quot; and her lawyer Kamini Jaiswal stated &quot;This murder is the result of caste conflict.&quot; The criminal case against her was still open at the time of her death.

Days after the murder, Sher Singh Rana surrendered to police in Dehra Dun and claimed he had assassinated Phoolan Devi in revenge for the Behmai massacre; he at first struggled to convince police that he was present at the scene of the crime. He escaped from Tihar Jail in 2004 and was recaptured two years later. In August 2014, Rana received a life sentence for murder, with ten co-defendants being acquitted. Two years later, he appealed his sentence to the Delhi High Court and was set free by Justice Gita Mittal on a personal bond of ₹50,000 (equivalent to ₹72,000 or £750 in 2023) and two sureties, each of the same amount. He was required to not interact with Phoolan Devi&#x27;s family and to report to the police every six months, whilst also informing them where he stayed and what mobile telephone number he was using. 

In August 2001, Umed Singh announced prior to Phoolan Devi&#x27;s terahvin that he was setting up a trust to administer the properties she owned; he was immediately denounced by her sisters and mother, who claimed he was trying to steal her investments worth ₹25 million (equivalent to ₹100 million or £1 million in 2023). Munni Devi alleged that Umed Singh knew the murderers and challenged his alibi. She said that Umed Singh was abusive towards Phoolan Devi and that her sister had tried at least twice to divorce him. Phoolan Devi&#x27;s first husband Puttilal also made a demand for her properties since they had never officially divorced.

==Legacy==

Phoolan Devi&#x27;s fame throughout India continued to grow after her death and the controversy surrounding the &quot;Bandit Queen&quot; film had already ensured that she was globally famous. She has become a legendary figure, alongside other outlaws such as Ned Kelly, Sándor Rózsa and Pancho Villa. Her life has inspired biographies by Roy Moxham, Mala Sen and Richard Shears and Isobelle Gidley, as well as novels by Irène Frain and Dimitri Friedman. A graphic novel entitled &quot;Phoolan Devi, Rebel Queen&quot; by was published in 2020. The scholar Tatiana Szurlej notes that the facts presented in these biographies often contradict each other despite coming from interviews with Phoolan Devi herself and questions whether she forgot elements or adapted her account to suit her changing circumstances. In 1994, Arundhati Roy commented that Phoolan Devi &quot;is suffering from a case of Legenditis. She&#x27;s only a version of herself. There are other versions of her that are jostling for attention.&quot; Media theorist Sandra Ponzanesi states Phoolan Devi is an example of a Third World postcolonial subject who is aware of the racist and patronising Orientalist attitudes that First World analysts have of her.

Several films have been made about her life. Ashok Roy made the 1984 film &quot;Phoolan Devi&quot; in Bengali and followed it the next year with a Hindi version entitled &quot;Kahani Phoolvati Ki&quot; (&quot;The story of Phoolan&quot;). &quot;Bandit Queen&quot; came out in 1994 and in 2019 Hossein Martin Fazeli was developing a documentary entitled &quot;Phoolan&quot;. In 2022, Farrukh Dhondy announced that he was making a web series about her life told from the perspective of Rajendra Chaturvedi, the person who arranged her surrender. Phoolan Devi has been represented in fine art by painters such as Rekha Rodwittiya. Her life has also been commemorated by folk singers, making her into a mythical outlaw figure. Shirish Korde and Lynn Kremer wrote an opera called &quot;Phoolan Devi: The Bandit Queen&quot; which premiered in 2010 at the College of the Holy Cross in Worcester, Massachusetts, US.

The verdict in the court case concerning the Behmai massacre was delayed in 2020 because important case documents had been lost. The last witness died the following year and since the presiding judge had been transferred, the case began again in 2022. In 2023, another suspect died, leaving only two people on trial.

The Mallah subcaste forms part of the Nishad caste and two Nishad political parties laid claim to Phoolan Devi&#x27;s legacy. In 2018, the NISHAD Party reported it would build a statue of her in Gorakhpur. Three years later, in order to mark twenty years since her assassination, the Vikassheel Insaan Party (VIP) announced it would place high statues of her in 18 districts of Uttar Pradesh and were prevented from doing so by the police. Mukesh Sahani, the leader of the VIP, was prevented from leaving Varanasi airport by the Government of Uttar Pradesh when he wanted to install a statue. He reacted by setting up a foundation in Phoolan Devi&#x27;s name and promising to deliver up to 50,000 small idols of Phoolan Devi, to any local person who requested one. Also in 2021, tributes marking the anniversary of her death were made by Chirag Paswan of the Lok Janshakti Party (Ram Vilas) and Tejashwi Yadav of Rashtriya Janata Dal.

==Selected works==

==See also==
* Jagga Jatt
* Paan Singh Tomar
* Seema Parihar
* Ashok Mahto gang
* List of assassinated Indian politicians
* Michelina Di Cesare

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q465026" start="0" end="12" title="Phoolan Devi" label="Phoolan Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q465026" start="69" end="81" title="Phoolan Devi" label="Bandit Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17176963" start="97" end="103" title="dacoit" label="dacoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556694" start="151" end="171" title="Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha" label="member of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744018" start="220" end="226" title="Mallaah" label="Mallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q484416" start="227" end="235" title="subcaste" label="subcaste"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="279" end="284" title="States and union territories of India" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="288" end="301" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q43414" start="449" end="464" title="Sexual Abuse" label="sexually abused"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108582" start="682" end="702" title="Other Backward Class" label="Other Backward Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="722" end="732" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q336289" start="772" end="783" title="Trial in absentia" label="in absentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q337487" start="836" end="842" title="Rajput" label="Thakur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837973" start="908" end="939" title="List of chief ministers of Uttar Pradesh" label="Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q158467" start="1088" end="1095" title="Gwalior" label="Gwalior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546941" start="1276" end="1291" title="Samajwadi Party" label="Samajwadi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15636047" start="1462" end="1477" title="Sher Singh Rana" label="Sher Singh Rana"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="1646" end="1659" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762808" start="1784" end="1796" title="Bandit Queen" label="Bandit Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089115" start="2188" end="2203" title="Jalaun district" label="Jalaun district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="2205" end="2218" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="2254" end="2260" title="Yamuna" label="Yamuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060631" start="2265" end="2272" title="Chambal River" label="Chambal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17176963" start="2350" end="2357" title="dacoity" label="dacoits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744018" start="2402" end="2408" title="Mallaah" label="Mallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="2456" end="2461" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q130695" start="2462" end="2483" title="caste system in India" label="caste system in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q905360" start="2504" end="2511" title="Shudra" label="Shudras"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309573" start="2583" end="2593" title="dung cakes" label="dung cakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q81375" start="2664" end="2673" title="chickpeas" label="chickpeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q50840653" start="2690" end="2702" title="pearl millet" label="pearl millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q43731" start="3615" end="3628" title="The Asian Age" label="The Asian Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923231" start="3789" end="3807" title="arranged marriage" label="arrange a marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q80524" start="3875" end="3888" title="Indian rupees" label="Indian rupees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270398" start="3904" end="3905" title="₹" label="₹"/>
<link wikidata="Q16320284" start="4022" end="4030" title="Mala Sen" label="Mala Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="4329" end="4336" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q170461" start="5607" end="5611" title="neem" label="neem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="5778" end="5790" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q673281" start="6078" end="6092" title="sexual assault" label="sexual assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030890" start="6319" end="6347" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Feature Service" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Feature Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266557" start="7182" end="7190" title="Devariya" label="Devariya"/>
<link wikidata="Q66568" start="7192" end="7198" title="Kanpur" label="Kanpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q640646" start="7203" end="7207" title="Orai" label="Orai"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="7421" end="7431" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q382973" start="7538" end="7543" title="Durga" label="Durga"/>
<link wikidata="Q806285" start="7603" end="7612" title="bandoleer" label="bandoleer"/>
<link wikidata="Q337487" start="7745" end="7751" title="Rajput" label="Thakur"/>
<link wikidata="Q242360" start="7789" end="7798" title="Kshatriya" label="Kshatriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q216217" start="8513" end="8523" title="loudhailer" label="loudhailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="8895" end="8908" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740716" start="9249" end="9264" title="Khushwant Singh" label="Khushwant Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q219517" start="9337" end="9343" title="Dalits" label="Dalits"/>
<link wikidata="Q315338" start="9551" end="9562" title="V. P. Singh" label="V. P. Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837973" start="9568" end="9599" title="Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh" label="Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108582" start="9706" end="9726" title="Other Backward Class" label="Other Backward Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q336289" start="9761" end="9772" title="Trial in absentia" label="in absentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281643" start="10005" end="10010" title="Kalpi" label="Kalpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q796501" start="10190" end="10195" title="Bhind" label="Bhind"/>
<link wikidata="Q109283907" start="10250" end="10271" title="Malkhan Singh Rajpoot" label="Malkhan Singh Rajpoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="10399" end="10413" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113454" start="10420" end="10430" title="Prostration" label="prostrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309208" start="10451" end="10462" title="Arjun Singh (Madhya Pradesh politician)" label="Arjun Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q980652" start="10468" end="10500" title="List of chief ministers of Madhya Pradesh" label="Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="10775" end="10789" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q158467" start="11175" end="11182" title="Gwalior" label="Gwalior"/>
<link wikidata="Q550675" start="11460" end="11472" title="hysterectomy" label="hysterectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736550" start="11773" end="11792" title="Mulayam Singh Yadav" label="Mulayam Singh Yadav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546941" start="11812" end="11827" title="Samajwadi Party" label="Samajwadi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532207" start="11938" end="11959" title="1996 Indian general election" label="1996 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q230003" start="12014" end="12023" title="Lok Sabha" label="Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6874958" start="12062" end="12070" title="Mirzapur Lok Sabha constituency" label="Mirzapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q16104425" start="12222" end="12235" title="Bhagwati Devi" label="Bhagwati Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373199" start="12388" end="12398" title="Roy Moxham" label="Roy Moxham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12730" end="12751" title="Kanpur#Law_and_order" label="Kanpur District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522720" start="12903" end="12923" title="Allahabad High Court" label="Allahabad High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="12954" end="12967" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q66568" start="13185" end="13191" title="Kanpur" label="Kanpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090493" start="13340" end="13354" title="Virendra Singh (Mirzapur)" label="Virendra Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="13360" end="13382" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532246" start="13406" end="13420" title="1998 Indian general election" label="1998 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968265" start="13443" end="13457" title="1999 Indian general election" label="following year"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="13658" end="13666" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q130695" start="13694" end="13706" title="Caste system in India" label="caste system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762808" start="13815" end="13827" title="Bandit Queen" label="Bandit Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q522232" start="13901" end="13914" title="Shekhar Kapur" label="Shekhar Kapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576856" start="13927" end="13939" title="Seema Biswas" label="Seema Biswas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="13986" end="14006" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944404" start="14044" end="14079" title="Central Board of Film Certification" label="Central Board of Film Certification"/>
<link wikidata="Q212801" start="14278" end="14291" title="Arundhati Roy" label="Arundhati Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436349" start="14560" end="14574" title="Farrukh Dhondy" label="Farrukh Dhondy"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="14611" end="14620" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184183" start="14936" end="14952" title="Delhi High Court" label="Delhi High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q604055" start="15344" end="15347" title="Indian Standard Time" label="IST"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288522" start="15596" end="15610" title="Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital" label="Lohia Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q564538" start="15630" end="15645" title="dead on arrival" label="dead on arrival"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="15730" end="15740" title="Parliament of India" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q956371" start="15798" end="15806" title="Mirzapur" label="Mirzapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q15636047" start="16138" end="16153" title="Sher Singh Rana" label="Sher Singh Rana"/>
<link wikidata="Q199528" start="16179" end="16188" title="Dehra Dun" label="Dehra Dun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593538" start="16374" end="16384" title="Tihar Jail" label="Tihar Jail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184183" start="16576" end="16592" title="Delhi High Court" label="Delhi High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q29452532" start="16621" end="16632" title="Gita Mittal" label="Gita Mittal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302665" start="16638" end="16651" title="Recognizance" label="personal bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q748845" start="16711" end="16719" title="Surety" label="sureties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694909" start="17014" end="17022" title="terahvin" label="terahvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q301816" start="17865" end="17874" title="Ned Kelly" label="Ned Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q743825" start="17876" end="17888" title="Sándor Rózsa" label="Sándor Rózsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="17893" end="17905" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154646" start="18026" end="18037" title="Irène Frain" label="Irène Frain"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="18062" end="18075" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q265425" start="18704" end="18716" title="postcolonial" label="postcolonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q42865" start="18768" end="18779" title="Orientalism" label="Orientalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="18932" end="18939" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="18977" end="18982" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q39071096" start="19006" end="19025" title="Phoolan Devi (film)" label="Kahani Phoolvati Ki"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195529" start="19122" end="19143" title="Hossein Martin Fazeli" label="Hossein Martin Fazeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="19410" end="19418" title="fine art" label="fine art"/>
<link wikidata="Q21466140" start="19439" end="19455" title="Rekha Rodwittiya" label="Rekha Rodwittiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498624" start="19552" end="19565" title="Shirish Korde" label="Shirish Korde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620177" start="19678" end="19703" title="College of the Holy Cross" label="College of the Holy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="19707" end="19731" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q85789227" start="20094" end="20100" title="Nishad" label="Nishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q28924658" start="20195" end="20207" title="NISHAD Party" label="NISHAD Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584396" start="20251" end="20260" title="Gorakhpur" label="Gorakhpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q85813158" start="20340" end="20363" title="Vikassheel Insaan Party" label="Vikassheel Insaan Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243284" start="20421" end="20447" title="districts of Uttar Pradesh" label="districts of Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q90145597" start="20496" end="20509" title="Mukesh Sahani" label="Mukesh Sahani"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="20561" end="20569" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589328" start="20585" end="20612" title="Government of Uttar Pradesh" label="Government of Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728004" start="20894" end="20907" title="Chirag Paswan" label="Chirag Paswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108829795" start="20915" end="20946" title="Lok Janshakti Party (Ram Vilas)" label="Lok Janshakti Party (Ram Vilas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14317045" start="20951" end="20965" title="Tejashwi Yadav" label="Tejashwi Yadav"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176919" start="20969" end="20989" title="Rashtriya Janata Dal" label="Rashtriya Janata Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122529" start="21027" end="21037" title="Jagga Jatt" label="Jagga Jatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121433" start="21040" end="21056" title="Paan Singh Tomar" label="Paan Singh Tomar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445871" start="21059" end="21072" title="Seema Parihar" label="Seema Parihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q65079917" start="21075" end="21091" title="Ashok Mahto gang" label="Ashok Mahto gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606248" start="21094" end="21133" title="List of assassinated Indian politicians" label="List of assassinated Indian politicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121169" start="21136" end="21155" title="Michelina Di Cesare" label="Michelina Di Cesare"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44542" wikidata="Q471953" url="?curid=44542" title="Pat Mastelotto">
<text>Lee Patrick Mastelotto (born September 10, 1955) is an American rock drummer and record producer. He has been a member of King Crimson, Stick Men, Mr. Mister and O.R.k., as well as working as a session drummer with XTC, The Pointer Sisters and The Rembrandts (including well known Friends theme song I&#x27;ll Be There for You), among others. In addition, he has led or co-led other projects including Mastica, Tuner, TU and The Mastelottos.
For King Crimson, he initially formed part of the &quot;Double Trio&quot; lineup from 1994 to 1997, working with Bill Bruford as part of a double-drumkit arrangement. Following Bruford&#x27;s departure in 1997, Mastelotto remained with King Crimson, becoming their longest-serving drummer and working both solo and in various configurations with subsequent drummers Gavin Harrison, Bill Rieflin and Jeremy Stacey.

Mastelotto is a pioneer and continuing developer of a mixed acoustic-and-electronic drumming approach which he refers to as &quot;traps and buttons&quot;, and which incorporates techniques and methods from rock, pop and electronic dance music styles. As well as being a drummer, he works as a producer, engineer and mixer, working extensively with digital audio workstations.

== Career ==

===Early years and Mr. Mister===

Mastelotto was born in Chico, California. He started playing the drums at the age of 10; by the time he was 16 he was playing in popular local bands and while still in high school commuted several hours to Lake Tahoe for gigs. Moving to Los Angeles in the mid-1970s, Mastelotto worked for many bands and as a studio session drummer. In this capacity he worked for Martin Briley, Holly Knight, Scandal, Al Jarreau, The Pointer Sisters, Patti LaBelle, Kenny Loggins, Martika, Danny Wilde and Holly Penfield as well as playing drums on the double platinum album &quot;Rockland&quot; by Canadian rock musician Kim Mitchell.

In 1982 Mastelotto was a founding member of Mr. Mister. The band had a number one album, &quot;Welcome to the Real World&quot;, and two number one singles, &quot;Broken Wings&quot; and &quot;Kyrie&quot;. They recorded four albums, with the fourth, &quot;Pull&quot;, recorded in 1989–1990 but remaining unreleased until late 2010.

His tenure with Mr. Mister was followed by more session work for bands such as XTC, The Sugarcubes, Hall &amp; Oates, Cock Robin, The Rembrandts, Jude Cole, Eddie Money, Tina Arena, Matthew Sweet, Julia Fordham, Robyn Hitchcock and David Sylvian. In 1991 Mastelotto co-produced Peter Kingsbery&#x27;s first solo album before being asked to join King Crimson.

===King Crimson===

Mastelotto had been a member of King Crimson since 1994, resulting in him becoming their longest serving drummer. He was the first of two drummers hired for the &quot;Double Trio&quot; line-up of the mid-1990s, the second being previous long-term King Crimson drummer Bill Bruford. Mastelotto and Bruford operated as parallel drummers for the Double Trio, playing different styles and parts which sometimes intermeshed and sometimes worked separately. Following Bruford&#x27;s departure in 1997, Mastelotto became the band&#x27;s sole drummer, working mostly on the electronic Roland V-Drums set and bringing in simultaneous/triggered electronic drum loops and textures based on his interest in intelligent dance music and drum and bass. For King Crimson&#x27;s 2008 lineup, the band returned to a double-drummer arrangement with Mastelotto now joined by Gavin Harrison.

For the period of King Crimson activity lasting from 2013 to 2021 (the &quot;Seven Headed Beast&quot; and &quot;Three over Five&quot; line-ups), Mastelotto played as part of a three-drummer arrangement, initially with Harrison and Bill Rieflin, and subsequently with Harrison and Jeremy Stacey. In each of these setups, Mastelotto also took on an extended percussionist role incorporating multiple sound effects, samples and programs (taking on something of the function played by percussionist/&quot;allsorts&quot; contributor Jamie Muir in the 1972 King Crimson).

To date, Mastelotto has appeared on three King Crimson studio albums (&quot;Thrak&quot;, &quot;The ConstruKction of Light&quot; and &quot;The Power to Believe&quot;, released between 1995 and 2003), one mini-album, two EPs and numerous live releases between 1995 and 2022.

===King Crimson-related===

During, and in parallel to, his King Crimson work, Mastelotto has been an integral part of several King Crimson-related bands. He produced, edited, mixed and played on the ProjeKct 3 and ProjeKct 4 releases by the band&#x27;s &quot;ProjeKcts&quot; subgroupings, playing a particularly dominant role on the IDM-influenced ProjeKct 3.

Mastelotto also played with League of Crafty Guitarists who formed Fripp adjacent bands; one was California Guitar Trio. Along with Tony Levin and CGT, such pieces as Mahavishnu Orchestra covers were done.

Mastelotto currently works with King Crimson bass/Chapman Stick player Tony Levin and centrozoon&#x27;s touch guitarist Markus Reuter in the art rock trio Stick Men. He is also a member of the progressive/experimental bands TU (with fellow King Crimson alumnus Trey Gunn), KTU (with Gunn, Kimmo Pohjonen and Samuli Kosminen), and Tuner (a duo with Markus Reuter).

Mastelotto was one of the two drummers in the Crimson ProjeKct, a six-piece band which merged Stick Men with the Adrian Belew Power Trio in order to play King Crimson music from the 1980s to 2000s periods. In conjunction with engineer/programmer Bill Munyon, Mastelotto formed the IDM project BPM&amp;M (which to date has recorded one album, 2001&#x27;s &#x27;XtraKcts &amp; ArtifaKcts&#x27;, which featured or sampled many King Crimson members and associates). In early 2021 he released a new album, &quot;A Romantic&#x27;s Guide to King Crimson&quot;, with his wife Deborah on lead vocals, credited to &quot;The Mastelottos&quot;. The album featured reworked versions of twelve King Crimson songs, deliberately re-arranged in a more popular style in order to accent the group&#x27;s songwriting and its gentler side.

===O.R.k.===

In 2015, Mastelotto joined Carmelo Pipitone (guitarist of Italian band Marta sui Tubi), Lorenzo Esposito Fornasari (singer and keyboard player with Berserk! and Obake) and Colin Edwin (former bass player with Porcupine Tree) in a new heavy progressive rock band called O.R.k. Their first album, &quot;Inflamed Rides&quot;, was released the same year and was followed in 2017 by &quot;Soul of an Octopus&quot;, in 2019 by &quot;Ramagehead&quot; (with artwork by Adam Jones of Tool) and in 2022 by &quot;Screamnasium&quot;.

===Other projects===
Mastelotto&#x27;s other projects include Mastica (an Americana/art-rock trio with Mark &quot;Gum B.&quot; Williams of Poi Dog Pondering/Alejandro Escovedo band and Monica &#x27;MonKey&#x27; Champion from Baboon Orchestra), and M.P.TU (with Little Feat guitarist Phil Brown, singer Malford Milligan and Spirit/Firefall/Heart bassist Mark Andes). He has continued to guest with Jay Terrien, Cock Robin, drummer Terry Bozzio, Mecca, Herd of Instinct, Tony Levin and the California Guitar Trio, and has contributed to major network television themes.

Since moving to Austin, Texas, Mastelotto has worked with Austinites Storyville, Abra Moore, ...And You Will Know Us by the Trail of Dead and theremin player Pamelia Kurstin. In 2007 Mastelotto went on tour with The Flower Kings in Europe supporting their album &quot;The Sum Of No Evil&quot;, followed by an appearance at the enormous Creation of Peace festival in Kazan, Russia, with Adrian Belew, Tony Levin and Eddie Jobson. This was followed by another new project, HoBoLeMa, with Levin, Bozzio and Allan Holdsworth.

In 2014, he released a collaborative album with Tobias Ralph called &quot;ToPaRaMa&quot;.

==Discography==
==References==
== External links ==
* Biography at mastica.net
* Pat Mastelotto homepage
* Tuner MySpace page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q471953" start="0" end="22" title="Pat Mastelotto" label="Lee Patrick Mastelotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="122" end="134" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616221" start="136" end="145" title="Stick Men (prog band)" label="Stick Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334471" start="147" end="157" title="Mr. Mister" label="Mr. Mister"/>
<link wikidata="Q123702791" start="162" end="168" title="O.R.k." label="O.R.k."/>
<link wikidata="Q1413926" start="215" end="218" title="XTC" label="XTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161836" start="220" end="239" title="The Pointer Sisters" label="The Pointer Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334434" start="244" end="258" title="The Rembrandts" label="The Rembrandts"/>
<link wikidata="Q79784" start="281" end="288" title="Friends" label="Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006198" start="300" end="326" title="I&amp;#x27;ll Be There for You (The Rembrandts song)" label="I&amp;#x27;ll Be There for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q3979792" start="418" end="420" title="TU (band)" label="TU"/>
<link wikidata="Q312797" start="555" end="567" title="Bill Bruford" label="Bill Bruford"/>
<link wikidata="Q361888" start="808" end="822" title="Gavin Harrison" label="Gavin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517349" start="824" end="836" title="Bill Rieflin" label="Bill Rieflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807966" start="841" end="854" title="Jeremy Stacey" label="Jeremy Stacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="1077" end="1099" title="electronic dance music" label="electronic dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060750" start="1205" end="1230" title="digital audio workstation" label="digital audio workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q432152" start="1305" end="1322" title="Chico, California" label="Chico, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q15514241" start="1646" end="1659" title="Martin Briley" label="Martin Briley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139389" start="1661" end="1673" title="Holly Knight" label="Holly Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q616239" start="1675" end="1682" title="Scandal (American band)" label="Scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q174547" start="1684" end="1694" title="Al Jarreau" label="Al Jarreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161836" start="1696" end="1715" title="The Pointer Sisters" label="The Pointer Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q31013" start="1717" end="1730" title="Patti LaBelle" label="Patti LaBelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q435965" start="1732" end="1745" title="Kenny Loggins" label="Kenny Loggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q241675" start="1747" end="1754" title="Martika" label="Martika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579544" start="1756" end="1767" title="Danny Wilde (musician)" label="Danny Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355428" start="1847" end="1855" title="Rockland (Kim Mitchell album)" label="Rockland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309155" start="1888" end="1900" title="Kim Mitchell" label="Kim Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334471" start="1947" end="1957" title="Mr. Mister" label="Mr. Mister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132709" start="1992" end="2029" title="Welcome to the Real World (Mr. Mister album)" label="&amp;quot;Welcome to the Real World&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q925895" start="2065" end="2077" title="Broken Wings (Mr. Mister song)" label="Broken Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748161" start="2094" end="2099" title="Kyrie (song)" label="Kyrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259374" start="2157" end="2161" title="Pull (Mr. Mister album)" label="Pull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413926" start="2313" end="2316" title="XTC" label="XTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q876705" start="2318" end="2332" title="The Sugarcubes" label="The Sugarcubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q733182" start="2334" end="2350" title="Hall &amp;amp; Oates" label="Hall &amp;amp; Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105240" start="2352" end="2362" title="Cock Robin (band)" label="Cock Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334434" start="2364" end="2378" title="The Rembrandts" label="The Rembrandts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302349" start="2380" end="2389" title="Jude Cole" label="Jude Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282910" start="2391" end="2402" title="Eddie Money" label="Eddie Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q239917" start="2404" end="2414" title="Tina Arena" label="Tina Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100060" start="2416" end="2429" title="Matthew Sweet" label="Matthew Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306421" start="2431" end="2444" title="Julia Fordham" label="Julia Fordham"/>
<link wikidata="Q931909" start="2446" end="2461" title="Robyn Hitchcock" label="Robyn Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q519273" start="2466" end="2479" title="David Sylvian" label="David Sylvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376698" start="2512" end="2527" title="Peter Kingsbery" label="Peter Kingsbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="2646" end="2658" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q312797" start="2882" end="2894" title="Bill Bruford" label="Bill Bruford"/>
<link wikidata="Q660984" start="3309" end="3332" title="intelligent dance music" label="intelligent dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="3337" end="3350" title="drum and bass" label="drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q361888" start="3469" end="3483" title="Gavin Harrison" label="Gavin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517349" start="3717" end="3729" title="Bill Rieflin" label="Bill Rieflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807966" start="3766" end="3779" title="Jeremy Stacey" label="Jeremy Stacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q714309" start="4014" end="4024" title="Jamie Muir" label="Jamie Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716130" start="4587" end="4596" title="ProjeKcts" label="ProjeKcts"/>
<link wikidata="Q841778" start="4856" end="4876" title="Mahavishnu Orchestra" label="Mahavishnu Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q754518" start="4946" end="4959" title="Chapman Stick" label="Chapman Stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q216986" start="4967" end="4977" title="Tony Levin" label="Tony Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5063041" start="4982" end="4992" title="centrozoon" label="centrozoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931160" start="5016" end="5029" title="Markus Reuter" label="Markus Reuter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616221" start="5051" end="5060" title="Stick Men (prog band)" label="Stick Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q3979792" start="5120" end="5122" title="TU (band)" label="TU"/>
<link wikidata="Q709624" start="5157" end="5166" title="Trey Gunn" label="Trey Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q655443" start="5169" end="5172" title="KTU (band)" label="KTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253738" start="5185" end="5199" title="Kimmo Pohjonen" label="Kimmo Pohjonen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5307" end="5323" title="Crimson ProjeKct" label="Crimson ProjeKct"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660260" start="6122" end="6138" title="Carmelo Pipitone" label="Carmelo Pipitone"/>
<link wikidata="Q962912" start="6166" end="6180" title="Marta sui Tubi" label="Marta sui Tubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208142" start="6183" end="6209" title="Lorenzo Esposito Fornasari" label="Lorenzo Esposito Fornasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q311817" start="6267" end="6278" title="Colin Edwin" label="Colin Edwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q213923" start="6304" end="6318" title="Porcupine Tree" label="Porcupine Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q123702791" start="6364" end="6370" title="O.R.k." label="O.R.k."/>
<link wikidata="Q184827" start="6570" end="6574" title="Tool (band)" label="Tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207811" start="6757" end="6774" title="Poi Dog Pondering" label="Poi Dog Pondering"/>
<link wikidata="Q974936" start="6775" end="6793" title="Alejandro Escovedo" label="Alejandro Escovedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q946124" start="6879" end="6890" title="Little Feat" label="Little Feat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777553" start="6941" end="6947" title="Spirit (band)" label="Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q941662" start="6957" end="6962" title="Heart (band)" label="Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766544" start="6971" end="6981" title="Mark Andes" label="Mark Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q218031" start="7048" end="7060" title="Terry Bozzio" label="Terry Bozzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q216986" start="7087" end="7097" title="Tony Levin" label="Tony Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026817" start="7106" end="7128" title="California Guitar Trio" label="California Guitar Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="7203" end="7216" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620497" start="7256" end="7266" title="Storyville (band)" label="Storyville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668698" start="7268" end="7278" title="Abra Moore" label="Abra Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q426068" start="7280" end="7324" title="...And You Will Know Us by the Trail of Dead" label="...And You Will Know Us by the Trail of Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q207691" start="7329" end="7337" title="theremin" label="theremin"/>
<link wikidata="Q275179" start="7345" end="7360" title="Pamelia Kurstin" label="Pamelia Kurstin"/>
<link wikidata="Q912990" start="7399" end="7415" title="The Flower Kings" label="The Flower Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="7553" end="7558" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q363019" start="7573" end="7585" title="Adrian Belew" label="Adrian Belew"/>
<link wikidata="Q706756" start="7602" end="7614" title="Eddie Jobson" label="Eddie Jobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873901" start="7658" end="7666" title="HoBoLeMa" label="HoBoLeMa"/>
<link wikidata="Q285254" start="7691" end="7707" title="Allan Holdsworth" label="Allan Holdsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164518" start="7784" end="7792" title="ToPaRaMa" label="ToPaRaMa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44543" wikidata="Q2107607" url="?curid=44543" title="Prairie Prince">
<text>Charles Lempriere &quot;Prairie&quot; Prince (born May 7, 1950) is an American drummer and visual artist. He came to prominence in the 1970s as a member of the San Francisco–based rock group The Tubes, was a member of Jefferson Starship from 1992 to 2008 and has worked with a wide range of other performers as a session musician.

== Career ==
Prince is a member of The Tubes and was a founding member of Journey along with Neal Schon and Gregg Rolie. However, he quit Journey after a few months before they made any recordings.

He has subsequently worked with Chris Isaak (on his first four albums), Todd Rundgren, Brian Eno, David Byrne, XTC, Tom Waits, Paul Kantner, George Harrison, Dick Dale, Glenn Frey, Richard Marx, Bill Spooner, Neil Hamburger, John Fogerty, Nicky Hopkins, Tommy Bolin, Phil Lesh, John Ferenzik, Singer at Large Johnny J. Blair, The Gilmour Project, Negativland and former Tubes and Grateful Dead keyboardist Vince Welnick.

Prince collaborated with Ross Valory, bassist and founding member of Journey, on a line of patented eco-friendly, US-made hoodie shirts called MouthMan, where graphic designs of jaws and teeth on the sleeves form a mouth when the wearer &quot;hugs himself&quot;.

In 2006, he toured with The New Cars including Todd Rundgren, bassist Kasim Sulton (Rundgren&#x27;s Utopia bandmate), and original The Cars guitarist Elliot Easton and keyboardist Greg Hawkes. He continues to play with The Tubes and Todd Rundgren.

He was an original member of the reformed Jefferson Starship, known as &quot;Jefferson Starship – The Next Generation&quot; in 1992 and appears on both that band&#x27;s studio albums (the 1999 release &quot;Windows of Heaven&quot; and the 2008 release, &quot;Jefferson&#x27;s Tree of Liberty&quot;), along with numerous live albums. Prince announced in early 2008 that he was leaving the band on amicable terms and remains available for international performances.

He is a sought-after session musician and played drums and percussion on all tracks of Chuck Prophet&#x27;s 2012 release &quot;Temple Beautiful&quot; and seven of 12 tracks on Prophet&#x27;s 2014&#x27;s &quot;Night Surfer&quot;.

As an artist he designed the album cover artwork for many artists including The Tubes, Todd Rundgren (1981 album &quot;Healing&quot;), Journey, Lyle Workman and Vince Welnick&#x27;s 1998 album &quot;Missing Man Formation&quot;, among many others. Along with his creative partner and fellow former Tube Michael Cotten, he has created numerous set designs for major artists including Michael Jackson, Billy Joel, Bette Midler, N&#x27;Sync, Shania Twain, Styx, The Tubes and Todd Rundgren. Prince and Cotten have teamed up with choreographer Kenny Ortega on several special events including the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, the Super Bowl XXX halftime show (which featured Diana Ross singing &quot;Take Me Higher&quot; as she was lifted from the field in a helicopter), Michael Jackson&#x27;s &quot;This is It&quot; concert, and Shania Twain&#x27;s residency, &quot;Shania: Still the One&quot;, at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nevada.

== Personal life ==
Prince lived with fellow Tubes member Re Styles from 1973 until the early 1990s. In a 2006 interview with &quot;Modern Drummer&quot; magazine&#x27;s Billy Amendola, he referred to singer Diana Mangano as his wife, adding they were not formally married but had been together for a decade.

== See also ==
* The Nuclear Beauty Parlor§Activities

== References ==
== External links ==
*The Tubes official website
*Prairie Prince audio interview on RundgrenRadio.com 2007
*Prairie Prince audio interview on RundgrenRadio.com 2009
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2107607" start="0" end="17" title="Prairie Prince" label="Charles Lempriere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107607" start="24" end="31" title="Prairie Prince" label="Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107607" start="38" end="44" title="Prairie Prince" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165544" start="191" end="200" title="The Tubes" label="The Tubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265203" start="218" end="236" title="Jefferson Starship" label="Jefferson Starship"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="313" end="329" title="session musician" label="session musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165544" start="367" end="376" title="The Tubes" label="The Tubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q464749" start="406" end="413" title="Journey (band)" label="Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q389242" start="425" end="435" title="Neal Schon" label="Neal Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335067" start="440" end="451" title="Gregg Rolie" label="Gregg Rolie"/>
<link wikidata="Q313009" start="563" end="574" title="Chris Isaak" label="Chris Isaak"/>
<link wikidata="Q364875" start="603" end="616" title="Todd Rundgren" label="Todd Rundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q569003" start="618" end="627" title="Brian Eno" label="Brian Eno"/>
<link wikidata="Q336640" start="629" end="640" title="David Byrne" label="David Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413926" start="642" end="645" title="XTC" label="XTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q184805" start="647" end="656" title="Tom Waits" label="Tom Waits"/>
<link wikidata="Q280657" start="658" end="670" title="Paul Kantner" label="Paul Kantner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="672" end="687" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q346785" start="689" end="698" title="Dick Dale" label="Dick Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q472051" start="700" end="710" title="Glenn Frey" label="Glenn Frey"/>
<link wikidata="Q311256" start="712" end="724" title="Richard Marx" label="Richard Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629007" start="726" end="738" title="Bill Spooner" label="Bill Spooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988690" start="740" end="754" title="Neil Hamburger" label="Neil Hamburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q326538" start="756" end="768" title="John Fogerty" label="John Fogerty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28348" start="770" end="783" title="Nicky Hopkins" label="Nicky Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q313670" start="785" end="796" title="Tommy Bolin" label="Tommy Bolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350527" start="798" end="807" title="Phil Lesh" label="Phil Lesh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="857" end="876" title="The Gilmour Project" label="The Gilmour Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q624627" start="878" end="889" title="Negativland" label="Negativland"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="911" end="924" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936454" start="937" end="950" title="Vince Welnick" label="Vince Welnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q301874" start="978" end="989" title="Ross Valory" label="Ross Valory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753539" start="1241" end="1253" title="The New Cars" label="The New Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q364875" start="1264" end="1277" title="Todd Rundgren" label="Todd Rundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193703" start="1287" end="1299" title="Kasim Sulton" label="Kasim Sulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601575" start="1317" end="1323" title="Utopia (band)" label="Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q858388" start="1348" end="1356" title="The Cars" label="The Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433372" start="1367" end="1380" title="Elliot Easton" label="Elliot Easton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433399" start="1397" end="1408" title="Greg Hawkes" label="Greg Hawkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265203" start="1508" end="1526" title="Jefferson Starship" label="Jefferson Starship"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024469" start="1673" end="1690" title="Windows of Heaven (album)" label="Windows of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176634" start="1725" end="1757" title="Jefferson&amp;#x27;s Tree of Liberty" label="Jefferson&amp;#x27;s Tree of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3170833" start="2019" end="2032" title="Chuck Prophet" label="Chuck Prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333350" start="2191" end="2202" title="album cover" label="album cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q624903" start="2203" end="2210" title="Cover art" label="artwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129008" start="2281" end="2288" title="Healing (Todd Rundgren album)" label="Healing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878366" start="2361" end="2382" title="Missing Man Formation (album)" label="Missing Man Formation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2464" end="2478" title="Michael Cotten" label="Michael Cotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="2544" end="2559" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q194333" start="2561" end="2571" title="Billy Joel" label="Billy Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q190631" start="2573" end="2585" title="Bette Midler" label="Bette Midler"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="2587" end="2598" title="N&amp;#x27;Sync" label="N&amp;#x27;Sync"/>
<link wikidata="Q131433" start="2600" end="2612" title="Shania Twain" label="Shania Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q590102" start="2614" end="2618" title="Styx (band)" label="Styx"/>
<link wikidata="Q380852" start="2701" end="2713" title="Kenny Ortega" label="Kenny Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065229" start="2791" end="2805" title="Super Bowl XXX" label="Super Bowl XXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q36290" start="2836" end="2846" title="Diana Ross" label="Diana Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q569978" start="3061" end="3075" title="Caesars Palace" label="Caesars Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q124299781" start="3157" end="3166" title="Re Styles" label="Re Styles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3425" end="3461" title="The Nuclear Beauty Parlor#Activities" label="The Nuclear Beauty Parlor§Activities"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44545" wikidata="Q427711" url="?curid=44545" title="Till">
<text>Till or glacial till is unsorted glacial sediment.

Till is derived from the erosion and entrainment of material by the moving ice of a glacier. It is deposited some distance down-ice to form terminal, lateral, medial and ground moraines.

Till is classified into primary deposits, laid down directly by glaciers, and secondary deposits, reworked by fluvial transport and other processes.

==Description==
Till is a form of &quot;glacial drift&quot;, which is rock material transported by a glacier and deposited directly from the ice or from running water emerging from the ice. It is distinguished from other forms of drift in that it is deposited directly by glaciers without being reworked by meltwater.

Till is characteristically unsorted and unstratified, and is not usually consolidated. Most till consists predominantly of clay, silt, and sand, but with pebbles, cobbles, and boulders scattered through the till. The abundance of clay demonstrates lack of reworking by turbulent flow, which otherwise would winnow the clay. Typically, the distribution of particle sizes shows two peaks (it is &quot;bimodal&quot;) with pebbles predominating in the coarser peak.

The larger clasts (rock fragments) in till typically show a diverse composition, often including rock types from outcrops hundreds of kilometers away. Some clasts may be rounded, and these are thought to be stream pebbles entrained by the glacier. Many of the clasts are faceted, striated, or polished, all signs of glacial abrasion. The sand and silt grains are typically angular to subangular rather than rounded.

It has been known since the careful statistic work by geologist Chauncey D. Holmes in 1941 that elongated clasts in tills tend to align with the direction of ice flow. Clasts in till may also show slight imbrication, with the clasts dipping upstream.

Though till is generally unstratified, till high in clay may show lamination due to compaction under the weight of overlying ice. Till may also contain lenses of sand or gravel, indicating minor and local reworking by water transitional to non-till glacial drift.

The term &quot;till&quot; comes from an old Scottish name for coarse, rocky soil. It was first used to describe primary glacial deposits by Archibald Geikie in 1863. Early researchers tended to prefer the term &quot;boulder clay&quot; for the same kind of sediments, but this has fallen into disfavor. Where it is unclear whether a poorly sorted, unconsolidated glacial deposit was deposited directly from glaciers, it is described as diamict or (when lithified) as diamictite. &quot;Tillite&quot; is a sedimentary rock formed by lithification of till.

==Processes==

===Erosional===
Glacial till is mostly derived from subglacial erosion and from the entrainment by the moving ice of previously available unconsolidated sediments. Bedrock can be eroded through the action of glacial plucking and abrasion, and the resulting clasts of various sizes will be incorporated to the glacier&#x27;s bed.

Glacial abrasion is the weathering of bedrock below a flowing glacier by fragmented rock on the basal layer of the glacier. The two mechanisms of glacial abrasion are striation of the bedrock by coarse grains moved by the glacier, thus gouging the rock below, and polishing of the bedrock by smaller grains such as silts. Glacial plucking is the removal of large blocks from the bed of a glacier.

Much of the silt in till is produced by glacial grinding, and the longer the till remains at the ice-bedrock interface, the more thoroughly it is crushed. However, the crushing process appears to stop with fine silt. Clay in till is likely eroded from bedrock rather than being created by glacial processes.

===Depositional===
The sediments carried by a glacier will eventually be deposited some distance down-ice from its source. This takes place in the &quot;ablation zone&quot;, which is the part of the glacier where the rate of ablation (removal of ice by evaporation, melting, or other processes) exceeds the rate of accumulation of new ice from snowfall. As ice is removed, debris are left behind as till. The deposition of glacial till is not uniform, and a single till plain can contain a wide variety of different types of tills due to the various erosional mechanisms and location of till with respect to the transporting glacier.

The different types of till can be categorized between subglacial (beneath) and supraglacial (surface) deposits. Subglacial deposits include lodgement, subglacial meltout, and deformation tills. Supraglacial deposits include supraglacial meltout and flow till. Supraglacial deposits and landforms are widespread in areas of glacial downwasting (vertical thinning of glaciers, as opposed to ice-retreat. They typically sit at the top of the stratigraphic sediment sequence, which has a major influence on land usage. Till is deposited as the terminal moraine, along the lateral and medial moraines and in the ground moraine of a glacier, and &quot;moraine&quot; is often conflated with &quot;till&quot; in older writings. Till may also be deposited as drumlins and flutes, though some drumlins consist of a core of stratified sediments with only a cover of till. Interpreting the glacial history of landforms can be difficult due to the tendency of overprinting landforms on top of each other.

As a glacier melts, large amounts of till are eroded and become a source of sediments for reworked glacial drift deposits. These include glaciofluvial deposits, such as outwash in sandurs, and as glaciolacustrine and glaciomarine deposits, such as varves (annual layers) in any proglacial lakes which may form. Erosion of till may take place even in the subglacial environment, such as in tunnel valleys.

==Types of till==
There are various types of classifying tills:
* Primary deposits – Laid down directly by glacier action.
* Secondary deposits – Reworked by fluvial transport, erosion, etc.

Traditionally (e.g. Dreimanis, 1988) a further set of divisions has been made to primary deposits, based upon the method of deposition. Van der Meer et al. 2003 have suggested that these till classifications are outdated and should instead be replaced with only one classification, that of deformation till. The reasons behind this are largely down to the difficulties in accurately classifying different tills, which are often based on inferences of the physical setting of the till rather than detailed analysis of the till fabric or particle size.

===Subglacial till===
====Lodgement till====

Subglacial lodgement tills are deposits beneath the glacier that are forced, or &quot;lodged&quot; into the bed below. As glaciers advance or retreat, the clasts that are deposited by the ice may have a lower velocity than the ice itself. When the friction between the clast and the bed exceeds the forces of the ice flowing above and around it, the clast will cease to move, and it will become a lodgement till.

====Meltout till====

Subglacial meltout tills are tills that are deposited via the melting of the ice lobe. Clasts are transported to the base of the glacier over time, and as basal melting continues, they are slowly deposited below the glacier. Since the rate of deposition is controlled by the rate of basal melting, it is worth considering the factors that contribute to melting. These can be the geothermal heat flux, frictional heat generated by sliding, ice thickness, and ice-surface temperature gradients.

====Deformation till====

Subglacial deformation tills refer to the homogenization of glacial sediments that occur when the stresses and shear forces from the moving glacier rework the topography of the bed. These contain preglacial sediments (non glacial or earlier glacial sediments), which have been run over and thus deformed by meltout processes or lodgement. The constant reworking of these deposited tills leads to a highly homogenized till.

===Supraglacial till===

====Meltout till====

Supraglacial meltout tills are similar to subglacial meltout tills. Rather than being the product of basal melting, however, supraglacial meltout tills are imposed on top of the glacier. These consist of clasts and debris that become exposed due to melting via solar radiation. These debris are either just debris that have a high relative position on the glacier, or clasts that have been transported up from the base of the glacier. Debris accumulation has a feedback-loop relationship with melting. Initially, the darker colored debris absorb more heat and thus accelerate the melting process. After a significant amount of melting has occurred, the thickness of the till insulates the ice sheet and slows the melting process. Supraglacial meltout tills typically end up forming moraines.

====Flow till====

Supraglacial flow tills refer to tills that are subject to a dense concentration of clasts and debris from meltout. These debris localities are then subsequently affected by ablation. Due to their unstable nature, they are subject to downslope flow, and thus named &quot;flow till.&quot; Properties of flow tills vary, and can depend on factors such as water content, surface gradient, and debris characteristics. Generally, flow tills with a higher water content behave more fluidly, and thus are more susceptible to flow. There are three main types of flows, which are listed below.
*Mobile flows: Thin, fluid, and rapid flows that significantly contribute to erosional processes. These cause strong clast orientation in the direction of flow.
*Semi-plastic: Thick, slow moving &quot;tongues&quot; of debris. These are also erosive, and clast sorting is more organized than in mobile flows.
*Creep: Very slow movement of debris, downslope in direction. Flow rate is slow enough not to be seen on relatively short timescales, as observed by humans. Particle orientation is often random and not associated with the direction of flow.

==Tillite==

In cases where till has been indurated or lithified by subsequent burial into solid rock, it is known as the sedimentary rock tillite. Matching beds of ancient tillites on opposite sides of the south Atlantic Ocean provided early evidence for continental drift. The same tillites also provide some support to the Precambrian Snowball Earth glaciation event hypothesis.

==Economic resources==
Tills sometimes contain placer deposits of valuable minerals such as gold. Diamonds have been found in glacial till in the north-central United States and in Canada. &quot;Till prospecting&quot; is a method of prospecting in which tills are sampled over a wide area to determine if they contain valuable minerals, such as gold, uranium, silver, nickel, or diamonds, and the flow direction indicated by the till is then used to trace the minerals back to their bedrock source.

==See also==
* 
* 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q427711" start="0" end="4" title="Till" label="Till"/>
<link wikidata="Q427711" start="8" end="20" title="Till" label="glacial till"/>
<link wikidata="Q4429373" start="24" end="32" title="Sorting (sediment)" label="unsorted"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="33" end="40" title="glacier" label="glacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="41" end="49" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="77" end="84" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866635" start="89" end="100" title="Glacial motion" label="entrainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="136" end="143" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987070" start="151" end="160" title="Deposition (geology)" label="deposited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585022" start="192" end="200" title="terminal moraine" label="terminal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="202" end="209" title="Moraine#Lateral moraines" label="lateral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="211" end="217" title="Moraine#Medial moraine" label="medial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="222" end="237" title="Moraine#Ground moraines" label="ground moraines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434465" start="350" end="357" title="fluvial" label="fluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279297" start="430" end="443" title="Drift (geology)" label="glacial drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="491" end="498" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4429373" start="736" end="744" title="Sorting (sediment)" label="unsorted"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="749" end="761" title="Stratum" label="unstratified"/>
<link wikidata="Q107503638" start="782" end="794" title="Consolidation (geology)" label="consolidated"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="838" end="842" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="848" end="852" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457474" start="1016" end="1022" title="Winnowing (sedimentology)" label="winnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q612133" start="1183" end="1189" title="clasts" label="clasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q188842" start="1496" end="1504" title="Abrasion (geology)" label="abrasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q589004" start="1793" end="1804" title="Imbrication (sedimentology)" label="imbrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711375" start="1907" end="1917" title="Lamination (geology)" label="lamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414356" start="1925" end="1935" title="Compaction (geology)" label="compaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="2011" end="2017" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="2150" end="2158" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982613" start="2541" end="2548" title="diamict" label="diamict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191052" start="2558" end="2567" title="lithified" label="lithified"/>
<link wikidata="Q840899" start="2572" end="2582" title="diamictite" label="diamictite"/>
<link wikidata="Q427711" start="2590" end="2597" title="Tillite" label="Tillite"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="2609" end="2625" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="2738" end="2745" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866635" start="2759" end="2770" title="Glacial motion" label="entrainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771460" start="2891" end="2899" title="Plucking (glaciation)" label="plucking"/>
<link wikidata="Q188842" start="2904" end="2912" title="Abrasion (geology)" label="abrasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q612133" start="2932" end="2938" title="clasts" label="clasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987070" start="3785" end="3794" title="Deposition (geology)" label="deposited"/>
<link wikidata="Q322152" start="3865" end="3878" title="ablation zone" label="ablation zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3902058" start="4177" end="4187" title="till plain" label="till plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585022" start="4888" end="4904" title="terminal moraine" label="terminal moraine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4916" end="4923" title="Moraine#Lateral moraines" label="lateral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4928" end="4943" title="Moraine#Medial moraine" label="medial moraines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4955" end="4969" title="Moraine#Ground moraines" label="ground moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192701" start="5098" end="5105" title="drumlin" label="drumlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462939" start="5111" end="5117" title="Flute (glacial)" label="flutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667598" start="5478" end="5500" title="glaciofluvial deposits" label="glaciofluvial deposits"/>
<link wikidata="Q670772" start="5521" end="5528" title="Outwash plain" label="sandurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342592" start="5537" end="5553" title="Glaciolacustrine deposits" label="glaciolacustrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503599" start="5558" end="5570" title="Glaciomarine clays" label="glaciomarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q835591" start="5589" end="5594" title="varve" label="varve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320719" start="5619" end="5634" title="proglacial lake" label="proglacial lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q611796" start="5730" end="5743" title="tunnel valley" label="tunnel valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640856" start="5959" end="5968" title="Aleksis Dreimanis" label="Dreimanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q322177" start="8950" end="8958" title="ablation" label="ablation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191052" start="9966" end="9975" title="lithification" label="lithified"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="10033" end="10049" title="sedimentary rocks" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="10124" end="10138" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q178605" start="10167" end="10184" title="continental drift" label="continental drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="10237" end="10248" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q214689" start="10249" end="10263" title="Snowball Earth" label="Snowball Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141583" start="10341" end="10356" title="placer deposits" label="placer deposits"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44547" wikidata="Q2407660" url="?curid=44547" title="Tie rod">
<text>A tie rod or tie bar (also known as a hanger rod if vertical) is a slender structural unit used as a tie and (in most applications) capable of carrying tensile loads only.
It is any rod or bar-shaped structural member designed to prevent the separation of two parts, as in a vehicle.
== Subtypes and examples of applications ==
* In airplane structures, tie rods are sometimes used in the fuselage or wings.
* Tie rods are often used in steel structures, such as bridges, industrial buildings, tanks, towers, and cranes.
* Sometimes tie rods are retrofitted to bowing or subsiding masonry walls (brick, block, stone, etc.) to keep them from succumbing to lateral forces. The ends of the rods are secured by anchor plates which may be visible from the outside.
* The rebar used in reinforced concrete is not referred to as a &quot;tie rod&quot;, but it essentially performs some of the same tension-force-counteracting purposes that tie rods perform.
* In automobiles, the &quot;tie rods&quot; are part of the steering mechanism. They differ from the archetypal tie rod by both pushing and pulling (operating in both tension and compression). In the UK, these items are generally referred to as &quot;track rods&quot;.
* In steam locomotives, a &quot;tie rod&quot; is a rod that connects several driving wheels to transmit the power from the connecting rod.
* Tie rods known as &quot;sag rods&quot; are sometimes used in connection with purlins to take the component of the loads which is parallel to the roof.
* The spokes of bicycle wheels are tie rods.
*In ships, tie rods are bolts which keep the whole engine structure under compression. They provide for fatigue strength. They also provide for proper running gear alignment which prevents fretting. They help to reduce the bending stress being transmitted to the transverse girder.

== Physics and engineering principles ==
In general, because the ratio of the typical tie rod&#x27;s length to its cross section is usually very large, it would buckle under the action of compressive forces. The working strength of a tie rod is the product of the allowable working stress and the rod&#x27;s minimum cross-sectional area.

If threads are cut into a cylindrical rod, that minimum area occurs at the root of the thread. Often rods are upset (made thicker at the ends) so that the tie rod does not become weaker when threads are cut into it.

Tie rods may be connected at the ends in various ways, but it is desirable that the strength of the connection should be at least equal to the strength of the rod. The ends may be threaded and passed through drilled holes or shackles and retained by nuts screwed on the ends. If the ends are threaded right- and left-hand the length between points of loading may be altered. This furnishes a second method for pre-tensioning the rod at will by turning it in the nuts so that the length will be changed. A turnbuckle will accomplish the same purpose. The ends may also be swaged to receive a fitting which is connected to the supports. Another way of making end connections is to forge an eye or hook on the rod.

An infamous structural failure involving tie rods is the Hyatt Regency walkway collapse in Kansas City, Missouri, on July 17, 1981. The hotel had a large atrium with three walkways crossing it suspended from tie rods. Construction errors led to several of the walkways collapsing, killing 114 people and injuring over 200.

==Geometry==
Osgood and Graustein used the rectangular hyperbola, its conjugate hyperbola, and conjugate diameters to rationalize tie rods at 15 degree radial spacing, to a square of girders, from its center. The tie-rods to the corners (45°) correspond to the asymptotes, while the pair at 15° and 75° are conjugate, as are the pair at 30° and 60°. According to this model in linear elasticity, the application of a load compressing the square results in a deformation where the tie rods maintain their conjugate relations.

==See also==
* Guy-wire
* Tie (engineering)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2407660" start="2" end="9" title="Tie rod" label="tie rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407660" start="13" end="20" title="Tie rod" label="tie bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407660" start="38" end="48" title="Tie rod" label="hanger rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q908584" start="152" end="159" title="tension (physics)" label="tensile"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="333" end="341" title="airplane" label="airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="437" end="442" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280" start="463" end="469" title="bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="494" end="498" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q12518" start="501" end="506" title="tower" label="tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q178692" start="513" end="518" title="crane (machine)" label="crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q556991" start="707" end="719" title="anchor plate" label="anchor plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q150425" start="766" end="771" title="rebar" label="rebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="780" end="799" title="reinforced concrete" label="reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="955" end="965" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q18891017" start="1009" end="1017" title="steering" label="steering"/>
<link wikidata="Q171043" start="1223" end="1239" title="steam locomotive" label="steam locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q284786" start="1295" end="1308" title="driving wheel" label="driving wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q221539" start="1341" end="1355" title="connecting rod" label="connecting rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q645110" start="1436" end="1442" title="purlin" label="purlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83180" start="1504" end="1508" title="roof" label="roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q845671" start="1516" end="1521" title="spoke" label="spoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q11442" start="1526" end="1533" title="bicycle" label="bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q446" start="1534" end="1539" title="wheel" label="wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455732" start="1744" end="1752" title="fretting" label="fretting"/>
<link wikidata="Q845080" start="1953" end="1966" title="Cross section (geometry)" label="cross section"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712821" start="2026" end="2037" title="compression (physical)" label="compressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="2038" end="2043" title="force (physics)" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q749400" start="2180" end="2187" title="Screw thread" label="threads"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="2203" end="2214" title="cylinder (geometry)" label="cylindrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430961" start="2619" end="2626" title="shackle" label="shackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190977" start="2644" end="2648" title="Nut (hardware)" label="nuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q145765" start="2804" end="2818" title="Tensile structure" label="pre-tensioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q376793" start="2899" end="2909" title="turnbuckle" label="turnbuckle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489874" start="2965" end="2970" title="swage" label="swage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309431" start="3119" end="3137" title="structural failure" label="structural failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038788" start="3164" end="3194" title="Hyatt Regency walkway collapse" label="Hyatt Regency walkway collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="3198" end="3209" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="3211" end="3219" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q165301" start="3474" end="3495" title="rectangular hyperbola" label="rectangular hyperbola"/>
<link wikidata="Q125726487" start="3501" end="3520" title="conjugate hyperbola" label="conjugate hyperbola"/>
<link wikidata="Q361892" start="3526" end="3545" title="conjugate diameters" label="conjugate diameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371480" start="3614" end="3620" title="girder" label="girder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851760" start="3808" end="3825" title="linear elasticity" label="linear elasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193514" start="3889" end="3900" title="deformation (mechanics)" label="deformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283556" start="3972" end="3980" title="Guy-wire" label="Guy-wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144541" start="3983" end="4000" title="Tie (engineering)" label="Tie (engineering)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44552" wikidata="Q37701" url="?curid=44552" title="Bloemfontein">
<text>Bloemfontein ( ; ), also known as Bloem, is the capital and the largest city of the Free State province in South Africa. It is often, and has been traditionally, referred to as the country&#x27;s &quot;judicial capital&quot;, alongside the legislative capital Cape Town and administrative capital Pretoria, although the highest court in South Africa, the Constitutional Court, has been in Johannesburg since 1994.

Situated at an elevation of above sea level, the city is home to 256,185 (as of 2011) residents and forms part of the Mangaung Metropolitan Municipality which has a population of 747,431. It was one of the host cities for the 2010 FIFA World Cup.

The city of Bloemfontein hosts the Supreme Court of Appeal, the Franklin Game Reserve, Naval Hill, the Maselspoort Resort and the Sand du Plessis Theatre. The city hosts numerous museums, including the National Women&#x27;s Monument, the Anglo-Boer War Museum, the National Museum, and the Oliewenhuis Art Museum. Bloemfontein also hosts the first digital planetarium in the southern hemisphere, the Naval Hill Planetarium, and Boyden Observatory, an astronomical research observatory.

Bloemfontein is popularly and poetically known as &quot;the city of roses&quot; for its abundance of these flowers and the annual rose festival held there. The city is situated in the middle of the country; hence it is referred to as &quot;Central South Africa&quot;. The city&#x27;s Sesotho name is &quot;Mangaung&quot;, meaning &quot;place of cheetahs&quot;.

==History==
===Early history===
Though historically a !Orana and Barolong settlement, and then a Boer settlement, Bloemfontein was officially founded in 1846 as a fort by British Army major Henry Douglas Warden as a British outpost in the Transoranje region, at that stage occupied by various groups of peoples including !Orana (so-called &quot;Korana&quot; of the ǀHõaǁʼaes, ǀHũdiǁʼaes, Einiǁʼaes, and others), Cape Colony Trek Boers, Griqua (at that time known as &quot;Baasters&quot;) and Barolong.

Warden initially chose the site primarily because of its proximity to the main route to Winburg, the spacious open country, and the absence of horse sickness. Bloemfontein was the original farm of Johannes Nicolaas Brits, born on 21 February 1790, owner and first inhabitant of Bloemfontein. Johann – as he was known – sold the farm to Major Warden.

With colonial policy shifts, the region changed into the Orange River Sovereignty (1848–1854) and eventually the Orange Free State Republic (1854–1902). From 1902 to 1910, it served as the capital of the Orange River Colony and since that time as the provincial capital of the Free State. In 1910, it became the Judicial capital of the Union of South Africa. A possible etymology for the city&#x27;s name is that it is called Bloemfontein &quot;Bloem&#x27;s fountain&quot;, after Jan Bloem II, a Griqua leader.

===Orange Free State (1854–1902)===

The Orange Free State was an independent Boer Republic in southern Africa during the second half of the 19th century. Extending between the Orange and Vaal rivers, its borders were determined by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in 1848 when the region was proclaimed as the Orange River Sovereignty, with a seat of a British Resident in Bloemfontein.

As the capital of the Orange Free State Republic, the growth and maturing of the republic resulted in the development of Bloemfontein. The city constructed numerous public buildings that remain in use today, facilitated by the republic&#x27;s governance and compensation from the British for the loss of the diamond-rich Griqua Land area. The old Orange Free State&#x27;s presidential residence, the Old Presidency, is currently a museum and cultural space in the city.

A railway line was built in 1890 connecting Bloemfontein to Cape Town. The railway line provided a centrally located railway station and proved critical to the British in occupying the city later.

The writer J. R. R. Tolkien was born in the city on 3 January 1892. However, his family left Orange Free State (now Free State province, South Africa) following the death of his father, Arthur Tolkien, when Tolkien was three (1895). He recorded that his earliest memories were of &quot;a hot country&quot;.

In 1899, the city was the site of the Bloemfontein Conference, which failed to prevent the outbreak of the Second Boer War. The conference was a final attempt to avert a war between Britain and the South African Republic, and its failure set the stage for war, which broke out on 11 October 1899.

On 13 March 1900, following the Battle of Paardeberg, the British captured the city and built a concentration camp nearby to house Boer women and children. In 1913, the National Women&#x27;s Monument was constructed on the outskirts of the city to commemorate all Boer civilians who died in concentration camps during the war.

The hill in town was named Naval Hill after the naval guns brought in by the British to fortify the position against attack.

=== Unionisation of South Africa (1910s) ===
On 31 May 1910, exactly eight years after the Boers signed the Peace Treaty of Vereeniging that ended the Anglo-Boer War between the British Empire and two Boer states, the South African Republic (Republic of Transvaal) and the Orange Free State, South Africa became a Union.

Due to disagreements over where the Union&#x27;s capital should be, a compromise was reached that allowed Bloemfontein to host Appellate Division and become the Union&#x27;s judicial capital. Bloemfontein was also given financial compensation.

On 8 January 1912, the South African Native National Congress (SANNC) was founded in Bloemfontein. The Union of South Africa had not granted rights to black South Africans, causing the organisation&#x27;s creation. Its primary aim was to fight for the rights of black South Africans. During the implementation of pass laws, the city saw major demonstrations that forced South African authorities to exempt women from them for nearly four decades.

From 1 to 9 January 1914, James Barry Munnik Hertzog and his supporters met in Bloemfontein to form the National Party of the Orange Free State, and to lay down its principles, following Hertzog&#x27;s exit from the South African Party in 1913. The National Party grew to govern South Africa in 1948 and implement the policy of racial segregation known as apartheid.

===Apartheid era (1948–1994)===

When the National Party won the 1948 South African national government elections, they began implementing the policy known as apartheid. The policy was built on separate development of ethnic groups, and racial segregation was enforced. In Bloemfontein, residential segregation had begun in the 19th century with the passing of Ordinance 1 of 1860, which determined that no non-white, without written permission from the landlord (British government), had the right to occupy urban land in towns where local municipalities did not yet exist. On 3 June 1861, the council demarcated three locations in the following areas; the black population was to move to the area that lay to the right of a neighbourhood that was known as Kaffirfontein, Coloureds were to move to the Waaihoek Black residential area on the eastern outskirts of the town. The inhabitants of these settlements had to pay the so-called hut tax and grazing rights tax. This laid the foundation for the implementation of residential urban segregation as envisaged by the architects of apartheid.

When the South African apartheid government passed the Group Areas Act of 1950, the Bloemfontein municipality put into effect changes in the racial set-up of the city. The municipality demolished the Cape Stands residential area, which was occupied by the city&#x27;s coloured population, and moved the residents to Heidedal. However, due to Coloureds living in such proximity to black people, intermarriages across racial lines occurred, resulting in a partially mixed population in Heidedal and Mangaung. In 1952, the Bloemfontein municipality began building new residential areas for the city&#x27;s black population. New residential areas to separate ethnic groups such as Sotho, Xhosa and Tswana were formed. The residential areas were jointly known as Mangaung. Phahameng, a Sotho township, was the first formal housing projects to be approved by the municipality in 1956. Physical buffers such as the railway line and roads were put into place to separate black ethnic groups, the white and coloured population. Eleven thousand housing structures, of which approximately 6,000 were government-built rental accommodations, were erected in Mangaung between 1952 and 1968.

In 1968, Mangaung faced severe housing shortages when as many as 3,000 to 6,000 housing units were needed. To counter this problem, a 55 km eastward expansion called Botshabelo was added in 1979. The Bloemfontein municipality channelled off all black urbanisation to Thaba Nchu and Botshabelo, which were developed as a source of cheap labour for the city of Bloemfontein. A subsidised bus service was established, and Botshabelo was declared a decentralisation point, meaning it was designated to become an industrial development point to reduce the distance between the place of employment and the place of residence.

In 1988, approximately 14,500 people were commuting daily between Botshabelo and Bloemfontein. This meant that 55% of Botshabelo&#x27;s workforce was employed outside the city. In 1994, after the disestablishment of the apartheid government, Bloemfontein, Botshabelo, and Thaba Nchu became part of Motheo District Municipality. The Motheo District Municipality was disestablished on 18 May 2011, and Mangaung was upgraded to become an autonomous metropolitan municipality with Bloemfontein as the main seat.

===Since 1994===
Until 1994, the city was South Africa&#x27;s sole judicial capital. It remains the seat for the Supreme Court of Appeal (formerly the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court). The city is also an administrative centre with many private hospitals and educational institutions.

==Government==
Free State Provincial Government building
Bloemfontein forms part of the Mangaung Metropolitan Municipality, which was upgraded from a Local Municipality in 2011.

The Mangaung Metropolitan Municipality elects a municipal council for five-year periods through a mixed-member proportional representation (MMP) system in which wards elect individual councillors alongside those named from party lists. Voters get two votes: one for a representative to become a ward councillor and the other for a political party. The latter vote distributes seats in the municipal council amongst parties, while the former distributes seats through the individual representatives.

==Geography and climate==

Bloemfontein is located in central South Africa on the southern edge of the Highveld at an elevation of , bordering on the semi-arid region of the Karoo. The area is generally flat with occasional hills (&quot;koppies&quot; in Afrikaans), and the general vegetation is Highveld grassland. 

Bloemfontein experiences a Cold Semi-arid climate (Köppen BSk), with hot summer days and cool, dry winters with frosty nights. Rainfall usually arrives in the summer months, often in the form of dramatic but short-lived afternoon/evening thunderstorms that serve as a temporary relief from the heat. The city tends to be dry and dusty in winter with freezing nights and mostly mild, sunny days. Frost is very common but snow is rare. Snowfall was reported in August 2006 with snowfalls occurring again at the airport on 26 July 2007. As recently as August 2020 and July 2021 very light snow fell across the city with heavier snowfall on 4 June 2024. In addition, the city&#x27;s highland elevation allows for exceptional temperature diurnal of about 15-20°C (27-36°F)
===Suburbs===
Bloemfontein suburbs include Heidedal to the east and southeast, Bain&#x27;s Vlei, Woodland Hills Wildlife Estate, Brandwag, Ehrlich Park, Fauna, Fichardt Park, Fleurdal, Gardenia Park, Generaal De Wet, Hospitaalpark, Kiepersol, Lourier Park, Park West, Pellissier, Uitsig, Universitas, Westdene, Wilgehof and Willows to the south of the city. In the centre is Bloemfontein Central. To the west of Bloemfontein, you will find Langenhoven Park. To the north you will find Arboretum, Baysvalley, Bayswater, Dan Pienaar, Helicon Heights, Heuwelsig, Hillsboro, Hillside, Hilton, Naval Hill, Navalsig, Noordhoek, Pentagon Park, Panorama Park, and Waverley. To the northeast, you will find Roodewal and Vallombrosa. The predominantly black suburbs are Rocklands, Phahameng, Phelindaba, Bloemanda, Bochabela, JB Mafora, and the most historic Batho, where the Maphikela House (where the African National Congress started) is situated.

==Sports==

===Stadium===

The Free State Stadium and the surrounding sports complex are the primary sports venues in the city and province. The venue was the hosting stadium of the 2010 FIFA World Cup South Africa matches played in Bloemfontein. There are several other sports venues in the city, however, including facilities belonging to the university, schools and sports clubs. Other stadiums in the city are Mangaung Oval, Dr. Petrus Molemela Stadium and Clive Solomons Stadium.

===Soccer===
Bloemfontein was joint home (together with nearby Botshabelo) to South African Premiership team Bloemfontein Celtic before the team sold their franchise in 2021. Some of the matches of the 2010 FIFA World Cup were played at the Free State Stadium, including the historic 4–1 defeat of England by Germany in the round of 16

===Rugby===
Bloemfontein&#x27;s Free State Stadium is home to two rugby union teams; the Cheetahs, who as of 2023 compete as in invited side in the EPCR Challenge Cup, and the Free State Cheetahs who play in the domestic Currie Cup. The Free State Cheetahs won the Currie Cup in 2005 against the Blue Bulls; they drew the final with the Blue Bulls in 2006 and retained the Currie Cup title in 2007 by beating the Golden Lions, resulting in the Cheetahs remaining Currie Cup champions until 2008 when the failed to make the final for the first time since 2004. 2009 saw the Cheetahs return to the Currie Cup final, but they could not beat the Blue Bulls at Loftus Versfeld. In 2016, the Cheetahs won the Currie Cup after a perfect season, beating the Blue Bulls in Bloemfontein.

===Cricket===
The Knights cricket team representing the Free State and Northern Cape in various series is located at Mangaung Oval, part of the Free State Stadium complex. Bloemfontein features as a regular venue for touring international and local cricket teams.

===Soaring===
The town has one of the most active soaring communities in South Africa and the world, using the New Tempe Airport, north of Bloemfontein. 

===Motor sports===
Bloemfontein has a motocross track (tempe) run by the Bloemfontein Off Road Club, as well as a go-kart circuit (M&amp;F Raceway), which was closed down in early 2015.

===Shooting sports===
Bloemfontein has a comprehensive shooting centre south of the city, offering most forms of shooting, including various clay target, pistol, and rifle disciplines. Bloemfontein&#x27;s shooting sports community has produced many provincial and national representatives.

==== Metallic Silhouette Shooting ====
Bloemfontein&#x27;s Metallic Silhouette Shooting Range is one of the top metallic silhouette shooting ranges in the world. Three IMSSU international championships have been held here :
* 2004 6th IMSSU World Championships
* 2006 7th IMSSU World Championships
*2016 12th IMSSU World Championships

===Rock climbing===
Bloemfontein has two rock climbing clubs with a wall and boulder cave.

==Rose Festival==
Every year Bloemfontein, the &#x27;City of Roses&#x27;, celebrates the &#x27;Bloemfontein Rose Festival&#x27;, also known as the &#x27;Mangaung Rose Festival&#x27;, in October—the cool month in which roses in the Free State bloom best. The majority of the events happen at the Loch Logan Waterfront in Bloemfontein. The festival attracts rose enthusiasts from all over South Africa and the world to participate in and experience this grand showcase of roses and other local events and attractions. The festival has made Bloemfontein a popular tourist destination with thousands of people attending the festival annually.

===History of the Rose Festival===
The first rose festival occurred in 1976, when council members decided that hosting such a festival was appropriate, given the area&#x27;s name. In 1976, the events spanned over a few days and included activities related to roses in the Sanlam Plaza. Since then, the rose festival has expanded and grown to meet the needs and interests of the public.

===Activities===
Horticulturalists are invited to participate in competitions to design and improve unkempt gardens around the city. 
Festival activities occur in private gardens all over Bloemfontein as city residents open their gardens to the general public.

====Loch Logan Waterfront====
Most festival activities occur at the Loch Logan Waterfront, the largest shopping centre in central South Africa. It spans about 80 000 m2 of space and is the hub of shopping, entertainment, sport, and culture in Bloemfontein. The waterfront displays flowers created by local nurseries as well as the official municipal display created by the parks department, which the Mangaung Municipality organises. The Free State Rose Society&#x27;s champion Rose Cut Competition, with approximately 700 entrants every year, is also hosted at the Waterfront, along with the Miss Volksblad Rosebud competition for girls aged 3–4 years old, organised in conjunction with the Volksblad daily newspaper.

====Rose Morning High Tea====
The Rose Morning High Tea usually occurs at the Urth Garden Centre, where tea and treats are served. The Urth Garden Centre is a retail and wholesale nursery that is located on Kenneth Kaunda Road in Bloemfontein. The crowning of the King and Mangaung in the year of nomination.

====Mangaung Rose Classic Cycle Tour====
The Mangaung Rose Classic Cycle Tour is a road race that takes place during the festival every year. The event is organised by AfriCycle Tours, and the dates are announced annually. The race starts at the Urth, and the race distances include 22 km, 56 km, and 106 km.

====Let&#x27;s Green Bloem Expo====
This expo forms part of the Mangaung/Bloemfontein Rose Festival and gives &#x27;green&#x27; and organic local businesses an opportunity to promote their businesses. This includes showcasing different products and services that support a green environment, such as solar power, grey water systems, vegetable tunnels, JoJo tank systems, etc.

==Education==
Bloemfontein houses many institutions of learning, from pre-schools to universities and colleges. Classes are taught in different languages from school to school, with some even teaching all their classes in two languages. The languages are predominantly Afrikaans, English, and Sesotho.

===Primary education===
* St. Andrew&#x27;s Primary School
* Grey College Primary School
* Jim Fouché Primary School

===Secondary education===
* St. Andrew&#x27;s School
* Grey College
* Eunice High School
* Bloemfontein High School
* Hoërskool Fichardtpark
* Hoërskool Jim Fouché
* Hoërskool Sand du Plessis
* St. Michael&#x27;s School
* Hoërskool Sentraal

===Tertiary education===

===Public tertiary institutions===
*University of the Free State
*Central University of Technology
*Motheo TVET college

There is a Further Education and Training College called Motheo FET College, which comprises three main campuses (Thaba N&#x27;chu, Hillside View, and Bloemfontein) and satellite campuses in Zastron, Philippolis, and Botshabelo.Motheo TVET College 

== Economy ==
The private sector mainly drives Bloemfontein&#x27;s economy. Bloemfontein&#x27;s share of National GDP, employment, and population is the lowest among the benchmark group of South African and Southern African cities, falling just below the city of Port Elizabeth. The city&#x27;s share of the National GDP is 1.73%, with a share of national employment at 1.86% and a share of the national population at 1.67%. Bloemfontein&#x27;s GDP growth, at 0.57% in 2015, stood in the lower half of the benchmark group of cities. Like other major cities in South Africa, Bloemfontein&#x27;s GDP growth has slowly decreased in recent years.

=== Major companies ===
The city is home to two of South Africa&#x27;s top construction and infrastructure companies. Raubex Group Ltd, established in 1974 and listed on the JSE Limited since March 2007 and Ruwacon (Pty Ltd), established in 1999.

Other major companies included the retail department store, Kloppers, established in 1967 and EconoFoods (Pty Ltd) established in 1996.

=== Hospitals and clinics ===
=== Entertainment ===
* Sand du Plessis Theatre

Queen of Roses also happens during this event. The competition recognizes citizens of the City of Bloemfontein for contributions that go beyond their regular duties to enrich the Mangaung Metro. Nominees need to be citizens.

==Media==
* Dumelang Media

=== Newspapers ===

* &quot;Dumelang News - The People&#x27;s Paper&quot;
* &quot;Free State Times&quot;
* &quot;Volksblad&quot;
* &quot;Ons Stad&quot; Closed down
* &quot;Bloemnuus&quot;
* &quot;The Weekly&quot;
* &quot;Courant&quot;
===Radio===

* OFM
* Kovsie FM
* Lesedi FM
* Motheo FM
* Radio Rosestad 100.6 FM
* Motsweding FM
* CUT FM
* Med FM
==Transport==

===Road===

Bloemfontein&#x27;s national and regional roads are as follows: The N1, a major highway running roughly SW to NE from Cape Town to Johannesburg and Zimbabwe largely bypasses this city to the west. The N8 runs east/west connecting Bloemfontein to Kimberley and Maseru, the capital of Lesotho. Bloemfontein is also the northern end of the N6 road heading roughly southwards to the port of East London.

There are also two two-digit R routes: the R64, which is the old road to Kimberley, via Dealesville and Boshof. It ends at the N1. The R30 ends at the N1 north of the town. It is the road to Welkom.

Three other three-digit R routes have their origin in Bloemfontein. The R706 takes origin from the N8 in the city centre, and heads south-west towards Jagersfontein and Fauresmith. The R702 also originates from the N8 in the city centre, but heads south-east towards the towns of Dewetsdorp and Wepener. The third road, the R700, starts in the city centre from the N8 and heads north, crossing the N1 towards Bultfontein.

Below that level, Bloemfontein has several metropolitan or M roads. These roads are numbered independently of M-roads in other South African cities.

===Rail===

Bloemfontein is well connected with rail. It is located on the most important rail junction between Johannesburg and Cape Town, with daily trains to Port Elizabeth, East London and Johannesburg.

===Air===
Bloemfontein has two airports: New Tempe Aerodrome and Bram Fischer International Airport. New Tempe Aerodrome has no scheduled flights; it is a training facility for aviators and schools. Bram Fischer International Airport has scheduled flights to South Africa&#x27;s major cities.

=== Public transport ===

In October 2016, the Mangaung Metropolitan and various taxi associations agreed on the Integrated Public Transport system, which is currently under construction. The project consists of two phases. The first phase will involve the construction of busways along the Metropolitan. The second will be the building of depots and stations.

==Notable people==
Many famous people are associated with Bloemfontein; these include:

===Rugby players===

* François Steyn, rugby player
* Juan Smith, rugby player
* Os du Randt, rugby player
* Chris Dry, South Africa national rugby sevens team player
* Naka Drotské, rugby player
* Brendan Venter, rugby player
* Andre Joubert, rugby player
* Andre Venter, rugby player
* Ruben Kruger, rugby player
* Ollie Le Roux, rugby player
* Coenie Oosthuizen, rugby player
* Jannie de Beer, rugby player
* Ox Nché, rugby player

===Cricket players===

* Allan Donald, South African cricketer
* Hansie Cronje, South African cricket captain
* Morne van Wyk, played for South Africa Proteas Cricket team
* Kepler Wessels, test cricketer with Australia and South Africa

===Football players===

* Willem Jackson played for Bloemfontein Celtic and South Africa national football team.
* Vuyo Mere plays for Moroka Swallows.
* Thabo Nthethe played for Bloemfontein Celtic, Mamelodi Sundowns, Chippa United and South Africa national football team.
* Thembinkosi Lorch plays for Orlando Pirates and South Africa national football team.
* Kgotso Moleko plays for Kaizer Chiefs.
* Neo Maema plays for Mamelodi Sundowns.

===Musicians===

* Leon Schuster, filmmaker, comedian and musician, born and schooled in Bloemfontein
* Shaun Morgan and Dale Stewart, musicians and founding members of the band Seether
* Coenie de Villiers, Afrikaans musician and songwriter
* Brendan Peyper, Afrikaans musician and songwriter

===Actors / Directors===

* Leon Schuster, filmmaker, comedian and musician, born and schooled in Bloemfontein
* Tony Kgoroge, South African actor, performances in movies including &quot;Hotel Rwanda&quot;, &quot;Blood Diamond&quot;, &quot;Invictus&quot;, &quot;Lord of War&quot; and &quot;Skin&quot;

===Other===
* J. R. R. Tolkien CBE was born in Bloemfontein on 3 January 1892. Tolkien is famous for creating the &quot;Legendarium&quot; fantasy epics, &quot;The Hobbit&quot;, &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; and &quot;The Silmarillion&quot;. At three years of age, Tolkien left South Africa for England.
* Ryk Neethling, Olympic gold medalist swimmer
* Zola Budd, international long-distance athlete, born in the city and attended Sentraal High School
* Gerrit Badenhorst, a powerlifter and strongman competitor.
* Karla Pretorius, South Africa national netball team player, attended the University of the Free State
* Frans Claerhout, artist
* Gert Coetzer, rugby league footballer who played in the 1960s
* Beric John Croome, Advocate of the High Court of South Africa
* Winkie Direko, first black chancellor of the University of the Free State
* Lizzie van Zyl, Child inmate of the Bloemfontein concentration camp during the Second Boer War
* Dr John Vernon Harrison FRSE geologist, was born here
*Flaxman Qoopane, writer
*Billy Modise
*Elzabe Rockman, former Free State MEC for Finance

==Religion==
Bloemfontein has a large and diverse Christian population. The city houses several churches and denominations:

* It is the seat of the Anglican Diocese of the Free State
* Afrikaans Baptist Church (Afrikaans: &quot;Afrikaanse Baptiste Kerk&quot;)
* Dutch Reformed Church (Afrikaans: &quot;Nederduitse Gereformeerde Kerk&quot;)
* Sacred Heart Cathedral in Bloemfontein is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bloemfontein
* Seventh-day Adventist Church, Southern African headquarters.
* Christian Revival Church.
* New Covenant Ministries International had a church called Fountainhead led by Chris Gerber. It was a New Testament Church known as Fountainhead Church International. Later, this church merged with Doxa Deo Bloemfontein, now the combined church&#x27;s name.

The city also has a large Jewish population, established in the mid-19th century.

There are two main cemeteries in Bloemfontein:
* The Old Cemetery: Over 1,000 names from the three cemeteries. Old: The oldest of the three cemeteries, dating from 1871, is simply a tiny fenced-off area of a public cemetery near the city centre. It includes a few graves of several Jewish pioneers involved in the city&#x27;s early days who died serving on either side in the Boer War, 1899–1902. Each of these pioneer families&#x27; thirty or so tombstones has been completely transcribed.
* South Park: This cemetery was consecrated in 1978 and now includes over 10,000 graves. It is the biggest cemetery in the Free State.

On 7 October 2010, Several tombstones in the Jewish cemetery in Bloemfontein were defaced with swastikas and antisemitic graffiti.
On 10 April 2012, Bloemfontein&#x27;s historic Memorium cemetery was vandalized, with 35 tombstones toppled and obscene graffiti daubed on the walls of the adjoining Ohel. The graffiti included images of money bags and diamonds, as well as of a crudely drawn Magen David, allegedly as part of an anti-Semitic act.
There is also the old Phahameng cemetery, which dates back to the 1960s and was explicitly reserved for Africans during the apartheid era and has a Heroes Acre, where freedom fighters are laid to rest.
The Heide Heights cemetery in Heidedal was reserved for coloured people during the apartheid era, but all races could bury their dead after 1994. This cemetery has been closed due to it being full.

==Community service organisations==
* Round Table 158 Bloemfontein The first Round Table was formed in Norwich, England in 1927. The founder, Louis Marchesi, was a young member of the Norwich Rotary Club who felt a need existed for a club where the young business owners of the town could gather regularly. At their meetings, they could exchange ideas, learn from the experiences of their colleagues, and play a collective part in the civic life of Norwich. From a very early stage, it was agreed that Round Table would be a non-religious, non-political club, which has continued to this day.
* Child Welfare Bloemfontein Child Welfare Bloemfontein &amp; Childline Free State is a non-profit organisation that was founded in 1914 by a group of volunteers who identified a need for welfare services among the community. In 2004, Child Welfare Bloemfontein celebrated its 90th birthday. Over the past 90 years, many community programmes have been successfully implemented.
* Freemasons The Masonic Centre, Bloemfontein, was built during the 1970s when all the Masonic Lodges in Bloemfontein, sold their individual properties. The centre was erected to facilitate all Masonic activities in Bloemfontein and surrounding areas. All four active Constitutions in South Africa gather at the centre. The lodges that own the centre are Lodge Unie (est. 1864), the Rising Star Lodge (est. 1865), Thistle Lodge (est.1903), Emerald Lodge (est. 1905), Lodge Dagbreek (est. 1932) &amp; Lodge Oranje (est. 1964). Various side degrees are catered for at the Centre, which includes the Mark, Ark, the Royal Arch &amp; Rose Croix. Bloemfontein has a rich Masonic history, especially in the Anglo-Boer War (1899–1902), with members such as Lord Kitchener, Rudyard Kipling and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, visiting Lodges in Bloemfontein. 

==International relations==
===Sister cities===

* Nanjing, China
* Bhubaneshwar, India

==References==
==External links==
* Bloemfontein The official Mangaung Local Municipality website
* Apartheid and housing in Mangaung and Botshabelo </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37701" start="0" end="12" title="Bloemfontein" label="Bloemfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q37701" start="34" end="39" title="Bloemfontein" label="Bloem"/>
<link wikidata="Q160284" start="84" end="94" title="Free State (province)" label="Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="107" end="119" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="240" end="251" title="legislative" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="260" end="269" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754526" start="274" end="288" title="Administration (government)" label="administrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="297" end="305" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133886" start="355" end="375" title="Constitutional Court of South Africa" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="389" end="401" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159185" start="533" end="567" title="Mangaung Metropolitan Municipality" label="Mangaung Metropolitan Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q176883" start="641" end="660" title="2010 FIFA World Cup" label="2010 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368304" start="698" end="721" title="Supreme Court of Appeal (South Africa)" label="Supreme Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="" start="750" end="760" title=":af:Naval Hill" label="Naval Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q12735125" start="766" end="784" title="Maselspoort" label="Maselspoort Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q13035991" start="793" end="816" title="Sand du Plessis Theatre" label="Sand du Plessis Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q795063" start="865" end="895" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Monument" label="National Women&amp;#x27;s Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227247" start="901" end="922" title="Anglo-Boer War Museum" label="Anglo-Boer War Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974423" start="928" end="943" title="National Museum, Bloemfontein" label="National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588880" start="953" end="975" title="Government House, Orange Free State" label="Oliewenhuis Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q895961" start="1091" end="1109" title="Boyden Observatory" label="Boyden Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q34340" start="1434" end="1441" title="Sesotho" label="Sesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q23907" start="1495" end="1502" title="cheetah" label="cheetah"/>
<link wikidata="Q219252" start="1566" end="1572" title="Khoekhoe" label="!Orana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136094" start="1577" end="1585" title="Barolong" label="Barolong"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="1609" end="1613" title="Afrikaner" label="Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="1683" end="1695" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720439" start="1702" end="1722" title="Henry Douglas Warden" label="Henry Douglas Warden"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="1924" end="1935" title="Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q963218" start="1936" end="1946" title="Trek Boers" label="Trek Boers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547060" start="1948" end="1954" title="Griqua people" label="Griqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136094" start="2004" end="2012" title="Barolong" label="Barolong"/>
<link wikidata="Q238991" start="2103" end="2110" title="Winburg" label="Winburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q386408" start="2158" end="2172" title="African horse sickness" label="horse sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048062" start="2423" end="2447" title="Orange River Sovereignty" label="Orange River Sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q218023" start="2479" end="2496" title="Orange Free State" label="Orange Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142179" start="2570" end="2589" title="Orange River Colony" label="Orange River Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q160284" start="2643" end="2653" title="Free State (South African province)" label="Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="2702" end="2723" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q218023" start="2919" end="2936" title="Orange Free State" label="Orange Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010624" start="2956" end="2969" title="Boer Republics" label="Boer Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="2973" end="2988" title="southern Africa" label="southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q181475" start="3055" end="3061" title="Orange River" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q209530" start="3066" end="3070" title="Vaal River" label="Vaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="3114" end="3157" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048062" start="3204" end="3228" title="Orange River Sovereignty" label="Orange River Sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q572927" start="3247" end="3263" title="British Resident" label="British Resident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547060" start="3603" end="3614" title="Griqualand" label="Griqua Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q23090654" start="3682" end="3696" title="Old Presidency" label="Old Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="3813" end="3822" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927330" start="3870" end="3885" title="Bloemfontein railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="3962" end="3978" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q218023" start="4044" end="4061" title="Orange Free State" label="Orange Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q160284" start="4067" end="4086" title="Free State (province)" label="Free State province"/>
<link wikidata="Q82718" start="4137" end="4151" title="Arthur Tolkien" label="Arthur Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927333" start="4297" end="4320" title="Bloemfontein Conference" label="Bloemfontein Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="4366" end="4381" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q550374" start="4457" end="4479" title="South African Republic" label="South African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237713" start="4589" end="4609" title="Battle of Paardeberg" label="Battle of Paardeberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q55137114" start="4653" end="4671" title="Second Boer War concentration camps" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q188201" start="4688" end="4692" title="Boers" label="Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q795063" start="4726" end="4756" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Monument" label="National Women&amp;#x27;s Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q511450" start="4933" end="4943" title="Naval artillery" label="naval guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q927606" start="5119" end="5146" title="Treaty of Vereeniging" label="Peace Treaty of Vereeniging"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="5189" end="5203" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188201" start="5212" end="5216" title="Boer" label="Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="5217" end="5223" title="State (polity)" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q550374" start="5229" end="5251" title="South African Republic" label="South African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q218023" start="5284" end="5301" title="Orange Free State" label="Orange Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368304" start="5460" end="5478" title="Appellate Division (South Africa)" label="Appellate Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="5601" end="5639" title="African National Congress" label="South African Native National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969688" start="5891" end="5900" title="pass laws" label="pass laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q356395" start="6052" end="6078" title="J. B. M. Hertzog" label="James Barry Munnik Hertzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q740718" start="6130" end="6169" title="National Party (South Africa)" label="National Party of the Orange Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473242" start="6242" end="6261" title="South African Party" label="South African Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="6354" end="6372" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="6382" end="6391" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255896" start="6459" end="6507" title="1948 South African general election" label="1948 South African national government elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="6553" end="6562" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902791" start="7197" end="7205" title="Waaihoek" label="Waaihoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="7497" end="7509" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="7511" end="7520" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547724" start="7543" end="7558" title="Group Areas Act" label="Group Areas Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130204" start="7756" end="7775" title="Coloureds" label="coloured population"/>
<link wikidata="Q21056954" start="7804" end="7812" title="Heidedal" label="Heidedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14324792" start="7882" end="7916" title="Interracial marriage" label="intermarriages across racial lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q21056954" start="7972" end="7980" title="Heidedal" label="Heidedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159185" start="7985" end="7993" title="Mangaung Metropolitan Municipality" label="Mangaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q577576" start="8165" end="8170" title="Sotho people" label="Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q207996" start="8172" end="8177" title="Xhosa people" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q810917" start="8182" end="8188" title="Tswana people" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q577576" start="8269" end="8274" title="Sotho people" label="Sotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q894856" start="8832" end="8842" title="Botshabelo" label="Botshabelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256430" start="8933" end="8943" title="Thaba Nchu" label="Thaba Nchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q894856" start="9353" end="9363" title="Botshabelo" label="Botshabelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q385802" start="9585" end="9613" title="Motheo District Municipality" label="Motheo District Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q385802" start="9619" end="9647" title="Motheo District Municipality" label="Motheo District Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368304" start="9909" end="9932" title="Supreme Court of Appeal of South Africa" label="Supreme Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159185" start="10178" end="10212" title="Mangaung Metropolitan Municipality" label="Mangaung Metropolitan Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500352" start="10240" end="10258" title="Local Municipality (South Africa)" label="Local Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="10367" end="10413" title="Mixed-member proportional representation" label="mixed-member proportional representation (MMP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q260225" start="10872" end="10880" title="Highveld" label="Highveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q916997" start="10943" end="10948" title="Karoo" label="Karoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="11023" end="11032" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q260225" start="11065" end="11073" title="Highveld" label="Highveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="11114" end="11136" title="Semi-arid climate" label="Cold Semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="11138" end="11144" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q21056954" start="11898" end="11906" title="Heidedal" label="Heidedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15196150" start="11934" end="11950" title="Bain&amp;#x27;s Vlei" label="Bain&amp;#x27;s Vlei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11952" end="11982" title="Woodland Hills Wildlife Estate" label="Woodland Hills Wildlife Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901663" start="11984" end="11992" title="Brandwag, Bloemfontein" label="Brandwag"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901686" start="11994" end="12006" title="Ehrlich Park, Bloemfontein" label="Ehrlich Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438187" start="12008" end="12013" title="Fauna, Bloemfontein" label="Fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901658" start="12015" end="12028" title="Fichardt Park" label="Fichardt Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q20971309" start="12030" end="12038" title="Fleurdal" label="Fleurdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q20971306" start="12040" end="12053" title="Gardenia Park" label="Gardenia Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q20971303" start="12055" end="12070" title="Generaal De Wet, Bloemfontein" label="Generaal De Wet"/>
<link wikidata="Q20974311" start="12072" end="12085" title="Hospitaalpark" label="Hospitaalpark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12098" end="12110" title="Lourier Park" label="Lourier Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q20974890" start="12123" end="12133" title="Pellissier, Bloemfontein" label="Pellissier"/>
<link wikidata="Q20976276" start="12135" end="12141" title="Uitsig, Bloemfontein" label="Uitsig"/>
<link wikidata="Q20976272" start="12143" end="12154" title="Universitas, Bloemfontein" label="Universitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20976247" start="12156" end="12164" title="Westdene, Bloemfontein" label="Westdene"/>
<link wikidata="Q20976265" start="12166" end="12174" title="Wilgehof, Bloemfontein" label="Wilgehof"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022439" start="12179" end="12186" title="Willows, Bloemfontein" label="Willows"/>
<link wikidata="Q20976289" start="12230" end="12250" title="Bloemfontein Central" label="Bloemfontein Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q20974756" start="12295" end="12311" title="Langenhoven Park" label="Langenhoven Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901672" start="12340" end="12349" title="Arboretum, Bloemfontein" label="Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q20971296" start="12351" end="12361" title="Baysvalley, Bloemfontein" label="Baysvalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q20971293" start="12363" end="12372" title="Bayswater, Bloemfontein" label="Bayswater"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901614" start="12374" end="12385" title="Dan Pienaar, Bloemfontein" label="Dan Pienaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748283" start="12404" end="12413" title="Heuwelsig" label="Heuwelsig"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12444" end="12454" title="Naval Hill" label="Naval Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q20974266" start="12456" end="12464" title="Navalsig" label="Navalsig"/>
<link wikidata="Q20974263" start="12466" end="12475" title="Noordhoek, Bloemfontein" label="Noordhoek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12511" end="12519" title="Waverley, Bloemfontein" label="Waverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q181439" start="12828" end="12846" title="Free State Stadium" label="Free State Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579839" start="12867" end="12881" title="sports complex" label="sports complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q176883" start="12979" end="12998" title="2010 FIFA World Cup" label="2010 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076486" start="13068" end="13080" title="sports venue" label="sports venue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094407" start="13211" end="13224" title="Mangaung Oval" label="Mangaung Oval"/>
<link wikidata="Q12244959" start="13226" end="13253" title="Dr. Petrus Molemela Stadium" label="Dr. Petrus Molemela Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134674" start="13258" end="13280" title="Clive Solomons Stadium" label="Clive Solomons Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q894856" start="13346" end="13356" title="Botshabelo" label="Botshabelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056559" start="13361" end="13386" title="South African Premiership" label="South African Premiership"/>
<link wikidata="Q884858" start="13392" end="13411" title="Bloemfontein Celtic" label="Bloemfontein Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q176883" start="13485" end="13504" title="2010 FIFA World Cup" label="2010 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13607" end="13618" title="2010 FIFA World Cup#Round of 16" label="round of 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q181439" start="13652" end="13670" title="Free State Stadium" label="Free State Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="13686" end="13697" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053725" start="13709" end="13717" title="Cheetahs (rugby union)" label="Cheetahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q937951" start="13768" end="13786" title="EPCR Challenge Cup" label="EPCR Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q266149" start="13796" end="13815" title="Free State Cheetahs" label="Free State Cheetahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144890" start="13841" end="13851" title="Currie Cup" label="Currie Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q885646" start="13916" end="13926" title="Blue Bulls" label="Blue Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534021" start="14033" end="14045" title="Golden Lions" label="Golden Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q181398" start="14276" end="14291" title="Loftus Versfeld" label="Loftus Versfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422392" start="14417" end="14437" title="Knights (cricket team)" label="Knights cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094407" start="14516" end="14529" title="Mangaung Oval" label="Mangaung Oval"/>
<link wikidata="Q624161" start="14714" end="14721" title="Gliding" label="soaring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14775" end="14792" title="New Tempe Airport" label="New Tempe Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q215862" start="14857" end="14866" title="motocross" label="motocross"/>
<link wikidata="Q15037754" start="14933" end="14940" title="go-kart" label="go-kart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298491" start="15409" end="15428" title="Metallic silhouette shooting" label="metallic silhouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q521839" start="15429" end="15443" title="shooting range" label="shooting range"/>
<link wikidata="Q19868523" start="15465" end="15470" title="International Metallic Silhouette Shooting Union" label="IMSSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q847484" start="16637" end="16643" title="Sanlam" label="Sanlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="16769" end="16786" title="Horticulturalists" label="Horticulturalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476852" start="17706" end="17715" title="Volksblad" label="Volksblad"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="19000" end="19009" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q34340" start="19024" end="19031" title="Sesotho" label="Sesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586896" start="19060" end="19092" title="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s School, Bloemfontein" label="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s Primary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608132" start="19095" end="19122" title="Grey College, Bloemfontein" label="Grey College Primary School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19125" end="19150" title="Jim Fouché, Bloemfontein" label="Jim Fouché Primary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586896" start="19180" end="19204" title="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s School, Bloemfontein" label="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608132" start="19207" end="19219" title="Grey College, Bloemfontein" label="Grey College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409752" start="19222" end="19240" title="Eunice High School (Bloemfontein)" label="Eunice High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110643" start="19243" end="19267" title="Bloemfontein High School" label="Bloemfontein High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055199" start="19270" end="19292" title="Hoërskool Fichardtpark" label="Hoërskool Fichardtpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059414" start="19295" end="19315" title="Hoërskool Jim Fouché" label="Hoërskool Jim Fouché"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125665" start="19318" end="19343" title="Hoërskool Sand du Plessis" label="Hoërskool Sand du Plessis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590718" start="19346" end="19371" title="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s School, Bloemfontein" label="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q31736038" start="19374" end="19392" title="Hoërskool Sentraal" label="Hoërskool Sentraal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678733" start="19456" end="19484" title="University of the Free State" label="University of the Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054047" start="19486" end="19518" title="Central University of Technology" label="Central University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q125434" start="20054" end="20068" title="Port Elizabeth" label="Port Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q627514" start="20609" end="20620" title="JSE Limited" label="JSE Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q13035991" start="20874" end="20897" title="Sand du Plessis Theatre" label="Sand du Plessis Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21137" end="21151" title="Dumelang Media" label="Dumelang Media"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21181" end="21220" title="Dumelang News - The People&amp;#x27;s Paper" label="Dumelang News - The People&amp;#x27;s Paper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21235" end="21251" title="Free State Times" label="Free State Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476852" start="21266" end="21275" title="Volksblad" label="Volksblad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21290" end="21298" title="Ons Stad" label="Ons Stad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21325" end="21334" title="Bloemnuus" label="Bloemnuus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21349" end="21359" title="The Weekly (Bloemfontein)" label="The Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21374" end="21381" title="Courant (Bloemfontein)" label="Courant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072481" start="21403" end="21406" title="OFM (South Africa)" label="OFM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21409" end="21418" title="Kovsie FM" label="Kovsie FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530318" start="21421" end="21430" title="Lesedi FM" label="Lesedi FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q17074658" start="21433" end="21442" title="Motheo FM" label="Motheo FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085250" start="21445" end="21468" title="Radio Rosestad 100.6 FM" label="Radio Rosestad 100.6 FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918605" start="21471" end="21484" title="Motsweding FM" label="Motsweding FM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21487" end="21493" title="CUT FM" label="CUT FM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21496" end="21502" title="Med FM" label="Med FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q167482" start="21598" end="21600" title="N1 road (South Africa)" label="N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="21648" end="21657" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="21661" end="21673" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="21678" end="21686" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q169406" start="21731" end="21733" title="N8 road (South Africa)" label="N8"/>
<link wikidata="Q125905" start="21776" end="21785" title="Kimberley, Northern Cape" label="Kimberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909" start="21790" end="21796" title="Maseru" label="Maseru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="21813" end="21820" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q167488" start="21867" end="21874" title="N6 road (South Africa)" label="N6 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q209537" start="21917" end="21928" title="East London, Eastern Cape" label="East London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274843" start="21974" end="21977" title="R64 road (South Africa)" label="R64"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642306" start="22019" end="22030" title="Dealesville" label="Dealesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256832" start="22035" end="22041" title="Boshof" label="Boshof"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274513" start="22066" end="22069" title="R30 road (South Africa)" label="R30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015631" start="22122" end="22128" title="Welkom" label="Welkom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885175" start="22203" end="22207" title="R706 road (South Africa)" label="R706"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460233" start="22282" end="22295" title="Jagersfontein" label="Jagersfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q985813" start="22300" end="22310" title="Fauresmith" label="Fauresmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16941199" start="22316" end="22320" title="R702 road (South Africa)" label="R702"/>
<link wikidata="Q593434" start="22411" end="22421" title="Dewetsdorp" label="Dewetsdorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q841619" start="22426" end="22433" title="Wepener" label="Wepener"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938700" start="22455" end="22459" title="R700 road (South Africa)" label="R700"/>
<link wikidata="Q994009" start="22540" end="22551" title="Bultfontein" label="Bultfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q24234063" start="22613" end="22620" title="Metropolitan routes in Bloemfontein" label="M roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q437175" start="22752" end="22756" title="Rail transport in South Africa" label="rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q336764" start="22794" end="22807" title="Junction (rail)" label="rail junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="22816" end="22828" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="22833" end="22842" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q125434" start="22865" end="22879" title="Port Elizabeth" label="Port Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q209537" start="22881" end="22892" title="East London, Eastern Cape" label="East London"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="22897" end="22909" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q921320" start="22943" end="22951" title="List of airports in South Africa" label="airports"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22953" end="22972" title="New Tempe Aerodrome" label="New Tempe Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q598282" start="22977" end="23011" title="Bram Fischer International Airport" label="Bram Fischer International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23013" end="23032" title="New Tempe Aerodrome" label="New Tempe Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q598282" start="23111" end="23145" title="Bram Fischer International Airport" label="Bram Fischer International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q181263" start="23679" end="23693" title="François Steyn" label="François Steyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="23695" end="23700" title="rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q982144" start="23710" end="23720" title="Juan Smith" label="Juan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="23722" end="23727" title="rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q726173" start="23737" end="23748" title="Os du Randt" label="Os du Randt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="23750" end="23755" title="rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q19585557" start="23765" end="23774" title="Chris Dry" label="Chris Dry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589638" start="23776" end="23815" title="South Africa national rugby sevens team" label="South Africa national rugby sevens team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335328" start="23825" end="23837" title="Naka Drotské" label="Naka Drotské"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="23839" end="23844" title="rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924439" start="23854" end="23868" title="Brendan Venter" label="Brendan Venter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="23870" end="23875" title="rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848016" start="23885" end="23898" title="Andre Joubert" label="Andre Joubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="23900" end="23905" title="rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q508342" start="23915" end="23927" title="Andre Venter" label="Andre Venter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="23929" end="23934" title="rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446467" start="23944" end="23956" title="Ruben Kruger" label="Ruben Kruger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="23958" end="23963" title="rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351507" start="23973" end="23986" title="Ollie Le Roux" label="Ollie Le Roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="23988" end="23993" title="rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140724" start="24003" end="24020" title="Coenie Oosthuizen" label="Coenie Oosthuizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="24022" end="24027" title="rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162066" start="24037" end="24051" title="Jannie de Beer" label="Jannie de Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="24053" end="24058" title="rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q20745098" start="24068" end="24075" title="Ox Nché" label="Ox Nché"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="24077" end="24082" title="rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345532" start="24116" end="24128" title="Allan Donald" label="Allan Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="24144" end="24151" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q681723" start="24156" end="24169" title="Hansie Cronje" label="Hansie Cronje"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="24185" end="24192" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530686" start="24203" end="24216" title="Morne van Wyk" label="Morne van Wyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520021" start="24265" end="24279" title="Kepler Wessels" label="Kepler Wessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624136" start="24355" end="24369" title="Willem Jackson" label="Willem Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170327" start="24405" end="24440" title="South Africa national football team" label="South Africa national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q779452" start="24444" end="24453" title="Vuyo Mere" label="Vuyo Mere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424451" start="24464" end="24479" title="Moroka Swallows F.C." label="Moroka Swallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448744" start="24483" end="24496" title="Thabo Nthethe" label="Thabo Nthethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q784965" start="24529" end="24546" title="Mamelodi Sundowns" label="Mamelodi Sundowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101632" start="24548" end="24561" title="Chippa United" label="Chippa United"/>
<link wikidata="Q27927835" start="24605" end="24622" title="Thembinkosi Lorch" label="Thembinkosi Lorch"/>
<link wikidata="Q607939" start="24633" end="24648" title="Orlando Pirates" label="Orlando Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398744" start="24692" end="24705" title="Kgotso Moleko" label="Kgotso Moleko"/>
<link wikidata="Q247731" start="24716" end="24729" title="Kaizer Chiefs" label="Kaizer Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q58810839" start="24733" end="24742" title="Neo Maema" label="Neo Maema"/>
<link wikidata="Q784965" start="24753" end="24770" title="Mamelodi Sundowns" label="Mamelodi Sundowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q967540" start="24792" end="24805" title="Leon Schuster" label="Leon Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014395" start="24877" end="24889" title="Shaun Morgan" label="Shaun Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q290837" start="24894" end="24906" title="Dale Stewart" label="Dale Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q461448" start="24951" end="24958" title="Seether" label="Seether"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140725" start="24961" end="24979" title="Coenie de Villiers" label="Coenie de Villiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24059060" start="25017" end="25031" title="Brendan Peyper" label="Brendan Peyper"/>
<link wikidata="Q967540" start="25096" end="25109" title="Leon Schuster" label="Leon Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822710" start="25181" end="25193" title="Tony Kgoroge" label="Tony Kgoroge"/>
<link wikidata="Q223884" start="25255" end="25267" title="Hotel Rwanda" label="Hotel Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q74958" start="25281" end="25294" title="Blood Diamond (film)" label="Blood Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q689842" start="25308" end="25316" title="Invictus (film)" label="Invictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q308681" start="25330" end="25341" title="Lord of War" label="Lord of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630067" start="25358" end="25362" title="Skin (2009 film)" label="Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="25384" end="25400" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="25401" end="25404" title="Order of the British Empire" label="CBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q81738" start="25490" end="25501" title="Legendarium" label="Legendarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q74287" start="25529" end="25539" title="The Hobbit" label="The Hobbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="25553" end="25574" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q79762" start="25591" end="25607" title="The Silmarillion" label="The Silmarillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q982122" start="25679" end="25692" title="Ryk Neethling" label="Ryk Neethling"/>
<link wikidata="Q218486" start="25726" end="25735" title="Zola Budd" label="Zola Budd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552553" start="25827" end="25844" title="Gerrit Badenhorst" label="Gerrit Badenhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372453" start="25888" end="25903" title="Karla Pretorius" label="Karla Pretorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565405" start="25905" end="25939" title="South Africa national netball team" label="South Africa national netball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678733" start="25961" end="25989" title="University of the Free State" label="University of the Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946685" start="25992" end="26007" title="Frans Claerhout" label="Frans Claerhout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553180" start="26018" end="26030" title="Gert Coetzer" label="Gert Coetzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193532" start="26082" end="26099" title="Beric John Croome" label="Beric John Croome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755253" start="26117" end="26143" title="High Court of South Africa" label="High Court of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584614" start="26146" end="26159" title="Winkie Direko" label="Winkie Direko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678733" start="26191" end="26219" title="University of the Free State" label="University of the Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987096" start="26222" end="26236" title="Lizzie van Zyl" label="Lizzie van Zyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="26301" end="26316" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19325387" start="26322" end="26342" title="John Vernon Harrison" label="John Vernon Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="26343" end="26347" title="FRSE" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814246" start="26374" end="26389" title="Flaxman Qoopane" label="Flaxman Qoopane"/>
<link wikidata="Q56241575" start="26399" end="26411" title="Billy Modise" label="Billy Modise"/>
<link wikidata="Q91493531" start="26413" end="26427" title="Elzabe Rockman" label="Elzabe Rockman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003223" start="26613" end="26647" title="Anglican Diocese of the Free State" label="Anglican Diocese of the Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="26660" end="26674" title="Baptist Church" label="Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q515880" start="26727" end="26748" title="Dutch Reformed Church" label="Dutch Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942909" start="26807" end="26829" title="Sacred Heart Cathedral, Bloemfontein" label="Sacred Heart Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363331" start="26865" end="26907" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bloemfontein" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bloemfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="26910" end="26938" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012244" start="27001" end="27038" title="New Covenant Ministries International" label="New Covenant Ministries International"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002296" start="27198" end="27219" title="Doxa Deo Church" label="Doxa Deo Bloemfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q846659" start="28014" end="28029" title="Jewish cemetery" label="Jewish cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="28064" end="28072" title="swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q161396" start="28359" end="28370" title="Star of David" label="Magen David"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="28538" end="28551" title="Apartheid" label="apartheid era"/>
<link wikidata="Q378190" start="28892" end="28903" title="Round Table (club)" label="Round Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q130191" start="28918" end="28925" title="Norwich" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q16006435" start="28957" end="28971" title="Louis Marchesi" label="Louis Marchesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454597" start="29873" end="29887" title="Masonic lodge" label="Masonic Lodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q216129" start="30535" end="30549" title="Herbert Kitchener, 1st Earl Kitchener" label="Lord Kitchener"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="30551" end="30566" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="30571" end="30593" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Sir Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="30681" end="30688" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q171771" start="30698" end="30710" title="Bhubaneshwar" label="Bhubaneshwar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44554" wikidata="Q370736" url="?curid=44554" title="Cape Colony">
<text>The Cape Colony (), also known as the Cape of Good Hope, was a British colony in present-day South Africa named after the Cape of Good Hope. It existed from 1795 to 1802, and again from 1806 to 1910, when it united with three other colonies to form the Union of South Africa, then became the Cape Province, which existed even after 1961, when South Africa had become a republic, albeit, temporarily outside the Commonwealth of Nations (1961–94).

The British colony was preceded by an earlier corporate colony that became an original Dutch colony of the same name, which was established in 1652 by the Dutch East India Company (VOC). The Cape was under VOC rule from 1652 to 1795 and under rule of the Napoleonic Batavia Republic from 1803 to 1806. The VOC lost the colony to Great Britain following the 1795 Battle of Muizenberg, but it was ceded to the Batavia Republic following the 1802 Treaty of Amiens. It was re-occupied by the British following the Battle of Blaauwberg in 1806, and British possession affirmed with the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814. The Cape of Good Hope then remained in the British Empire, becoming self-governing in 1872.

The colony was coextensive with the later Cape Province, stretching from the Atlantic coast inland and eastward along the southern coast, constituting about half of modern South Africa: the final eastern boundary, after several wars against the Xhosa, stood at the Fish River. In the north, the Orange River, natively known as the (Black River) and subsequently called the Gariep River, served as the boundary for some time, although some land between the river and the southern boundary of Botswana was later added to it. From 1878, the colony also included the enclave of Walvis Bay and the Penguin Islands, both in what is now Namibia.

It united with three other colonies to form the Union of South Africa in 1910, and was accordingly renamed the Province of the Cape of Good Hope. South Africa became a sovereign state in 1931 by the Statute of Westminster. In 1961, it became the Republic of South Africa. Following the 1994 creation of the present-day South African provinces, the Cape Province was partitioned into the Eastern Cape, Northern Cape, and Western Cape, with smaller parts in North West province.

==History==
===VOC settlement===

An expedition of the VOC led by Jan van Riebeeck established a trading post and naval victualing station at the Cape of Good Hope in 1652. Van Riebeeck&#x27;s objective was to secure a harbour of refuge for VOC ships during the long voyages between Europe and Asia. Within about three decades, the Cape had become home to a large community of , also known as (&#x27;free citizens&#x27;), former VOC employees who settled in the colonies overseas after completing their service contracts. were mostly married citizens who undertook to spend at least twenty years farming the land within the fledgling colony&#x27;s borders; in exchange they received tax exempt status and were loaned tools and seeds. Reflecting the multi-national nature of the early trading companies, the VOC granted status to Dutch, Swiss, Scandinavian and German employees, among others. In 1688 they also sponsored the immigration of nearly two hundred French Huguenot refugees who had fled to the Netherlands upon the Edict of Fontainebleau. This so-called &quot;Huguenot experiment&quot; was deemed a failure by the colonial authorities a decade later, as many of the Huguenot arrivals had little experience with agriculture and had become a net burden on the colonial government. There was a degree of cultural assimilation due to Dutch cultural hegemony that included the almost universal adoption of the Dutch language.

Many of the colonists who settled directly on the frontier became increasingly independent and localised in their loyalties. Known as &quot;Boers&quot;, they migrated beyond the Cape Colony&#x27;s initial borders and had soon penetrated almost a thousand kilometres inland. Some Boers even adopted a nomadic lifestyle permanently and were denoted as . The VOC colonial period had a number of bitter, genocidal conflicts between the colonists and the Khoe-speaking indigenes, followed by the Xhosa, both of which they perceived as unwanted competitors for prime farmland.

VOC traders imported thousands of slaves to the Cape of Good Hope from the Dutch East Indies and other parts of Africa. By the end of the eighteenth century the Cape&#x27;s population swelled to about 26,000 people of European descent and 30,000 slaves.

===British conquest===

In 1795, France occupied the Seven Provinces of the Dutch Republic, the mother country of the Dutch United East India Company. This prompted Great Britain to occupy the Cape Colony in 1795 as a way to better control the seas in order to stop any potential French attempt to reach India. The British sent a fleet of nine warships which anchored at Simon&#x27;s Town and, following the defeat of the VOC militia at the Battle of Muizenberg, took control of the territory. The United East India Company transferred its territories and claims to the Batavian Republic (the Revolutionary period Dutch state) in 1798, and went bankrupt in 1799. Improving relations between Britain and Napoleonic France, and its vassal state the Batavian Republic, led the British to hand the Cape of Good Hope over to the Batavian Republic in 1803, under the terms of the Treaty of Amiens.

In 1806, the Cape, now nominally controlled by the Batavian Republic, was occupied again by the British after their victory in the Battle of Blaauwberg. The temporary peace between the UK and Napoleonic France had crumbled into open hostilities, whilst Napoleon had been strengthening his influence on the Batavian Republic (which Napoleon would subsequently abolish and directly administer later the same year). The British, who set up a colony on 8 January 1806, hoped to keep Napoleon out of the Cape, and to control the Far East trade routes.

The Cape Colony at the time of British occupation was three months&#x27; sailing distance from London. The White colonial population was small, no more than 25,000 in all, scattered across a territory of 100,000 square miles. Most lived in Cape Town and the surrounding farming districts of the Boland, an area favoured with rich soils, a Mediterranean Climate and reliable rainfall. Cape Town had a population of 16,000 people. 
In 1814 the Dutch government formally ceded sovereignty over the Cape to the British, under the terms of the Convention of London.

===British colonisation===
The British started to settle the eastern border of the Cape Colony, with the arrival in Port Elizabeth of the 1820 Settlers. They also began to introduce the first rudimentary rights for the Cape&#x27;s Black African population and, in 1834, abolished slavery; however, the government proved unable to rein in settler violence against the San, which continued largely unabated as it had during the Dutch period. The resentment that the Boers felt against this social change, as well as the imposition of English language and culture, caused them to trek inland en masse. This was known as the Great Trek, and the migrating Boers settled inland, eventually forming the Boer Republics.

British Immigration continued in the Cape, even as many of the Boers continued to trek inland, and the ending of the British East India Company&#x27;s monopoly on trade led to economic growth.

At the same time, the long series of Xhosa Wars fought between the Xhosa people in the east and the government of the Cape Colony as well as Boer settlers finally died down when the Xhosa took part in a mass destruction of their own crops and cattle, in the belief that this would cause their ancestors to wake from the dead. The resulting famine crippled Xhosa country and ushered in a long period of stability on the border.

Peace and prosperity, in addition to the Convict crisis of 1849, led to a desire for political independence. In 1853, the Cape Colony became a British Crown colony with representative government. In 1854, the Cape of Good Hope elected its first parliament, on the basis of the multi-racial Cape Qualified Franchise. Cape residents qualified as voters based on a universal minimum level of property ownership, regardless of race.

Executive power remaining completely in the authority of the British governor did not relieve tensions in the colony between its eastern and western sections.

===Responsible government===
In 1872, after a long political battle, the Cape of Good Hope achieved responsible government under its first Prime Minister, John Molteno. Henceforth, an elected Prime Minister and his cabinet had total responsibility for the affairs of the country. A period of strong economic growth and social development ensued, and the eastern-western division was largely laid to rest. The system of multi-racial franchise also began a slow and fragile growth in political inclusiveness, and ethnic tensions subsided. In 1877, the state expanded by annexing Griqualand West and Griqualand East – that is, the Mount Currie district (Kokstad). The emergence of two Boer mini-republics along the Missionary Road resulted in 1885 in the Warren Expedition, sent to annex the republics of Stellaland and Goshen (lands annexed to British Bechuanaland). Major-General Charles Warren annexed the land south of the Molopo River as the colony of British Bechuanaland and proclaimed a protectorate over the land lying to the North of the river. Vryburg, the capital of Stellaland, became capital of British Bechuanaland, while Mafeking (now Mahikeng), although situated south of the protectorate border, became the protectorate&#x27;s administrative centre. The border between the protectorate and the colony ran along the Molopo and Nossob rivers. In 1895, British Bechuanaland became part of the Cape Colony.

However, the discovery of diamonds around Kimberley and gold in the Transvaal led to a return to instability, particularly because they fuelled the rise to power of the ambitious imperialist Cecil Rhodes. On becoming the Cape&#x27;s Prime Minister in 1890, he instigated a rapid expansion of British influence into the hinterland. In particular, he sought to engineer the conquest of the Transvaal, and although his ill-fated Jameson Raid failed and brought down his government, it led to the Second Boer War and British conquest at the turn of the century. The politics of the colony consequently came to be increasingly dominated by tensions between the British colonists and the Boers. Rhodes also brought in the first formal restrictions on the political rights of the Cape of Good Hope&#x27;s black African citizens.

The Cape of Good Hope remained nominally under British rule until the formation of the Union of South Africa in 1910, when it became the province of the Cape of Good Hope, better known as the Cape Province.

==Governors==
==Districts==

The districts of the colony in 1850 were:
* Clanwilliam
* The Cape
* Stellenbosch
* Zwellendam
* Tulbagh/Worcester
* Beaufort
* George
* Uitenhague
* Albany
* Victoria
* Somerset
* Graaf Reynet
* Colesberg

==Demographics==
Population figures for the 1865, 1875, 1891 and 1904 censuses. Groups marked &quot;nd&quot; are Not Distinguished in the censuses for those years.

* Includes both free Coloured people and Whites

==See also==
* Cape Colonial Forces
* Cape Government Railways
* Cape Qualified Franchise
* Parliament of the Cape of Good Hope

==References==
=== Explanatory notes ===
=== Citations ===
=== General and cited references ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==

* Beck, Roger B. (2000). &quot;The History of South Africa&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood. 
* Davenport, T. R. H., and Christopher Saunders (2000). &quot;South Africa: A Modern History&quot;, 5th ed. New York: St. Martin&#x27;s Press. .
* Elbourne, Elizabeth (2002). &quot;Blood Ground: Colonialism, Missions, and the Contest for Christianity in the Cape Colony and Britain, 1799–1853&quot;. McGill-Queen&#x27;s University Press. 
* Le Cordeur, Basil Alexander (1981). &quot;The War of the Axe, 1847: Correspondence between the governor of the Cape Colony, Sir Henry Pottinger, and the commander of the British forces at the Cape, Sire George Berkeley, and others&quot;. Brenthurst Press. 
* Mabin, Alan (1983). &quot;Recession and its aftermath: The Cape Colony in the eighteen eighties&quot;. University of the Witwatersrand, African Studies Institute.
* Ross, Robert, and David Anderson (1999). &quot;Status and Respectability in the Cape Colony, 1750–1870 : A Tragedy of Manners&quot;. Cambridge University Press. .
* Theal, George McCall (1970). &quot;History of the Boers in South Africa; Or, the Wanderings and Wars of the Emigrant Farmers from Their Leaving the Cape Colony to the Acknowledgment of Their Independence by Great Britain&quot;. Greenwood Press. .
* Van Der Merwe, P.J., Roger B. Beck (1995). &quot;The Migrant Farmer in the History of the Cape Colony&quot;. Ohio University Press. 


== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="4" end="15" title="Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="38" end="55" title="Cape Colony" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="63" end="70" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="71" end="77" title="colony" label="colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="93" end="105" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="122" end="139" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="253" end="274" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q849164" start="292" end="305" title="Cape Province" label="Cape Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="411" end="434" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807130" start="525" end="563" title="Dutch Cape Colony" label="original Dutch colony of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="602" end="632" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company (VOC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188553" start="713" end="729" title="Batavian Republic" label="Batavia Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="776" end="789" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977699" start="809" end="829" title="Invasion of the Cape Colony" label="Battle of Muizenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188553" start="855" end="871" title="Batavian Republic" label="Batavia Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183" start="891" end="907" title="Treaty of Amiens" label="Treaty of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786767" start="957" end="977" title="Battle of Blaauwberg" label="Battle of Blaauwberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q617263" start="1028" end="1054" title="Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814" label="Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1099" end="1113" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="1124" end="1138" title="self-governing" label="self-governing"/>
<link wikidata="Q849164" start="1191" end="1204" title="Cape Province" label="Cape Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1226" end="1240" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q207996" start="1394" end="1399" title="Xhosa people" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130009" start="1414" end="1424" title="Great Fish River" label="Fish River"/>
<link wikidata="Q181475" start="1444" end="1456" title="Orange River" label="Orange River"/>
<link wikidata="Q747314" start="1640" end="1648" title="Bechuanaland Protectorate" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q220843" start="1723" end="1733" title="Walvis Bay" label="Walvis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q187679" start="1742" end="1757" title="Penguin Islands" label="Penguin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="1779" end="1786" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="1837" end="1858" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q849164" start="1900" end="1933" title="Cape Province" label="Province of the Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="1935" end="1947" title="Union of South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q719883" start="1988" end="2010" title="Statute of Westminster 1931" label="Statute of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="2035" end="2059" title="South Africa" label="Republic of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q191093" start="2092" end="2131" title="Provinces of South Africa" label="the present-day South African provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q849164" start="2137" end="2150" title="Cape Province" label="Cape Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q130840" start="2176" end="2188" title="Eastern Cape" label="Eastern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q132418" start="2190" end="2203" title="Northern Cape" label="Northern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q127167" start="2209" end="2221" title="Western Cape" label="Western Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q165956" start="2245" end="2255" title="North West (South African province)" label="North West"/>
<link wikidata="Q294769" start="2333" end="2349" title="Jan van Riebeeck" label="Jan van Riebeeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="2413" end="2430" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q39546" start="2984" end="2989" title="tools" label="tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="2994" end="2999" title="seeds" label="seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="3232" end="3240" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q512443" start="3291" end="3313" title="Edict of Fontainebleau" label="Edict of Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q188201" start="3838" end="3842" title="Boer" label="Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219252" start="4148" end="4171" title="Khoekhoe" label="Khoe-speaking indigenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207996" start="4189" end="4194" title="Xhosa people" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="4304" end="4310" title="slavery" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="4345" end="4362" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="4558" end="4564" title="French First Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="4578" end="4593" title="Dutch Republic" label="Seven Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="4601" end="4615" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="4643" end="4674" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch United East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="4690" end="4703" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807130" start="4718" end="4729" title="Dutch Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="4805" end="4811" title="French First Republic" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="4829" end="4834" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013370" start="4896" end="4913" title="Simon&amp;#x27;s Town" label="Simon&amp;#x27;s Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977699" start="4966" end="4986" title="Invasion of the Cape Colony" label="Battle of Muizenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188553" start="5095" end="5112" title="Batavian Republic" label="Batavian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="5216" end="5223" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="5228" end="5245" title="First French Empire" label="Napoleonic France"/>
<link wikidata="Q188553" start="5272" end="5289" title="Batavian Republic" label="Batavian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183" start="5399" end="5415" title="Treaty of Amiens" label="Treaty of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="5431" end="5435" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q188553" start="5469" end="5486" title="Batavian Republic" label="Batavian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="5514" end="5521" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786767" start="5549" end="5569" title="Battle of Blaauwberg" label="Battle of Blaauwberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="5610" end="5627" title="First French Empire" label="Napoleonic France"/>
<link wikidata="Q188553" start="5724" end="5741" title="Batavian Republic" label="Batavian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="5749" end="5757" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="5835" end="5842" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="5897" end="5905" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="5997" end="6004" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6061" end="6067" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="6073" end="6078" title="White people" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805057" start="6261" end="6267" title="Boland, Western Cape" label="Boland"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="6305" end="6326" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean Climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="6350" end="6359" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="6461" end="6465" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="6473" end="6480" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q617263" start="6505" end="6525" title="Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814" label="Convention of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="6559" end="6566" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q125434" start="6644" end="6658" title="Port Elizabeth" label="Port Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800505" start="6666" end="6679" title="1820 Settlers" label="1820 Settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q173371" start="6759" end="6772" title="Bantu peoples" label="Black African"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821697" start="6798" end="6815" title="abolitionism in the United Kingdom" label="abolished slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="6895" end="6898" title="San people" label="San"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="7060" end="7076" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393277" start="7081" end="7088" title="Culture of England" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q338949" start="7149" end="7159" title="Great Trek" label="Great Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010624" start="7224" end="7238" title="Boer Republics" label="Boer Republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="7358" end="7384" title="East India Company" label="British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q582594" start="7472" end="7482" title="Xhosa Wars" label="Xhosa Wars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7638" end="7684" title="Xhosa Wars#Cattle-killing movement (1856–58)" label="mass destruction of their own crops and cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q125924314" start="7904" end="7918" title="Convict crisis" label="Convict crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55606581" start="8090" end="8118" title="1854 Cape Colony parliamentary election" label="elected its first parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035006" start="8153" end="8177" title="Cape Qualified Franchise" label="Cape Qualified Franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q130840" start="8422" end="8429" title="Eastern Cape" label="eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q127167" start="8434" end="8441" title="Western Cape" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="8553" end="8575" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225775" start="8608" end="8620" title="John Charles Molteno" label="John Molteno"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816604" start="8807" end="8831" title="Eastern Cape Separatist League" label="eastern-western division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547918" start="9030" end="9045" title="Griqualand West" label="Griqualand West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157575" start="9050" end="9065" title="Griqualand East" label="Griqualand East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671256" start="9104" end="9111" title="Kokstad, KwaZulu-Natal" label="Kokstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269234" start="9255" end="9265" title="Stellaland" label="Stellaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145397" start="9270" end="9276" title="Goshen (South Africa)" label="Goshen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530733" start="9295" end="9315" title="British Bechuanaland" label="British Bechuanaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q74338" start="9332" end="9346" title="Charles Warren" label="Charles Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027291" start="9505" end="9512" title="Vryburg, North West" label="Vryburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090584" start="9587" end="9595" title="Siege of Mafeking" label="Mafeking"/>
<link wikidata="Q211055" start="9601" end="9609" title="Mahikeng" label="Mahikeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q125905" start="9914" end="9923" title="Kimberley, Northern Cape" label="Kimberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q550374" start="9940" end="9949" title="South African Republic" label="Transvaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19825" start="10063" end="10075" title="Cecil Rhodes" label="Cecil Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q916340" start="10298" end="10310" title="Jameson Raid" label="Jameson Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="10365" end="10380" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="10782" end="10803" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q849164" start="10887" end="10900" title="Cape Province" label="Cape Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130204" start="11325" end="11333" title="Coloureds" label="Coloured"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034719" start="11368" end="11388" title="Cape Colonial Forces" label="Cape Colonial Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034433" start="11391" end="11415" title="Cape Government Railways" label="Cape Government Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035006" start="11418" end="11442" title="Cape Qualified Franchise" label="Cape Qualified Franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q96314868" start="11445" end="11480" title="Parliament of the Cape of Good Hope" label="Parliament of the Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="12627" end="12653" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947116" start="13017" end="13038" title="Ohio University Press" label="Ohio University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44555" wikidata="Q193619" url="?curid=44555" title="Union of South Africa">
<text>The Union of South Africa (; , ) was the historical predecessor to the present-day Republic of South Africa. It came into existence on 31 May 1910 with the unification of the Cape, Natal, Transvaal, and Orange River colonies. It included the territories that were formerly part of the South African Republic and the Orange Free State.

Following World War I, the Union of South Africa was a signatory of the Treaty of Versailles and became one of the founding members of the League of Nations. It was mandated by the League with the administration of South West Africa (now known as Namibia). South West Africa became treated in most respects as another province of the Union, but it never was formally annexed.

Like Canada, Australia and New Zealand, the Union of South Africa was a self-governing dominion of the British Empire. Its full sovereignty was confirmed with the Balfour Declaration of 1926 and the Statute of Westminster 1931. It was governed under a form of constitutional monarchy, with the Crown being represented by a governor-general. The Union came to an end with the enactment of the constitution of 1961, by which it became a republic and left the Commonwealth of Nations. The Republic of South Africa rejoined the Commonwealth on 1 June 1994.

==Constitution==
===Main features===
The Union of South Africa was a unitary state, rather than a federation like Canada and Australia, with each colony&#x27;s parliaments being abolished and replaced with provincial councils. A bicameral parliament was created, consisting of the House of Assembly and Senate, with members of the parliament being elected mostly by the country&#x27;s white minority. During the course of the Union, the franchise changed on several occasions always to suit the needs of the government of the day. Parliamentary sovereignty was a convention of the constitution, inherited from the United Kingdom; save for procedural safeguards in respect of the entrenched sections of franchise and language, the courts were unable to intervene in Parliament&#x27;s decisions.

===Capitals===

Pretoria was the seat of government, while the Parliament sat in Cape Town and the Appellate Division in Bloemfontein.

===Relationship to the Crown===

The Union initially remained under the British Crown as a self-governing dominion of the British Empire. With the passage of the Statute of Westminster in 1931, the Union and other dominions became equal in status to the United Kingdom, and the Parliament of the United Kingdom could no longer legislate on behalf of them. This had the effect of making the Union and the other dominions &quot;de jure&quot; sovereign nations. The Status of the Union Act, passed by the South African Parliament in 1934, incorporated the applicable portions of the Statute of Westminster into South African law, underscoring its status as a sovereign nation. It removed what remaining authority Whitehall had to legislate for South Africa, as well as any nominal role that the United Kingdom had in granting Royal Assent. The governor-general was now required to sign or veto bills passed by Parliament, without the option of seeking advice from London.

The monarch was represented in South Africa by a governor-general, while effective power was exercised by the Executive Council, headed by the prime minister. Louis Botha, formerly a Boer general, was appointed first prime minister of the Union, heading a coalition representing the white Afrikaner and English-speaking British diaspora communities.

Prosecutions before courts were instituted in the name of the Crown (cited in the format &quot;Rex / Regina v Accused&quot;) and government officials served in the name of the Crown.

===Languages===

An entrenched clause in the Constitution mentioned Dutch and English as official languages of the Union, but the meaning of Dutch was changed by the Official Languages of the Union Act, 1925 to include both Dutch and Afrikaans.

===Final days of the South Africa Act and legacy===

Most English-speaking whites in South Africa supported the United Party of Jan Smuts, which favoured close relations with the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth, unlike the Afrikaans-speaking National Party, which had held anti-British sentiments and was opposed to South Africa&#x27;s intervention in the Second World War. Some Nationalist organisations, like the &quot;Ossewabrandwag&quot;, were openly supportive of Nazi Germany during the Second World War.

Most English-speaking South Africans were opposed to the creation of a republic, many of them voting &quot;no&quot; in the 5 October 1960 referendum. But due to the much larger number of Afrikaans-speaking voters, the referendum passed, leading to the establishment of a republic on 31 May 1961. The government led by the National Party consequently withdrew South Africa from the Commonwealth. Following the results of the referendum, some whites in Natal, which had an English-speaking majority, called for secession from the Union. Five years earlier, some 33,000 Natalians had signed the Natal Covenant in opposition to the plans for a republic.

Subsequently, the National Party government had passed a Constitution that repealed the South Africa Act. The features of the Union were carried over with very little change to the newly formed Republic. The decision to transform from a Union to Republic was narrowly decided in the referendum. The decision together with the South African Government&#x27;s insistence on adhering to its policy of apartheid resulted in South Africa&#x27;s &quot;de facto&quot; expulsion from the Commonwealth of Nations.

===Segregation===

The South Africa Act dealt with race in two specific provisions. First it entrenched the liberal (by South African standards) Cape Qualified Franchise system of the Cape Colony which operated free of any racial considerations (although due to socio-economic restrictions no real political expression of non-whites was possible). The Cape Prime Minister at the time, John X. Merriman, fought hard, but ultimately unsuccessfully, to extend this system of multi-racial franchise to the rest of South Africa.

Second it made &quot;native affairs&quot; a matter for the national government. The practice therefore was to establish a Minister of Native Affairs.

According to Stephen Howe, &quot;colonialism in some cases—most obviously among white minorities in South Africa — meant mainly that these violent settlers wanted to maintain more racial inequalities than the colonial empire found just&quot;.

==Previous attempts at unification==

Several previous unsuccessful attempts to unite the colonies were made, with proposed political models ranging from unitary, to loosely federal.

===Early unification attempt under Sir George Grey (1850s)===

Sir George Grey, the Governor of Cape Colony from 1854 to 1861, decided that unifying the states of southern Africa would be mutually beneficial. The stated reasons were that he believed that political divisions between the white-controlled states &quot;weakened them against the natives&quot;, threatened an ethnic divide between British and Boer, and left the Cape vulnerable to interference from other European powers. He believed that a united &quot;South African Federation&quot;, under British control, would resolve all three of these concerns.

His idea was greeted with cautious optimism in southern Africa; the Orange Free State agreed to the idea in principle and the Transvaal may also eventually have agreed. However, he was overruled by the British Colonial Office which ordered him to desist from his plans. His refusal to abandon the idea eventually led to him being recalled.

===The imposition of confederation (1870s)===

In the 1870s, the London Colonial Office, under Secretary for the Colonies Lord Carnarvon, decided to apply a system of confederation onto southern Africa. On this occasion, however, it was largely rejected by southern Africans, primarily due to its very bad timing. The various component states of southern Africa were still simmering after the last bout of British expansion, and inter-state tensions were high. The Orange Free State this time refused to even discuss the idea, and Prime Minister John Molteno of the Cape Colony called the idea badly informed and irresponsible. In addition, many local leaders resented the way it was imposed from outside without understanding of local issues. The Confederation model was also seen as unsuitable for the disparate entities of southern Africa, with their wildly different sizes, economies and political systems.

The Molteno Unification Plan (1877), put forward by the Cape government as a more feasible unitary alternative to confederation, largely anticipated the final act of Union in 1909. A crucial difference was that the Cape&#x27;s liberal constitution and multiracial franchise were to be extended to the other states of the union. These smaller states would gradually accede to the much larger Cape Colony through a system of treaties, whilst simultaneously gaining elected seats in the Cape parliament. The entire process would be locally driven, with Britain&#x27;s role restricted to policing any set-backs. While subsequently acknowledged to be more viable, this model was rejected at the time by London. At the other extreme, another powerful Cape politician at the time, Saul Solomon, proposed an extremely loose system of federation, with the component states preserving their very different constitutions and systems of franchise.

Lord Carnarvon rejected the (more informed) local plans for unification, as he wished to have the process brought to a conclusion before the end of his tenure and, having little experience of southern Africa, he preferred to enforce the more familiar model of confederation used in Canada. He pushed ahead with his Confederation plan, which unraveled as predicted, leaving a string of destructive wars across southern Africa. These conflicts eventually fed into the first and second Anglo-Boer Wars, with far-reaching consequences for the subcontinent.

===Second Boer War (1899–1902)===

After the discovery of gold in the 1880s, thousands of British immigrants flocked to the gold mines of the Transvaal Republic and the Orange Free State. The newly arrived miners, though needed for the mines, were distrusted by the politically dominant Afrikaners, who called them &quot;uitlanders&quot;, imposed heavy taxes on them and granted them very limited civil rights, with no right to vote. The British government, interested in profiting from the gold and diamond mines there and highly protective of its own citizens, demanded reforms, which the Afrikaners rejected. A small-scale private British effort to overthrow Transvaal&#x27;s President Paul Kruger, the Jameson Raid of 1895, proved a fiasco, and presaged full-scale conflict as diplomatic efforts all failed.

The Second Boer War started on 11 October 1899 and ended on 31 May 1902. The United Kingdom gained the support of its Cape Colony, of its Colony of Natal and of some African allies. Volunteers from across the British Empire further supplemented the British war effort. All other nations remained neutral, but public opinion in them was largely hostile to Britain. Inside Britain and its Empire there was also significant opposition to the Second Boer War, spearheaded by anti-war activists such as Emily Hobhouse.

At the onset of the war, the British were both overconfident about the chances of success in a military confrontation with the Boer republics and underprepared for a long-term conflict. British Prime Minister Lord Salisbury and members of his cabinet, in particular Colonial Secretary Joseph Chamberlain, ignored repeated warnings that Boer forces were more powerful than previous reports had suggested. In the last months of 1899, Boer forces launched the first attacks of the war, besieging the British-held settlements of Ladysmith, Kimberley and Mafeking, and winning several engagements against British troops at Colenso, Magersfontein and Stormberg. However, by the next year the British soon organised an effective response to these attacks, lifting the three sieges and winning several battles against Boer forces. The British, now deploying approximately 400,000 soldiers from across their colonial empire, successfully invaded and occupied the Boer republics. Numerous Boer soldiers refused to surrender and took to the countryside to carry out guerrilla operations against the British, who responded by implementing scorched earth tactics. These tactics included interning Afrikaner civilians from the Boer republics in concentration camps (in which roughly 28,000 people died) and destroying homesteads owned by Afrikaners to flush out the guerillas and deny them a base of civilian support. Using these tactics combined with a system of blockhouses and barriers to seal off Boer holdouts, the British were able to gradually track down and defeat the guerillas. In the 1902 Treaty of Vereeniging, the British formally annexed the Boer republics into the Cape Colony, ending the war.

== History of the Union of South Africa ==

===National Convention===

The National Convention was a constitutional convention held between 1908 and 1909 in Durban (12 October to 5 November 1908), Cape Town (23 November to 18 December 1908, 11 January to 3 February 1909) and Bloemfontein (3 to 11 May 1909). This convention led to the British Parliament&#x27;s adoption of the South Africa Act, which ratified the Union. The four colonies that would become South Africa were represented, along with a delegation from Rhodesia. The 33 delegates assembled behind closed doors, in the fear that a public affair would lead delegates to refuse compromising on contentious areas. The delegates drew up a constitution that would, subject to some amendments by the British government, become the South Africa Act. This was South Africa&#x27;s constitution between 1910 and 1961, when the country became a republic under the Constitution of 1961.

===Union of South Africa and Southern Rhodesia===

In 1922 the colony of Southern Rhodesia had a chance (but ultimately rejected) to join the Union through a referendum. The referendum resulted from the fact that by 1920 British South Africa Company rule in Southern Rhodesia was no longer practical with many favouring some form of &#x27;responsible government&#x27;. Some favoured responsible government within Southern Rhodesia while others (especially in Matabeleland) favoured membership of the Union of South Africa. Politician Sir Charles Coghlan claimed that such membership with the Union would make Southern Rhodesia the &quot;Ulster of South Africa&quot;.

Prior to the referendum, representatives of Southern Rhodesia visited Cape Town where the Prime Minister of South Africa, Jan Smuts, eventually offered terms he considered reasonable and which the United Kingdom government found acceptable. Although opinion among the United Kingdom government, the South African government and the British South Africa Company favoured the union option (and none tried to interfere in the referendum), when the referendum was held the results saw 59.4% in favour of responsible government for a separate colony and 40.6% in favour of joining the Union of South Africa.

===Union of South Africa and South West Africa===

====Background====

The inhospitable coast of what is now the Republic of Namibia remained uncolonised up until the end of the 19th century.

From 1874, the leaders of several indigenous peoples, notably Maharero of the Herero nation, approached the Cape Parliament to the south. Anticipating invasion by a European power and already suffering Portuguese encroachment from the north and Afrikaner encroachment from the south, these leaders approached the Cape Colony government to discuss the possibility of accession and the political representation it would entail. Accession to the Cape Colony, a self-governing state with a system of multi-racial franchise and legal protection for traditional land rights, was at the time considered marginally preferable to annexation by either the Kingdom of Portugal or the German Empire.

In response, the Cape Parliament appointed a special Commission under William Palgrave, to travel to the territory between the Orange and Cunene rivers and to confer with these leaders regarding accession to the Cape. In the negotiations with the Palgrave Commission, some indigenous nations such as the Damara and the Herero responded positively (October 1876), other reactions were mixed. Discussions regarding the magisterial structure for the area&#x27;s political integration into the Cape dragged on until, from 1876, it was blocked by Britain. Britain relented, insofar as allowing the Cape to incorporate Walvis Bay as an exclave, which was brought under the magisterial district of Cape Town, but when the Germans established a protectorate over the area in 1884, South West Africa was predominantly autonomous.

Thereafter, South West Africa became a German colony, except for Walvis Bay and the Offshore Islands which remained part of the Cape, outside of German control.

====South African occupation====

Following the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, the Union of South Africa occupied and annexed the German colony of German South West Africa. With the establishment of the League of Nations and cessation of the war, South Africa obtained a Class C Mandate to administer South West Africa &quot;under the laws of the mandatory (South Africa) as integral portions of its territory&quot;. Subsequently, the Union of South Africa generally regarded South West Africa as a fifth province, although this was never an official status. 

With the creation of the United Nations, the Union applied for the incorporation of South West Africa, but its application was rejected by the U.N., which invited South Africa to prepare a Trusteeship agreement instead. This invitation was in turn rejected by the Union, which subsequently did not modify the administration of South West Africa and continued to adhere to the original mandate. This caused a complex set of legal wranglings that were not finalised when the Union was replaced with the Republic of South Africa. In 1949, the Union passed a law bringing South West Africa into closer association with it including giving South West Africa representation in the South African parliament.

Walvis Bay, which is now in Namibia, was originally a part of the Union of South Africa as an exclave as it was a part of the Cape Colony at the time of Unification. In 1921, Walvis Bay was integrated with the Class C Mandate over South West Africa for the rest of the Union&#x27;s duration and for part of the republican era.

===Statute of Westminster===

The Statute of Westminster passed by the British Parliament in December 1931, which repealed the Colonial Laws Validity Act and implemented the Balfour Declaration 1926, had a profound impact on the constitutional structure and status of the Union. The most notable effect was that the South African Parliament was released from many restrictions concerning the handling of the so-called &quot;native question&quot;. However, the repeal was not sufficient to enable the South African Parliament to ignore the entrenched clauses of its constitution (the South Africa Act) which led to the coloured-vote constitutional crisis of the 1950s wherein the right of coloureds to vote in the main South African Parliament was removed and replaced with a separate, segregated, and largely powerless assembly.
==Military==

The military of the Union of South Africa was the Union Defence Force (UDF) until 1957, when it became the South African Defence Force (SADF).

==Flags/coats of arms==

==See also==
* Basutoland
* Bechuanaland
* South West Africa
* Southern Rhodesia
* Swaziland Protectorate

==Notes==

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Beck, Roger B. &quot;The History of South Africa&quot; (Greenwood, 2000).
* Davenport, Thomas, and Christopher Saunders. &quot;South Africa: A modern history&quot; (Springer, 2000).
* Eze, M. &quot;Intellectual history in contemporary South Africa&quot; (Springer, 2016).
* Ross, Robert. &quot;A Concise History of South Africa&quot; (2009)
* Thompson, Leonard, and Lynn Berat. &quot;A History of South Africa&quot; (4th ed. 2014)
* Thompson, Leonard. &quot;The Unification of South Africa 1902 – 1910&quot; (Oxford UP, 1960).
* Welsh, Frank. &quot;A History of South Africa&quot; (2000).

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="4" end="25" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="83" end="107" title="South Africa" label="Republic of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="175" end="179" title="British Cape Colony" label="Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301901" start="181" end="186" title="Colony of Natal" label="Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187978" start="188" end="197" title="Transvaal Colony" label="Transvaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142179" start="203" end="215" title="Orange River Colony" label="Orange River"/>
<link wikidata="Q550374" start="285" end="307" title="South African Republic" label="South African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q218023" start="316" end="333" title="Orange Free State" label="Orange Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="346" end="357" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="408" end="428" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745501" start="451" end="467" title="Member states of the League of Nations" label="founding members"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="475" end="492" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q426759" start="501" end="509" title="League of Nations mandate" label="mandated"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="551" end="568" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="583" end="590" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="718" end="724" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="726" end="735" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="740" end="751" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="800" end="808" title="dominion" label="dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="816" end="830" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q195559" start="876" end="903" title="Balfour Declaration of 1926" label="Balfour Declaration of 1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q719883" start="912" end="939" title="Statute of Westminster 1931" label="Statute of Westminster 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="973" end="996" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591217" start="1105" end="1125" title="South African Constitution of 1961" label="constitution of 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="1148" end="1156" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1170" end="1193" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1199" end="1223" title="Republic of South Africa" label="Republic of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="1336" end="1349" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="1365" end="1375" title="federation" label="federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252694" start="1473" end="1491" title="provincial council (South Africa)" label="provincial council"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="1496" end="1505" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="1506" end="1516" title="parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993581" start="1548" end="1565" title="House of Assembly (South Africa)" label="House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450034" start="1570" end="1576" title="Senate (South Africa)" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813642" start="1798" end="1823" title="Parliamentary sovereignty" label="Parliamentary sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="2078" end="2086" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185780" start="2125" end="2135" title="Parliament (South Africa)" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="2143" end="2152" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368304" start="2161" end="2179" title="Appellate Division (South Africa)" label="Appellate Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q37701" start="2183" end="2195" title="Bloemfontein" label="Bloemfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="2270" end="2283" title="British monarchy" label="British Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="2304" end="2312" title="dominion" label="dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="2320" end="2334" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q719883" start="2360" end="2382" title="Statute of Westminster (1931)" label="Statute of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604539" start="2661" end="2684" title="Status of the Union Act, 1934" label="Status of the Union Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="3021" end="3033" title="Royal Assent" label="Royal Assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280467" start="3217" end="3233" title="Governor-General of South Africa" label="governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511951" start="3311" end="3325" title="Prime Minister (South Africa)" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q159397" start="3327" end="3338" title="Louis Botha" label="Louis Botha"/>
<link wikidata="Q188201" start="3351" end="3355" title="Boer" label="Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="3457" end="3466" title="Afrikaner" label="Afrikaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q655981" start="3488" end="3504" title="British diaspora in Africa" label="British diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q17990855" start="3723" end="3740" title="entrenched clause" label="entrenched clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="3771" end="3776" title="Dutch (language)" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="3792" end="3809" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079530" start="3869" end="3910" title="Official Languages of the Union Act, 1925" label="Official Languages of the Union Act, 1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812146" start="4061" end="4073" title="United Party (South Africa)" label="United Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q214321" start="4077" end="4086" title="Jan Smuts" label="Jan Smuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="4151" end="4163" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q740718" start="4195" end="4209" title="National Party (South Africa)" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4309" end="4325" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593124" start="4374" end="4388" title="Ossewabrandwag" label="Ossewabrandwag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="4422" end="4434" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4446" end="4462" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="4536" end="4544" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185754" start="4603" end="4613" title="South African republic referendum, 1960" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435643" start="5057" end="5071" title="Natal covenant" label="Natal Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="5173" end="5185" title="Constitution" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593116" start="5204" end="5220" title="South Africa Act 1909" label="South Africa Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="5514" end="5523" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="5596" end="5619" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593116" start="5645" end="5661" title="South Africa Act" label="South Africa Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035006" start="5767" end="5791" title="Cape Qualified Franchise" label="Cape Qualified Franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="5806" end="5817" title="Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="5979" end="5993" title="Prime Minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800483" start="6007" end="6023" title="John X. Merriman" label="John X. Merriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q806991" start="6269" end="6295" title="Minister_of_Bantu_Administration_and_Development,_and_Bantu_Education" label="Minister of Native Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="6696" end="6703" title="unitary (state)" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="6716" end="6723" title="confederation" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q76821" start="6793" end="6804" title="George Grey" label="George Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779605" start="6810" end="6833" title="Governor of Cape Colony" label="Governor of Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q218023" start="7410" end="7427" title="Orange Free State" label="Orange Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187978" start="7468" end="7477" title="Transvaal (colony)" label="Transvaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110907" start="7544" end="7567" title="British Colonial Office" label="British Colonial Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519998" start="7778" end="7804" title="Secretary of State for the Colonies" label="Secretary for the Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q335845" start="7805" end="7819" title="Henry Herbert, 4th Earl of Carnarvon" label="Lord Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="7850" end="7863" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="8029" end="8044" title="southern Africa" label="southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q218023" start="8148" end="8165" title="Orange Free State" label="Orange Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225775" start="8229" end="8241" title="John Molteno" label="John Molteno"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="8249" end="8260" title="Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="8431" end="8444" title="Confederation" label="Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="8509" end="8524" title="southern Africa" label="southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="8686" end="8693" title="unitary (state)" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="8709" end="8722" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="8986" end="8997" title="Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q96314868" start="9079" end="9094" title="Parliament of the Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6354982" start="9369" end="9381" title="Saul Solomon" label="Saul Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="10015" end="10029" title="Anglo-Boer War" label="Anglo-Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q550374" start="10228" end="10246" title="South African Republic" label="Transvaal Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q218023" start="10255" end="10272" title="Orange Free State" label="Orange Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424243" start="10407" end="10416" title="uitlander" label="uitlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q244407" start="10775" end="10786" title="Paul Kruger" label="Paul Kruger"/>
<link wikidata="Q916340" start="10792" end="10804" title="Jameson Raid" label="Jameson Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098647" start="11320" end="11353" title="opposition to the Second Boer War" label="opposition to the Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="11370" end="11388" title="Anti-war movement" label="anti-war activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377789" start="11397" end="11411" title="Emily Hobhouse" label="Emily Hobhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="11623" end="11637" title="Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury" label="Lord Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592915" start="11653" end="11664" title="Unionist government, 1895–1905" label="his cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519998" start="11680" end="11698" title="Secretary of State for the Colonies" label="Colonial Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q315999" start="11699" end="11717" title="Joseph Chamberlain" label="Joseph Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543997" start="11939" end="11948" title="Siege of Ladysmith" label="Ladysmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485913" start="11950" end="11959" title="Siege of Kimberley" label="Kimberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090584" start="11964" end="11972" title="Siege of Mafeking" label="Mafeking"/>
<link wikidata="Q111699632" start="11978" end="12005" title="Black Week" label="winning several engagements"/>
<link wikidata="Q868249" start="12032" end="12039" title="Battle of Colenso" label="Colenso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388058" start="12041" end="12054" title="Battle of Magersfontein" label="Magersfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q431849" start="12059" end="12068" title="Battle of Stormberg" label="Stormberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937193" start="12393" end="12406" title="Boer Commando" label="Boer soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196345" start="12432" end="12455" title="Bittereinder" label="took to the countryside"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="12469" end="12489" title="Guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="12541" end="12555" title="scorched earth" label="scorched earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q55137114" start="12645" end="12664" title="Second Boer War concentration camps" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q927606" start="13000" end="13021" title="Treaty of Vereeniging" label="Treaty of Vereeniging"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="13080" end="13091" title="Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q55648422" start="13185" end="13204" title="National Convention (South Africa)" label="National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720142" start="13211" end="13236" title="Constitutional convention (political custom)" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="13267" end="13273" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="13307" end="13316" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q37701" start="13386" end="13398" title="Bloemfontein" label="Bloemfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="13446" end="13464" title="British parliament" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593116" start="13488" end="13504" title="South Africa Act 1909" label="South Africa Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155572" start="13628" end="13636" title="Company rule in Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="14008" end="14016" title="South Africa" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591217" start="14027" end="14047" title="South African Constitution of 1961" label="Constitution of 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q750583" start="14123" end="14140" title="Southern Rhodesia" label="Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570428" start="14208" end="14218" title="Southern Rhodesia government referendum, 1922" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q918320" start="14271" end="14299" title="British South Africa Company" label="British South Africa Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="14389" end="14411" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266775" start="14509" end="14521" title="Matabeleland" label="Matabeleland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065737" start="14584" end="14603" title="Charles Coghlan (politician)" label="Sir Charles Coghlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="14687" end="14693" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q214321" start="14840" end="14849" title="Jan Smuts" label="Jan Smuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="15435" end="15454" title="Republic of Namibia" label="Republic of Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321588" start="15577" end="15585" title="Maharero" label="Maharero"/>
<link wikidata="Q170088" start="15593" end="15599" title="Herero people" label="Herero"/>
<link wikidata="Q96314868" start="15623" end="15638" title="Parliament of the Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="15717" end="15740" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese encroachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="15760" end="15782" title="Afrikaners" label="Afrikaner encroachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="15828" end="15839" title="Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035006" start="16001" end="16033" title="Cape Qualified Franchise" label="system of multi-racial franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="16161" end="16180" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Kingdom of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="16188" end="16201" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q96314868" start="16221" end="16236" title="Parliament of the Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931878" start="16274" end="16290" title="Palgrave Commission" label="William Palgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q181475" start="16331" end="16337" title="Orange (river)" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q320649" start="16342" end="16354" title="Cunene river" label="Cunene river"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931878" start="16451" end="16470" title="Palgrave Commission" label="Palgrave Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158214" start="16508" end="16514" title="Damara (people)" label="Damara"/>
<link wikidata="Q220843" start="16817" end="16827" title="Walvis Bay" label="Walvis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="16895" end="16904" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="17038" end="17055" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q329618" start="17065" end="17078" title="German colonial empire" label="German colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q220843" start="17091" end="17101" title="Walvis Bay" label="Walvis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q187679" start="17110" end="17126" title="Penguin Islands" label="Offshore Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17252" end="17267" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q153665" start="17345" end="17369" title="German South West Africa" label="German South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="17401" end="17418" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q426759" start="17469" end="17484" title="Class C mandate" label="Class C Mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="17784" end="17798" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q219693" start="17948" end="17959" title="Trusteeship (United Nations)" label="Trusteeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q220843" start="18461" end="18471" title="Walvis Bay" label="Walvis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="18489" end="18496" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="18555" end="18562" title="Enclave and exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q719883" start="18823" end="18845" title="Statute of Westminster 1931" label="Statute of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="18860" end="18878" title="British Parliament" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q769339" start="18916" end="18942" title="Colonial Laws Validity Act" label="Colonial Laws Validity Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q195559" start="18963" end="18987" title="Balfour Declaration 1926" label="Balfour Declaration 1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593116" start="19372" end="19388" title="South Africa Act 1909" label="South Africa Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149235" start="19407" end="19442" title="coloured-vote constitutional crisis" label="coloured-vote constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303895" start="19682" end="19701" title="Union Defence Force (South Africa)" label="Union Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779935" start="19739" end="19766" title="South African Defence Force" label="South African Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340665" start="19816" end="19826" title="Basutoland" label="Basutoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q747314" start="19829" end="19841" title="Bechuanaland Protectorate" label="Bechuanaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="19844" end="19861" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q750583" start="19864" end="19881" title="Southern Rhodesia" label="Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q902521" start="19884" end="19906" title="Swaziland Protectorate" label="Swaziland Protectorate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44557" wikidata="Q849164" url="?curid=44557" title="Cape Province">
<text>The Province of the Cape of Good Hope (), commonly referred to as the Cape Province () and colloquially as The Cape (), was a province in the Union of South Africa and subsequently the Republic of South Africa. It encompassed the old Cape Colony, as well as Walvis Bay, and had Cape Town as its capital. In 1994, the Cape Province was divided into the new Eastern Cape, Northern Cape and Western Cape provinces, along with part of the North West.

==History==
When the Union of South Africa was formed in 1910, the original Cape Colony was renamed the Cape Province.

It was by far the largest of South Africa&#x27;s four provinces, as it contained regions it had previously annexed, such as British Bechuanaland (not to be confused with the Bechuanaland Protectorate, now Botswana), Griqualand East (the area around Kokstad) and Griqualand West (area around Kimberley). As a result, it encompassed two-thirds of South Africa&#x27;s territory, and covered an area of approximately .

At the time of the formation of the Union of South Africa, South Africa consisted of four provinces: Transvaal (previously the South African Republic), Natal, Orange Free State and the Cape Province.

===Cape Franchise===

Before union, the Cape Colony had traditionally implemented a system of non-racial franchise, whereby qualifications for suffrage were applied equally to all males, regardless of race. During the union negotiations, the Cape Prime Minister, John X. Merriman fought unsuccessfully to extend this multi-racial franchise system to the rest of South Africa. This failed, as it was strongly opposed by the former Boer Republics which were determined to entrench white rule. 
After union, the Cape Province was permitted to keep a restricted version of its multi-racial qualified franchise, and thus became the only province where Coloureds (mixed-race people) and Black Africans could vote.

Over the following years, successive acts were passed to erode this colour-blind voters roll. 
In 1931, the restricting franchise qualifications were removed for white voters, but kept for Black and Coloured voters. In 1956, the Apartheid government removed all remaining suffrage rights for &quot;non-whites&quot;. The government had to appoint many extra senators in parliament to force through this change.

===Partitioning under Apartheid===
During the apartheid era, so-called &quot;bantustans&quot; or homelands for the different Bantu nations were carved out of the existing provinces as part of the policy of perpetuating white control over South Africa. These became known as the four independent TBVC States and the six Non-Independent Homelands.

In the Cape Province, the Transkei (1976) and Ciskei (1981) regions were declared independent of South Africa. Griqualand East was transferred to Natal Province after Transkei was declared independent, since it was cut off from the rest of the province. With the 1994 adoption of the Interim Constitution, these homelands were re-incorporated into South Africa, both part of the new Eastern Cape province.

===Post-apartheid===
After the first fully democratic elections in April 1994, the Transkei and Ciskei bantustans were reunited with Cape Province, then the country was divided into what are now the current nine provinces of South Africa. Cape Province was broken up into three smaller provinces: the Western Cape, Eastern Cape and Northern Cape. Parts of it were also absorbed into the North West. Walvis Bay, a territory of the original Cape Colony, had been ceded to Namibia two months earlier.

==Districts in 1991==
Districts of the province and population at the 1991 census. 

==Administrators==
== See also ==
* Provinces of South Africa

==References==
==External links==
*A history of the Cape Province
*Archives kept at Cape Town 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q849164" start="4" end="37" title="Cape Province" label="Province of the Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q849164" start="70" end="83" title="Cape Province" label="Cape Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q849164" start="107" end="115" title="Cape Province" label="The Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q191093" start="126" end="134" title="Provinces of South Africa" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="142" end="163" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="185" end="209" title="Republic of South Africa" label="Republic of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="234" end="245" title="British Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q220843" start="258" end="268" title="Walvis Bay" label="Walvis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="278" end="287" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q130840" start="356" end="368" title="Eastern Cape" label="Eastern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q132418" start="370" end="383" title="Northern Cape" label="Northern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q127167" start="388" end="400" title="Western Cape" label="Western Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q165956" start="435" end="445" title="North West (South African province)" label="North West"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="469" end="490" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="524" end="535" title="British Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530733" start="692" end="712" title="British Bechuanaland" label="British Bechuanaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q747314" start="742" end="767" title="Bechuanaland Protectorate" label="Bechuanaland Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="773" end="781" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157575" start="784" end="799" title="Griqualand East" label="Griqualand East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671256" start="817" end="824" title="Kokstad, KwaZulu-Natal" label="Kokstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547918" start="830" end="845" title="Griqualand West" label="Griqualand West"/>
<link wikidata="Q125905" start="859" end="868" title="Kimberley, Northern Cape" label="Kimberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="1020" end="1041" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q190959" start="1085" end="1094" title="Transvaal Province" label="Transvaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q550374" start="1111" end="1133" title="South African Republic" label="South African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q917867" start="1136" end="1141" title="Natal Province" label="Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971200" start="1143" end="1160" title="Orange Free State (province)" label="Orange Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="1225" end="1236" title="British Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800483" start="1448" end="1464" title="John X. Merriman" label="John X. Merriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1547" end="1559" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869224" start="1664" end="1674" title="white rule" label="white rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130204" start="1832" end="1840" title="Coloured" label="Coloured"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="2123" end="2132" title="Apartheid" label="Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450034" start="2251" end="2259" title="Senate of South Africa" label="senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="2351" end="2360" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190354" start="2382" end="2392" title="bantustans" label="bantustans"/>
<link wikidata="Q190354" start="2600" end="2611" title="TBVC States" label="TBVC States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2624" end="2649" title="Bantustan#Self-governing entities" label="Non-Independent Homelands"/>
<link wikidata="Q466551" start="2678" end="2686" title="Transkei" label="Transkei"/>
<link wikidata="Q379042" start="2698" end="2704" title="Ciskei" label="Ciskei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157575" start="2763" end="2778" title="Griqualand East" label="Griqualand East"/>
<link wikidata="Q917867" start="2798" end="2812" title="Natal Province" label="Natal Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591169" start="2936" end="2956" title="Interim Constitution (South Africa)" label="Interim Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q130840" start="3035" end="3047" title="Eastern Cape" label="Eastern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q191093" start="3271" end="3296" title="provinces of South Africa" label="provinces of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q127167" start="3360" end="3372" title="Western Cape" label="Western Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q130840" start="3374" end="3386" title="Eastern Cape" label="Eastern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q132418" start="3391" end="3404" title="Northern Cape" label="Northern Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q165956" start="3446" end="3456" title="North West (South African province)" label="North West"/>
<link wikidata="Q220843" start="3458" end="3468" title="Walvis Bay" label="Walvis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143371" start="3520" end="3525" title="Cession" label="ceded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="3529" end="3536" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191093" start="3679" end="3704" title="Provinces of South Africa" label="Provinces of South Africa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44561" wikidata="Q597164" url="?curid=44561" title="ISO/IEC 8859-15">
<text>ISO/IEC 8859-15:1999, &quot;Information technology — 8-bit single-byte coded graphic character sets — Part 15: Latin alphabet No. 9&quot;, is part of the ISO/IEC 8859 series of ASCII-based standard character encodings, first edition published in 1999. It is informally referred to as Latin-9 (and for a while Latin-0). It is similar to ISO 8859-1, and thus also intended for “Western European” languages, but replaces some less common symbols with the euro sign and some letters that were deemed necessary.

ISO-8859-15 is the IANA preferred charset name for this standard when supplemented with the C0 and C1 control codes from ISO/IEC 6429.

Microsoft has assigned code page 28605 a.k.a. Windows-28605 to ISO-8859-15. IBM has assigned code page 923 (CCSID 923) to ISO 8859-15.

All the printable characters from both ISO/IEC 8859-1 and ISO/IEC 8859-15 are also found in Windows-1252. Since October 2016, less than 0.1% (actually currently less than 0.02%) of all web sites use ISO-8859-15.

==History==
The identifier ISO 8859-15 was proposed for the Sami languages in 1996, which was eventually rejected, but was passed as ISO-IR 197.

ISO 8859-16 was proposed as a similar encoding to today&#x27;s ISO 8859-15, to replace 11 unused or rarely used ISO 8859-1 characters with the missing French Œ œ (at the same spot as same place as DEC-MCS and Lotus International Character Set) and Ÿ (which was not at the same place as these sets, as Ý was in that spot for Icelandic), Dutch Ĳ ĳ, and Turkish Ğ ğ İ ı Ş ş. The euro sign did not exist at the time.

The draft was as follows:

The name was later changed to ISO-8859-0 and was restructured by 1997. The Turkish characters were removed because it was considered that it would potentially do more harm to Turkish then-current practice while UCS (Unicode) implementation was not that far away, and the Dutch &quot;IJ&quot; ligature was removed as the existing digraph &quot;ij&quot; was found to be adequate. It was also considered to add the Welsh Ŵ ŵ and Ŷ ŷ, but that was postponed pending further investigation. 4 unused or rarely used ISO 8859-1 characters (, , , and ) were replaced with , , , and respectively. became necessary when the euro was introduced. is needed so that French text can be converted from lower-case to all-caps and back again without loss, and and are French ligatures. Ironically, the last three had already been present in DEC&#x27;s Multinational Character Set (MCS) in 1983, a character set from which ECMA-94 (1985) and ISO-8859-1 (1987) were derived. Since their original codepoints were now occupied by other characters, less logical codepoints had to be chosen for their reintroduction.

The same proposal also recommended replacing 6 more characters (, , , , , ) with &quot;some other characters to cover a maximum of languages&quot;. The reasons for choosing these characters was stated in the proposal.
For the euro sign, some wanted to replace the plus–minus sign instead of the currency sign. The currency sign is used in some applications as a field separator and in some others to indicate . There was strong opposition to this. One person said &quot;The proposed «+-» is not an adequate fall-back, as this sequence, though rarely used, has already a fixed mathematical meaning, quite different from «±»; and, even if a reader would deduce the intended meaning, «±», from the context, «+-» in lieu of «±» will hurt a physicist&#x27;s æsthetic feelings at least as much as «oe» in lieu of an o-e ligature a Francophone&#x27;s.&quot;
In the end, was kept, and was removed (as originally planned).

Circa 1997/1998 (when Windows-1252 was updated) four characters were selected: , , , and , which are used in Finnish and Estonian for the transliteration of Russian loanwords and names. The proposal was renamed to ISO 8859-15 at the same time. In the end the characters , , , and were removed, while was kept because it was more common than the other four.

There were attempts to make ISO 8859-15 the default character set for 8-bit communication, but it was never able to supplant the popular ISO 8859-1. It did see some use as the default character set for the text console and terminal programs under Linux when the euro sign was needed, but the use of full Unicode was not practical, but this has since been replaced with UTF-8.

==Coverage==
ISO 8859-15 encodes what it refers to as &quot;Latin alphabet no. 9&quot;. This character set is used throughout the Americas, Western Europe, Oceania, and much of Africa. It is also commonly used in most standard romanizations of East-Asian languages.

Each character is encoded as a single eight-bit code value. These code values can be used in almost any data interchange system to communicate in the following languages:

; Modern languages with complete coverage of their alphabet:
*Afrikaans
*Albanian
*Breton
*Catalan
*Danish
*Dutch

*English
*Estonian
*Faroese
*Finnish
*French
*Galician

*German (missing uppercase ẞ)
*Icelandic
*Irish
*Italian
*Latin
*Luxembourgish

*Malay
*Norwegian
*Occitan
*Portuguese
*Rhaeto-Romanic
*Rotokas
*Scottish Gaelic

*Swedish
*Tagalog
*Walloon
*Scots
*Spanish
*Swahili
;Notes
===Coverage of punctuation signs and apostrophes===
For some languages listed above, the correct typographical quotation marks are missing, since only «, », &quot;, and &#x27; are included.

Also, this encoding does not provide the correct character for the apostrophe, and oriented single high quotation marks, although some texts use the spacing grave accent and spacing acute accent, which are both part of ISO 8859-1, instead of the 6-shaped/9-shaped quotations marks or apostrophes (and this works reliably with some font styles, where all these characters are displayed as slanted wedge glyphs).

==Codepage layout==
Differences from ISO-8859-1 have the Unicode code point shown underneath the character.
==Aliases==
ISO 8859-15 also has the following, vendor-specific aliases:
* WE8ISO8859P15 (Oracle database)

==See also==
*Western Latin character sets (computing)
*DIN 91379 Unicode subset for Europe

==References==
==External links==
*ISO/IEC 8859-15:1999 - 8-bit single-byte coded graphic character sets, Part 15: Latin alphabet No. 9 (published March 15, 1999)
*ISO/IEC 8859-15 &quot;(final committee draft dated August 1, 1997)&quot;
*ISO Latin 9 as compared with ISO Latin 1
*ISO-IR 203 European supplementary Latin set &quot;(September 16, 1998)&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q597164" start="0" end="20" title="ISO/IEC 8859-15" label="ISO/IEC 8859-15:1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q221738" start="154" end="166" title="ISO/IEC 8859" label="ISO/IEC 8859"/>
<link wikidata="Q184759" start="198" end="216" title="character encoding" label="character encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q597164" start="284" end="291" title="ISO/IEC 8859-15" label="Latin-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q597164" start="309" end="316" title="ISO/IEC 8859-15" label="Latin-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q935289" start="336" end="346" title="ISO/IEC 8859-1" label="ISO 8859-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18100" start="452" end="461" title="euro sign" label="euro sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q597164" start="508" end="519" title="ISO/IEC 8859-15" label="ISO-8859-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q242540" start="527" end="531" title="Internet Assigned Numbers Authority" label="IANA"/>
<link wikidata="Q718147" start="600" end="623" title="C0 and C1 control codes" label="C0 and C1 control codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q760000" start="629" end="641" title="ISO/IEC 6429" label="ISO/IEC 6429"/>
<link wikidata="Q597164" start="667" end="682" title="ISO/IEC 8859-15" label="code page 28605"/>
<link wikidata="Q597164" start="690" end="703" title="ISO/IEC 8859-15" label="Windows-28605"/>
<link wikidata="Q597164" start="737" end="750" title="ISO/IEC 8859-15" label="code page 923"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009716" start="752" end="757" title="CCSID" label="CCSID"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736131" start="872" end="884" title="Windows-1252" label="Windows-1252"/>
<link wikidata="Q56463" start="1053" end="1067" title="Sami languages" label="Sami languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614183" start="1126" end="1136" title="ISO-IR 197" label="ISO-IR 197"/>
<link wikidata="Q935289" start="1251" end="1261" title="ISO 8859-1" label="ISO 8859-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152919" start="1336" end="1343" title="DEC-MCS" label="DEC-MCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454447" start="1348" end="1381" title="Lotus International Character Set" label="Lotus International Character Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="1992" end="1997" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q935289" start="2089" end="2099" title="ISO 8859-1" label="ISO 8859-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="2193" end="2197" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="2403" end="2406" title="DEC (company)" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152919" start="2414" end="2441" title="Multinational Character Set" label="Multinational Character Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q221738" start="2484" end="2491" title="ECMA-94" label="ECMA-94"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021669" start="3036" end="3051" title="Delimiter-separated values" label="field separator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736131" start="3611" end="3623" title="Windows-1252" label="Windows-1252"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="3698" end="3705" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="3710" end="3718" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="3727" end="3742" title="transliteration" label="transliteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="3746" end="3753" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="4251" end="4258" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q193537" start="4316" end="4321" title="UTF-8" label="UTF-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="4384" end="4398" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="4454" end="4462" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="4464" end="4478" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="4480" end="4487" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="4501" end="4507" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="4825" end="4834" title="Afrikaans language" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="4836" end="4844" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="4846" end="4852" title="Breton language" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="4854" end="4861" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="4863" end="4869" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="4871" end="4876" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="4879" end="4886" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="4888" end="4896" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25258" start="4898" end="4905" title="Faroese language" label="Faroese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="4907" end="4914" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4916" end="4922" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="4924" end="4932" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="4935" end="4941" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="4961" end="4962" title="ß" label="ẞ"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="4965" end="4974" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="4976" end="4981" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="4983" end="4990" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4992" end="4997" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051" start="4999" end="5012" title="Luxembourgish language" label="Luxembourgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="5015" end="5020" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="5022" end="5031" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="5033" end="5040" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="5042" end="5052" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q13199" start="5054" end="5068" title="Romansh language" label="Rhaeto-Romanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312652" start="5070" end="5077" title="Rotokas alphabet" label="Rotokas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="5079" end="5094" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="5097" end="5104" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="5106" end="5113" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q34219" start="5115" end="5122" title="Walloon language" label="Walloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="5124" end="5129" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="5131" end="5138" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="5140" end="5147" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5266" end="5280" title="Quotation mark#Table" label="quotation mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q935289" start="5795" end="5805" title="ISO-8859-1" label="ISO-8859-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q185524" start="5956" end="5971" title="Oracle database" label="Oracle database"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988014" start="5988" end="6028" title="Western Latin character sets (computing)" label="Western Latin character sets (computing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q101208709" start="6030" end="6039" title="DIN 91379" label="DIN 91379"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44563" wikidata="Q2276335" url="?curid=44563" title="Graphics suite">
<text>A graphics suite is a software suite for graphics work that are distributed together. The programs are usually able to interact with each other on a higher level than the operating system would normally allow.

There is no hard, fast rule regarding the programs to be included in a graphics application suite, but most will include at least a bitmap graphics editor and a vector graphics editor. In addition to these, the suite may contain VRML editors, animation editors, and morphing tools.

== See also ==
*Adobe graphics suite
*CorelDRAW Graphics Suite
*Microsoft Expression Studio

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2276335" start="2" end="16" title="Graphics suite" label="graphics suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143070" start="22" end="36" title="software suite" label="software suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027879" start="41" end="49" title="graphics" label="graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="171" end="187" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351962" start="343" end="365" title="bitmap graphics editor" label="bitmap graphics editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155404" start="372" end="394" title="vector graphics editor" label="vector graphics editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q176061" start="440" end="444" title="VRML" label="VRML"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="454" end="463" title="animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="510" end="530" title="Adobe Systems#Products" label="Adobe graphics suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q142371" start="532" end="556" title="CorelDRAW Graphics Suite" label="CorelDRAW Graphics Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q688988" start="558" end="585" title="Microsoft Expression Studio" label="Microsoft Expression Studio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44564" wikidata="Q2351962" url="?curid=44564" title="Raster graphics editor">
<text>A raster graphics editor (also called bitmap graphics editor) is a computer program that allows users to create and edit images interactively on the computer screen and save them in one of many raster graphics file formats (also known as bitmap images) such as JPEG, PNG, and GIF.

== Comparison to vector graphic editors ==
Vector graphics editors are often contrasted with raster graphics editors, yet their capabilities complement each other. The technical difference between vector and raster editors stem from the difference between vector and raster images. Vector graphics are created mathematically, using geometric formulas. Each element is created and manipulated numerically; essentially using Cartesian coordinates for the placement of key points, and then a mathematical algorithm to connect the dots and define the colors.

Raster images include digital photos. A raster image is made up of rows and columns of dots, called pixels, and is generally more photo-realistic. This is the standard form for digital cameras; whether it be a .raw file or .jpg file, the concept is the same. The image is represented pixel by pixel, like a microscopic jigsaw puzzle.

Vector editors tend to be better suited for graphic design, page layout, typography, logos, sharp-edged artistic illustrations, &quot;e.g.&quot;, cartoons, clip art, complex geometric patterns, technical illustrations, diagramming and flowcharting.

Advanced raster editors, like GIMP and Adobe Photoshop, use vector methods (mathematics) for general layout and elements such as text, but are equipped to deal with raster images down to the pixel and often have special capabilities in doing so, such as brightness/contrast, and even adding &quot;lighting&quot; to a raster image or photograph.

== Popular editors ==
* Adobe Photoshop: Industry standard for photography, design, and digital art
* GIMP: Free, open-source alternative with similar features to Photoshop
* Corel Painter: Focuses on digital painting with traditional art simulation
* Affinity Photo: Professional-grade tools with a one-time purchase model
* Procreate(iOS): Popular app for digital painting on iPad
* Krita : A popular software for Windows.

== Common features ==
* Select a region for editing
* Draw lines with simulated brushes of different color, size, shape and pressure
* Fill a region with a single color, gradient of colors, or a texture
* Select a color using different color models, &quot;e.g.&quot;, RGB, HSV, or by using a color dropper
* Edit and convert between various color models.
* Add typed letters in various font styles
* Remove imperfections from photo images
* Composite editing using layers
* Apply filters for effects including sharpening and blurring
* Convert between various image file formats

== See also ==
* Comparison of raster graphics editors
* Vector graphics editor
* Texture mapping
* Text editor
* 3D modeling

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2351962" start="2" end="24" title="Raster graphics editor" label="raster graphics editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351962" start="38" end="60" title="Raster graphics editor" label="bitmap graphics editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="67" end="83" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="105" end="111" title="Computer graphics" label="create"/>
<link wikidata="Q545981" start="116" end="120" title="image editing" label="edit"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="194" end="209" title="raster graphics" label="raster graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572121" start="210" end="222" title="Image file formats" label="file formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194708" start="238" end="244" title="bitmap" label="bitmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195" start="261" end="265" title="JPEG" label="JPEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q178051" start="267" end="270" title="Portable Network Graphics" label="PNG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192" start="276" end="279" title="GIF" label="GIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155404" start="325" end="347" title="Vector graphics editor" label="Vector graphics editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="564" end="579" title="Vector graphics" label="Vector graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="614" end="623" title="Geometry" label="geometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q976981" start="624" end="631" title="formula" label="formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="705" end="726" title="Cartesian coordinate system" label="Cartesian coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q173095" start="860" end="874" title="Digital photography" label="digital photos"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="938" end="943" title="pixel" label="pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q939559" start="968" end="983" title="Photorealism" label="photo-realistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q62927" start="1015" end="1029" title="digital camera" label="digital camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q654383" start="1048" end="1052" title="Raw image format" label=".raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195" start="1061" end="1065" title="JPEG" label=".jpg"/>
<link wikidata="Q185925" start="1217" end="1231" title="graphic design" label="graphic design"/>
<link wikidata="Q868954" start="1233" end="1244" title="page layout" label="page layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q159964" start="1246" end="1256" title="typography" label="typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886349" start="1258" end="1262" title="logo" label="logo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178659" start="1286" end="1298" title="illustration" label="illustration"/>
<link wikidata="Q627603" start="1319" end="1326" title="cartoon" label="cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q857780" start="1367" end="1389" title="technical illustration" label="technical illustration"/>
<link wikidata="Q959962" start="1392" end="1399" title="diagram" label="diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q185092" start="1408" end="1417" title="flowchart" label="flowchart"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038" start="1453" end="1457" title="GIMP" label="GIMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="1462" end="1477" title="Adobe Photoshop" label="Adobe Photoshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="1793" end="1808" title="Adobe Photoshop" label="Adobe Photoshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038" start="1871" end="1875" title="GIMP" label="GIMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070296" start="1944" end="1957" title="Corel Painter" label="Corel Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23302620" start="2021" end="2035" title="Affinity Photo" label="Affinity Photo"/>
<link wikidata="Q65072923" start="2095" end="2104" title="Procreate (software)" label="Procreate"/>
<link wikidata="Q604945" start="2154" end="2159" title="Krita" label="Krita"/>
<link wikidata="Q753651" start="2219" end="2225" title="selection (user interface)" label="Select"/>
<link wikidata="Q17039097" start="2365" end="2383" title="Image gradient" label="gradient of colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q166194" start="2463" end="2466" title="RGB color model" label="RGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q376492" start="2468" end="2471" title="HSL and HSV" label="HSV"/>
<link wikidata="Q375580" start="2487" end="2500" title="Color tool" label="color dropper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294018" start="2536" end="2547" title="color model" label="color model"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="2581" end="2585" title="typeface" label="font"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278631" start="2660" end="2666" title="Layers (digital image editing)" label="layers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572121" start="2755" end="2773" title="image file formats" label="image file formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438334" start="2792" end="2829" title="Comparison of raster graphics editors" label="Comparison of raster graphics editors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155404" start="2832" end="2854" title="Vector graphics editor" label="Vector graphics editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q752176" start="2857" end="2872" title="Texture mapping" label="Texture mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q131212" start="2875" end="2886" title="Text editor" label="Text editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q568742" start="2889" end="2900" title="3D modeling" label="3D modeling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44565" wikidata="Q1155404" url="?curid=44565" title="Vector graphics editor">
<text>A vector graphic editor is a computer program that enables its users to create, compose and edit images with the use of mathematical and geometrical commands rather than individual pixels. This software is used in creating high-definition vector graphic images that can be scaled indefinitely without losing their quality. The output is saved in vector graphic formats, such as EPS, ODG, or SVG.

==Vector editors versus bitmap editors==
Vector editors are often contrasted with bitmap editors, and their capabilities complement each other. Vector editors are often better for page layout, typography, logos, sharp-edged artistic illustrations (e.g. cartoons, clip art, complex geometric patterns), technical illustrations, diagramming and flowcharting. Bitmap editors are more suitable for retouching, photo processing, photorealistic illustrations, collage, and illustrations drawn by hand with a pen tablet. Recent versions of bitmap editors such as GIMP and Adobe Photoshop support vector tools (e.g. editable paths), and vector editors have adopted raster effects that were once limited to bitmap editors (e.g. blurring).

==Specialized features==
Some vector editors support animation, while others (e.g. Synfig Studio) are specifically geared towards producing animated graphics. Generally, vector graphics are more suitable for animation, though there are raster-based animation tools as well. 

3D computer graphics software such as Maya, Blender or Autodesk 3ds Max can also be thought of as an extension of the traditional 2D vector editors, as they share some common concepts and tools.

==See also==
* Vector graphics
*Comparison of vector graphics editors
*Raster graphics editor
*Image editing
*Graphics
*MetaPost
== References ==
== External links ==
*Bitmap and Vector Graphics Explained
*Edit SVG Images Online
*App Vector Graphics</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1155404" start="2" end="23" title="Vector graphics editor" label="vector graphic editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="29" end="45" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="239" end="253" title="Vector graphics" label="vector graphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q478798" start="254" end="259" title="image" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047541" start="378" end="381" title="Encapsulated PostScript" label="EPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q184473" start="383" end="386" title="OpenDocument" label="ODG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078" start="391" end="394" title="Scalable Vector Graphics" label="SVG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351962" start="479" end="493" title="bitmap graphics editor" label="bitmap editors"/>
<link wikidata="Q868954" start="577" end="588" title="page layout" label="page layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q159964" start="590" end="600" title="typography" label="typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886349" start="602" end="606" title="logo" label="logo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178659" start="630" end="642" title="illustration" label="illustration"/>
<link wikidata="Q627603" start="650" end="658" title="cartoons" label="cartoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101796" start="660" end="668" title="clip art" label="clip art"/>
<link wikidata="Q857780" start="699" end="721" title="technical illustration" label="technical illustration"/>
<link wikidata="Q959962" start="724" end="731" title="diagram" label="diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q185092" start="740" end="752" title="flow chart" label="flowcharting"/>
<link wikidata="Q939559" start="821" end="835" title="photorealistic" label="photorealistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170593" start="851" end="858" title="collage" label="collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q189414" start="899" end="909" title="pen tablet" label="pen tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038" start="953" end="957" title="GIMP" label="GIMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q129793" start="962" end="977" title="Photoshop" label="Adobe Photoshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="1181" end="1190" title="animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q599608" start="1211" end="1224" title="Synfig Studio" label="Synfig Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="1268" end="1285" title="animated graphics" label="animated graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="1404" end="1424" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q272597" start="1442" end="1446" title="Maya (software)" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q173136" start="1448" end="1455" title="Blender (software)" label="Blender"/>
<link wikidata="Q212324" start="1459" end="1475" title="3D Studio Max" label="Autodesk 3ds Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="1615" end="1630" title="Vector graphics" label="Vector graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438315" start="1632" end="1669" title="Comparison of vector graphics editors" label="Comparison of vector graphics editors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351962" start="1671" end="1693" title="Raster graphics editor" label="Raster graphics editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q545981" start="1695" end="1708" title="Image editing" label="Image editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027879" start="1710" end="1718" title="Graphics" label="Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265836" start="1720" end="1728" title="MetaPost" label="MetaPost"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44568" wikidata="Q59099" url="?curid=44568" title="Herbivore">
<text>A herbivore is an animal anatomically and physiologically evolved to feed on plants, especially upon vascular tissues such as foliage, fruits or seeds, as the main component of its diet. These more broadly also encompass animals that eat non-vascular autotrophs such as mosses, algae and lichens, but do not include those feeding on decomposed plant matters (i.e. detritivores) or macrofungi (i.e. fungivores).

As a result of their plant-based diet, herbivorous animals typically have mouth structures (jaws or mouthparts) well adapted to mechanically break down plant materials, and their digestive systems have special enzymes (e.g. amylase and cellulase) to digest polysaccharides. Grazing herbivores such as horses and cattles have wide flat-crowned teeth that are better adapted for grinding grass, tree bark and other tougher lignin-containing materials, and many of them evolved rumination or cecotropic behaviors to better extract nutrients from plants. A large percentage of herbivores also have mutualistic gut flora made up of bacteria and protozoans that help to degrade the cellulose in plants, whose heavily cross-linking polymer structure makes it far more difficult to digest than the protein- and fat-rich animal tissues that carnivores eat.

==Etymology==
Herbivore is the anglicized form of a modern Latin coinage, &quot;herbivora&quot;, cited in Charles Lyell&#x27;s 1830 &quot;Principles of Geology&quot;. Richard Owen employed the anglicized term in an 1854 work on fossil teeth and skeletons. &quot;Herbivora&quot; is derived from Latin &quot;herba&quot; &#x27;small plant, herb&#x27; and &quot;vora&quot;, from &quot;vorare&quot; &#x27;to eat, devour&#x27;.

==Definition and related terms==
Herbivory is a form of consumption in which an organism principally eats autotrophs such as plants, algae and photosynthesizing bacteria. More generally, organisms that feed on autotrophs in general are known as primary consumers.
Herbivory is usually limited to animals that eat plants. Insect herbivory can cause a variety of physical and metabolic alterations in the way the host plant interacts with itself and other surrounding biotic factors. Fungi, bacteria, and protists that feed on living plants are usually termed plant pathogens (plant diseases), while fungi and microbes that feed on dead plants are described as saprotrophs. Flowering plants that obtain nutrition from other living plants are usually termed parasitic plants. There is, however, no single exclusive and definitive ecological classification of consumption patterns; each textbook has its own variations on the theme.

==Evolution of herbivory==

The understanding of herbivory in geological time comes from three sources: fossilized plants, which may preserve evidence of defence (such as spines), or herbivory-related damage; the observation of plant debris in fossilised animal faeces; and the construction of herbivore mouthparts.

Although herbivory was long thought to be a Mesozoic phenomenon, fossils have shown that plants were being consumed by arthropods within less than 20 million years after the first land plants evolved. Insects fed on the spores of early Devonian plants, and the Rhynie chert also provides evidence that organisms fed on plants using a &quot;pierce and suck&quot; technique.

During the next 75 million years, plants evolved a range of more complex organs, such as roots and seeds. There is no evidence of any organism being fed upon until the middle-late Mississippian, . There was a gap of 50 to 100 million years between the time each organ evolved and the time organisms evolved to feed upon them; this may be due to the low levels of oxygen during this period, which may have suppressed evolution. Further than their arthropod status, the identity of these early herbivores is uncertain. Hole feeding and skeletonization are recorded in the early Permian, with surface fluid feeding evolving by the end of that period.

Herbivory among four-limbed terrestrial vertebrates, the tetrapods, developed in the Late Carboniferous (307–299 million years ago). The oldest known herbivorous tetrapod is Desmatodon hesperis, belonging to the clade Diadectidae. Early anamniotic tetrapods were feeding on other aquatic vertebrates and invertebrates, and some amphibians would also evolve into terrestrial carnivores. The first amniotes were insectivores due to their small size, but later forms were larger and carnivious, before some eventually adated to a herbivorous lifestyle. In addiction to Diadectidae, four other tetrapod clades independently evolved adaptations towards herbivory from the Late Carboniferous to early Permian; the Captorhinidae, the parareptilian Bolosauridae, and the two synapsid clades Edaphosauridae and Caseidae. The entire dinosaur order ornithischia, which existed during Jurassic and Cretaceous, was composed of herbivorous dinosaurs. Carnivory was a natural transition from insectivory for medium and large tetrapods, requiring minimal adaptation. In contrast, a complex set of adaptations was necessary for feeding on highly fibrous plant materials.

Arthropods evolved herbivory in four phases, changing their approach to it in response to changing plant communities. Tetrapod herbivores made their first appearance in the fossil record of their jaws near the Permio-Carboniferous boundary, approximately 300 million years ago. The earliest evidence of their herbivory has been attributed to dental occlusion, the process in which teeth from the upper jaw come in contact with teeth in the lower jaw is present. The evolution of dental occlusion led to a drastic increase in plant food processing and provides evidence about feeding strategies based on tooth wear patterns. Examination of phylogenetic frameworks of tooth and jaw morphologes has revealed that dental occlusion developed independently in several lineages tetrapod herbivores. This suggests that evolution and spread occurred simultaneously within various lineages.

==Food chain==

Herbivores form an important link in the food chain because they consume plants to digest the carbohydrates photosynthetically produced by a plant. Carnivores in turn consume herbivores for the same reason, while omnivores can obtain their nutrients from either plants or animals. Due to a herbivore&#x27;s ability to survive solely on tough and fibrous plant matter, they are termed the primary consumers in the food cycle (chain). Herbivory, carnivory, and omnivory can be regarded as special cases of consumer–resource interactions.

==Feeding strategies==

Two herbivore feeding strategies are grazing (e.g. cows) and browsing (e.g. moose). For a terrestrial mammal to be called a grazer, at least 90% of the forage has to be grass, and for a browser at least 90% tree leaves and twigs. An intermediate feeding strategy is called &quot;mixed-feeding&quot;. In their daily need to take up energy from forage, herbivores of different body mass may be selective in choosing their food. &quot;Selective&quot; means that herbivores may choose their forage source depending on, e.g., season or food availability, but also that they may choose high quality (and consequently highly nutritious) forage before lower quality. The latter especially is determined by the body mass of the herbivore, with small herbivores selecting for high-quality forage, and with increasing body mass animals are less selective. Several theories attempt to explain and quantify the relationship between animals and their food, such as Kleiber&#x27;s law, Holling&#x27;s disk equation and the marginal value theorem (see below).

Kleiber&#x27;s law describes the relationship between an animal&#x27;s size and its feeding strategy, saying that larger animals need to eat less food per unit weight than smaller animals. Kleiber&#x27;s law states that the metabolic rate (q0) of an animal is the mass of the animal (M) raised to the 3/4 power: q0=M3/4

Therefore, the mass of the animal increases at a faster rate than the metabolic rate.

Herbivores employ numerous types of feeding strategies. Many herbivores do not fall into one specific feeding strategy, but employ several strategies and eat a variety of plant parts.

Optimal foraging theory is a model for predicting animal behavior while looking for food or other resources, such as shelter or water. This model assesses both individual movement, such as animal behavior while looking for food, and distribution within a habitat, such as dynamics at the population and community level. For example, the model would be used to look at the browsing behavior of a deer while looking for food, as well as that deer&#x27;s specific location and movement within the forested habitat and its interaction with other deer while in that habitat.

This model has been criticized as circular and untestable. Critics have pointed out that its proponents use examples that fit the theory, but do not use the model when it does not fit the reality. Other critics point out that animals do not have the ability to assess and maximize their potential gains, therefore the optimal foraging theory is irrelevant and derived to explain trends that do not exist in nature.

Holling&#x27;s disk equation models the efficiency at which predators consume prey. The model predicts that as the number of prey increases, the amount of time predators spend handling prey also increases, and therefore the efficiency of the predator decreases. In 1959, S. Holling proposed an equation to model the rate of return for an optimal diet: Rate (R )=Energy gained in foraging (Ef)/(time searching (Ts) + time handling (Th))formula_1

Where s=cost of search per unit time f=rate of encounter with items, h=handling time, e=energy gained per encounter.

In effect, this would indicate that a herbivore in a dense forest would spend more time handling (eating) the vegetation because there was so much vegetation around than a herbivore in a sparse forest, who could easily browse through the forest vegetation. According to the Holling&#x27;s disk equation, a herbivore in the sparse forest would be more efficient at eating than the herbivore in the dense forest.

The marginal value theorem describes the balance between eating all the food in a patch for immediate energy, or moving to a new patch and leaving the plants in the first patch to regenerate for future use. The theory predicts that absent complicating factors, an animal should leave a resource patch when the rate of payoff (amount of food) falls below the average rate of payoff for the entire area. According to this theory, an animal should move to a new patch of food when the patch they are currently feeding on requires more energy to obtain food than an average patch. Within this theory, two subsequent parameters emerge, the Giving Up Density (GUD) and the Giving Up Time (GUT). The Giving Up Density (GUD) quantifies the amount of food that remains in a patch when a forager moves to a new patch. The Giving Up Time (GUT) is used when an animal continuously assesses the patch quality.

==Plant-herbivore interactions==
Interactions between plants and herbivores can play a prevalent role in ecosystem dynamics such community structure and functional processes. Plant diversity and distribution is often driven by herbivory, and it is likely that trade-offs between plant competitiveness and defensiveness, and between colonization and mortality allow for coexistence between species in the presence of herbivores. However, the effects of herbivory on plant diversity and richness is variable. For example, increased abundance of herbivores such as deer decrease plant diversity and species richness, while other large mammalian herbivores like bison control dominant species which allows other species to flourish. Plant-herbivore interactions can also operate so that plant communities mediate herbivore communities. Plant communities that are more diverse typically sustain greater herbivore richness by providing a greater and more diverse set of resources.

Coevolution and phylogenetic correlation between herbivores and plants are important aspects of the influence of herbivore and plant interactions on communities and ecosystem functioning, especially in regard to herbivorous insects. This is apparent in the adaptations plants develop to tolerate and/or defend from insect herbivory and the responses of herbivores to overcome these adaptations. The evolution of antagonistic and mutualistic plant-herbivore interactions are not mutually exclusive and may co-occur. Plant phylogeny has been found to facilitate the colonization and community assembly of herbivores, and there is evidence of phylogenetic linkage between plant beta diversity and phylogenetic beta diversity of insect clades such as butterflies. These types of eco-evolutionary feedbacks between plants and herbivores are likely the main driving force behind plant and herbivore diversity.

Abiotic factors such as climate and biogeographical features also impact plant-herbivore communities and interactions. For example, in temperate freshwater wetlands herbivorous waterfowl communities change according to season, with species that eat above-ground vegetation being abundant during summer, and species that forage below-ground being present in winter months. These seasonal herbivore communities differ in both their assemblage and functions within the wetland ecosystem. Such differences in herbivore modalities can potentially lead to trade-offs that influence species traits and may lead to additive effects on community composition and ecosystem functioning. Seasonal changes and environmental gradients such as elevation and latitude often affect the palatability of plants which in turn influences herbivore community assemblages and vice versa. Examples include a decrease in abundance of leaf-chewing larvae in the fall when hardwood leaf palatability decreases due to increased tannin levels which results in a decline of arthropod species richness, and increased palatability of plant communities at higher elevations where grasshoppers abundances are lower. Climatic stressors such as ocean acidification can lead to responses in plant-herbivore interactions in relation to palatability as well.

===Herbivore offense===

The myriad defenses displayed by plants means that their herbivores need a variety of skills to overcome these defenses and obtain food. These allow herbivores to increase their feeding and use of a host plant. Herbivores have three primary strategies for dealing with plant defenses: choice, herbivore modification, and plant modification.

Feeding choice involves which plants a herbivore chooses to consume. It has been suggested that many herbivores feed on a variety of plants to balance their nutrient uptake and to avoid consuming too much of any one type of defensive chemical. This involves a tradeoff however, between foraging on many plant species to avoid toxins or specializing on one type of plant that can be detoxified.

Herbivore modification is when various adaptations to body or digestive systems of the herbivore allow them to overcome plant defenses. This might include detoxifying secondary metabolites, sequestering toxins unaltered, or avoiding toxins, such as through the production of large amounts of saliva to reduce effectiveness of defenses. Herbivores may also utilize symbionts to evade plant defenses. For example, some aphids use bacteria in their gut to provide essential amino acids lacking in their sap diet.

Plant modification occurs when herbivores manipulate their plant prey to increase feeding. For example, some caterpillars roll leaves to reduce the effectiveness of plant defenses activated by sunlight.

===Plant defense===

A plant defense is a trait that increases plant fitness when faced with herbivory. This is measured relative to another plant that lacks the defensive trait. Plant defenses increase survival and/or reproduction (fitness) of plants under pressure of predation from herbivores.

Defense can be divided into two main categories, tolerance and resistance. Tolerance is the ability of a plant to withstand damage without a reduction in fitness. This can occur by diverting herbivory to non-essential plant parts, resource allocation, compensatory growth, or by rapid regrowth and recovery from herbivory. Resistance refers to the ability of a plant to reduce the amount of damage it receives from herbivores. This can occur via avoidance in space or time, physical defenses, or chemical defenses. Defenses can either be constitutive, always present in the plant, or induced, produced or translocated by the plant following damage or stress.

Physical, or mechanical, defenses are barriers or structures designed to deter herbivores or reduce intake rates, lowering overall herbivory. Thorns such as those found on roses or acacia trees are one example, as are the spines on a cactus. Smaller hairs known as trichomes may cover leaves or stems and are especially effective against invertebrate herbivores. In addition, some plants have waxes or resins that alter their texture, making them difficult to eat. Also the incorporation of silica into cell walls is analogous to that of the role of lignin in that it is a compression-resistant structural component of cell walls; so that plants with their cell walls impregnated with silica are thereby afforded a measure of protection against herbivory.

Chemical defenses are secondary metabolites produced by the plant that deter herbivory. There are a wide variety of these in nature and a single plant can have hundreds of different chemical defenses. Chemical defenses can be divided into two main groups, carbon-based defenses and nitrogen-based defenses.

#Carbon-based defenses include terpenes and phenolics. Terpenes are derived from 5-carbon isoprene units and comprise essential oils, carotenoids, resins, and latex. They can have several functions that disrupt herbivores such as inhibiting adenosine triphosphate (ATP) formation, molting hormones, or the nervous system. Phenolics combine an aromatic carbon ring with a hydroxyl group. There are several different phenolics such as lignins, which are found in cell walls and are very indigestible except for specialized microorganisms; tannins, which have a bitter taste and bind to proteins making them indigestible; and furanocumerins, which produce free radicals disrupting DNA, protein, and lipids, and can cause skin irritation.
#Nitrogen-based defenses are synthesized from amino acids and primarily come in the form of alkaloids and cyanogens. Alkaloids include commonly recognized substances such as caffeine, nicotine, and morphine. These compounds are often bitter and can inhibit DNA or RNA synthesis or block nervous system signal transmission. Cyanogens get their name from the cyanide stored within their tissues. This is released when the plant is damaged and inhibits cellular respiration and electron transport.

Plants have also changed features that enhance the probability of attracting natural enemies to herbivores. Some emit semiochemicals, odors that attract natural enemies, while others provide food and housing to maintain the natural enemies&#x27; presence, e.g. ants that reduce herbivory. A given plant species often has many types of defensive mechanisms, mechanical or chemical, constitutive or induced, which allow it to escape from herbivores.

===Predator–prey theory===
According to the theory of predator–prey interactions, the relationship between herbivores and plants is cyclic. When prey (plants) are numerous their predators (herbivores) increase in numbers, reducing the prey population, which in turn causes predator number to decline. The prey population eventually recovers, starting a new cycle. This suggests that the population of the herbivore fluctuates around the carrying capacity of the food source, in this case, the plant.

Several factors play into these fluctuating populations and help stabilize predator-prey dynamics. For example, spatial heterogeneity is maintained, which means there will always be pockets of plants not found by herbivores. This stabilizing dynamic plays an especially important role for specialist herbivores that feed on one species of plant and prevents these specialists from wiping out their food source. Prey defenses also help stabilize predator-prey dynamics, and for more information on these relationships see the section on Plant Defenses. Eating a second prey type helps herbivores&#x27; populations stabilize. Alternating between two or more plant types provides population stability for the herbivore, while the populations of the plants oscillate. This plays an important role for generalist herbivores that eat a variety of plants. Keystone herbivores keep vegetation populations in check and allow for a greater diversity of both herbivores and plants. When an invasive herbivore or plant enters the system, the balance is thrown off and the diversity can collapse to a monotaxon system.

The back and forth relationship of plant defense and herbivore offense drives coevolution between plants and herbivores, resulting in a &quot;coevolutionary arms race&quot;. The escape and radiation mechanisms for coevolution, presents the idea that adaptations in herbivores and their host plants, has been the driving force behind speciation.

=== Mutualism ===
While much of the interaction of herbivory and plant defense is negative, with one individual reducing the fitness of the other, some is beneficial. This beneficial herbivory takes the form of mutualisms in which both partners benefit in some way from the interaction. Seed dispersal by herbivores and pollination are two forms of mutualistic herbivory in which the herbivore receives a food resource and the plant is aided in reproduction. Plants can also be indirectly affected by herbivores through nutrient recycling, with plants benefiting from herbivores when nutrients are recycled very efficiently. Another form of plant-herbivore mutualism is physical changes to the environment and/or plant community structure by herbivores which serve as ecosystem engineers, such as wallowing by bison. Swans form a mutual relationship with the plant species that they forage by digging and disturbing the sediment which removes competing plants and subsequently allows colonization of other plant species.

==Impacts==
=== Trophic cascades and environmental degradation ===
When herbivores are affected by trophic cascades, plant communities can be indirectly affected. Often these effects are felt when predator populations decline and herbivore populations are no longer limited, which leads to intense herbivore foraging which can suppress plant communities. With the size of herbivores having an effect on the amount of energy intake that is needed, larger herbivores need to forage on higher quality or more plants to gain the optimal amount of nutrients and energy compared to smaller herbivores. Environmental degradation from white-tailed deer (&quot;Odocoileus virginianus&quot;) in the US alone has the potential to both change vegetative communities through over-browsing and cost forest restoration projects upwards of $750 million annually. Another example of a trophic cascade involved plant-herbivore interactions are coral reef ecosystems. Herbivorous fish and marine animals are important algae and seaweed grazers, and in the absence of plant-eating fish, corals are outcompeted and seaweeds deprive corals of sunlight.

=== Economic impacts ===
Agricultural crop damage by the same species totals approximately $100 million every year. Insect crop damages also contribute largely to annual crop losses in the U.S. Herbivores also affect economics through the revenue generated by hunting and ecotourism. For example, the hunting of herbivorous game species such as white-tailed deer, cottontail rabbits, antelope, and elk in the U.S. contributes greatly to the billion-dollar annually, hunting industry. Ecotourism is a major source of revenue, particularly in Africa, where many large mammalian herbivores such as elephants, zebras, and giraffes help to bring in the equivalent of millions of US dollars to various nations annually.

==See also==
* Carnivore and omnivore
* Consumer-resource systems
* List of feeding behaviours
* List of herbivorous animals
* Plant-based diet
* Productivity (ecology)
* Seed predation
* Tritrophic interactions in plant defense
* Veganism
* Vegetarianism
==References==
==Further reading==
* Bob Strauss, 2008, Herbivorous Dinosaurs , The New York Times
*Danell, K., R. Bergström, P. Duncan, J. Pastor (Editors)(2006) &quot;Large herbivore ecology, ecosystem dynamics and conservation&quot; Cambridge, UK : Cambridge University Press. 506 p. 
*Crawley, M. J. (1983) &quot;Herbivory : the dynamics of animal-plant interactions&quot; Oxford : Blackwell Scientific. 437 p. 
*Olff, H., V.K. Brown, R.H. Drent (editors) (1999) &quot;Herbivores : between plants and predators&quot; Oxford; Malden, Ma. : Blackwell Science. 639 p. 

==External links==
*Herbivore information resource website
*The herbivore defenses of &quot;Senecio viscusus&quot;
*Herbivore defense in &quot;Lindera benzoin&quot;
*website of the herbivory lab at Cornell University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="2" end="11" title="Herbivore" label="herbivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="18" end="24" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="58" end="64" title="evolution" label="evolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="77" end="82" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q968604" start="101" end="116" title="vascular tissue" label="vascular tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="126" end="133" title="foliage" label="foliage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="135" end="140" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="145" end="149" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q474191" start="181" end="185" title="diet (nutrition)" label="diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239742" start="238" end="250" title="non-vascular plant" label="non-vascular"/>
<link wikidata="Q131427" start="251" end="260" title="autotroph" label="autotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="270" end="274" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="278" end="283" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="288" end="294" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q339062" start="333" end="342" title="decomposition" label="decompose"/>
<link wikidata="Q736879" start="344" end="356" title="detritus" label="plant matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750657" start="364" end="375" title="detritivore" label="detritivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q83093" start="381" end="391" title="macrofungi" label="macrofungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331325" start="398" end="407" title="fungivore" label="fungivore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="486" end="491" title="mouth" label="mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q180284" start="504" end="507" title="jaw" label="jaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q498963" start="512" end="522" title="arthropod mouthparts" label="mouthparts"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="529" end="534" title="adaptation" label="adapt"/>
<link wikidata="Q191671" start="540" end="563" title="comminution" label="mechanically break down"/>
<link wikidata="Q9649" start="591" end="607" title="digestive system" label="digestive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="622" end="628" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153" start="636" end="643" title="amylase" label="amylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q410324" start="648" end="657" title="cellulase" label="cellulase"/>
<link wikidata="Q134219" start="669" end="683" title="polysaccharide" label="polysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q85764397" start="686" end="693" title="Grazing (behaviour)" label="Grazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="713" end="718" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="724" end="730" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q940147" start="747" end="752" title="crown (tooth)" label="crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q553" start="755" end="760" title="teeth" label="teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="798" end="803" title="grass" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q184453" start="805" end="814" title="tree bark" label="tree bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="833" end="839" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="887" end="897" title="ruminant" label="rumination"/>
<link wikidata="Q163135" start="901" end="911" title="cecotrope" label="cecotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q739734" start="1018" end="1027" title="gut flora" label="gut flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="1039" end="1047" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="1052" end="1061" title="protozoan" label="protozoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q696715" start="1076" end="1083" title="biodegradation" label="degrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="1088" end="1097" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q898597" start="1123" end="1133" title="cross-link" label="cross-link"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="1137" end="1144" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="1202" end="1209" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="1215" end="1218" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="1231" end="1237" title="tissue (biology)" label="tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="1244" end="1253" title="carnivore" label="carnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333" start="1367" end="1380" title="Charles Lyell" label="Charles Lyell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348323" start="1399" end="1420" title="Principles of Geology" label="Principles of Geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q151556" start="1428" end="1440" title="Richard Owen" label="Richard Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q159344" start="1740" end="1751" title="heterotroph" label="consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="1764" end="1772" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q213449" start="1785" end="1789" title="eating" label="eats"/>
<link wikidata="Q131427" start="1790" end="1799" title="autotroph" label="autotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="1809" end="1814" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="1817" end="1822" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="1845" end="1853" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131427" start="1894" end="1903" title="autotroph" label="autotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q188956" start="2242" end="2257" title="phytopathology" label="plant pathogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="2292" end="2300" title="microbes" label="microbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001591" start="2343" end="2353" title="saprotroph" label="saprotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q127498" start="2439" end="2454" title="parasitic plant" label="parasitic plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q544041" start="2869" end="2882" title="coprolite" label="animal faeces"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="2975" end="2983" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633601" start="3192" end="3204" title="Rhynie chert" label="Rhynie chert"/>
<link wikidata="Q744718" start="3485" end="3498" title="Mississippian age" label="Mississippian"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="3881" end="3888" title="Permian" label="Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19159" start="4011" end="4020" title="tetrapods" label="tetrapods"/>
<link wikidata="Q373772" start="4039" end="4057" title="Late Carboniferous" label="Late Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024494" start="4128" end="4138" title="Desmatodon" label="Desmatodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481827" start="4172" end="4183" title="Diadectidae" label="Diadectidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q485501" start="4191" end="4201" title="Anamniotes" label="anamniotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181537" start="4350" end="4357" title="amniote" label="amniote"/>
<link wikidata="Q677088" start="4364" end="4375" title="insectivore" label="insectivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q141936" start="4662" end="4675" title="Captorhinidae" label="Captorhinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q140372" start="4695" end="4707" title="Bolosauridae" label="Bolosauridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q987588" start="4737" end="4751" title="Edaphosauridae" label="Edaphosauridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132725" start="4756" end="4764" title="Caseidae" label="Caseidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="4777" end="4785" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q191488" start="4792" end="4804" title="ornithischia" label="ornithischia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="5109" end="5118" title="Arthropod" label="Arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q968808" start="5451" end="5467" title="Occlusion (dentistry)" label="dental occlusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="5748" end="5760" title="phylogenetic" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="6115" end="6133" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthetically"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="6155" end="6164" title="Carnivore" label="Carnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="6220" end="6228" title="omnivore" label="omnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164625" start="6511" end="6541" title="consumer–resource interactions" label="consumer–resource interactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239189" start="6605" end="6612" title="grazing" label="grazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353883" start="6629" end="6637" title="browsing (herbivory)" label="browsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q911088" start="7519" end="7537" title="Kleiber&amp;#x27;s law" label="Kleiber&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q277031" start="8206" end="8229" title="Optimal foraging theory" label="Optimal foraging theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760432" start="10173" end="10195" title="marginal value theorem" label="marginal value theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="11172" end="11181" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608096" start="11196" end="11205" title="Community (ecology)" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q706937" start="11248" end="11257" title="Species diversity" label="diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4257161" start="11262" end="11274" title="Species distribution" label="distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q45767" start="11352" end="11367" title="Competition (biology)" label="competitiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004252" start="11372" end="11385" title="Plant defense against herbivory" label="defensiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146659" start="11663" end="11679" title="species richness" label="species richness"/>
<link wikidata="Q208841" start="12043" end="12054" title="Coevolution" label="Coevolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="12059" end="12071" title="Phylogenetics" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="12300" end="12310" title="adaptation" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201543" start="12330" end="12338" title="Plant tolerance to herbivory" label="tolerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004252" start="12346" end="12352" title="Plant defense against herbivory" label="defend"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736181" start="12383" end="12406" title="Herbivore adaptations to plant defense" label="responses of herbivores"/>
<link wikidata="Q36039" start="12718" end="12732" title="beta diversity" label="beta diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q36039" start="12750" end="12764" title="beta diversity" label="beta diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="12775" end="12780" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="12790" end="12801" title="Butterfly" label="butterflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="12972" end="12979" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q52106" start="12984" end="13008" title="Biogeography" label="biogeographical features"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="13414" end="13431" title="Wetland" label="wetland ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608096" start="13575" end="13584" title="Community (ecology)" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496857" start="13691" end="13699" title="Latitudinal gradients in species diversity" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361262" start="13717" end="13729" title="palatability" label="palatability"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="13948" end="13954" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146659" start="14002" end="14018" title="species richness" label="species richness"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398431" start="14095" end="14106" title="grasshopper" label="grasshopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q855711" start="14157" end="14176" title="ocean acidification" label="ocean acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q522244" start="15198" end="15218" title="secondary metabolite" label="secondary metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q155925" start="15323" end="15329" title="saliva" label="saliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="15502" end="15512" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q201851" start="16846" end="16852" title="Thorns, spines, and prickles" label="Thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125215" start="16969" end="16978" title="trichomes" label="trichomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695" start="17097" end="17102" title="waxes" label="waxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="17106" end="17112" title="resins" label="resins"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="17195" end="17201" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="17254" end="17260" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q522244" start="17483" end="17504" title="secondary metabolites" label="secondary metabolites"/>
<link wikidata="Q212364" start="17800" end="17808" title="terpenes" label="terpenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q290439" start="17813" end="17822" title="polyphenol" label="phenolics"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="18010" end="18038" title="Adenosine triphosphate" label="adenosine triphosphate (ATP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="18058" end="18066" title="hormones" label="hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="18306" end="18313" title="tannins" label="tannins"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="18596" end="18605" title="alkaloids" label="alkaloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="18678" end="18686" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086552" start="18688" end="18696" title="nicotine" label="nicotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="18702" end="18710" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="18861" end="18868" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="19261" end="19264" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="19503" end="19511" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q208841" start="21135" end="21146" title="coevolution" label="coevolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q39350" start="21390" end="21400" title="speciation" label="speciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q186368" start="21614" end="21623" title="Mutualism (biology)" label="mutualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q943313" start="21690" end="21704" title="Seed dispersal" label="Seed dispersal"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="21723" end="21734" title="pollination" label="pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070482" start="21923" end="21941" title="Nutrient cycle" label="nutrient recycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q962054" start="22171" end="22189" title="ecosystem engineer" label="ecosystem engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153998" start="22200" end="22209" title="wallowing" label="wallowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377214" start="22286" end="22292" title="forage" label="forage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455497" start="22524" end="22539" title="trophic cascade" label="trophic cascade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="23021" end="23046" title="Environmental degradation" label="Environmental degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="23052" end="23069" title="white-tailed deer" label="white-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469194" start="23210" end="23228" title="forest restoration" label="forest restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="23351" end="23361" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="23374" end="23390" title="Herbivorous fish" label="Herbivorous fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="23424" end="23429" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="24041" end="24051" title="Ecotourism" label="Ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="24287" end="24296" title="Carnivore" label="Carnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="24301" end="24309" title="omnivore" label="omnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164625" start="24312" end="24337" title="Consumer-resource systems" label="Consumer-resource systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281331" start="24340" end="24366" title="List of feeding behaviours" label="List of feeding behaviours"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622168" start="24369" end="24396" title="List of herbivorous animals" label="List of herbivorous animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201457" start="24399" end="24415" title="Plant-based diet" label="Plant-based diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289687" start="24418" end="24440" title="Productivity (ecology)" label="Productivity (ecology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690250" start="24443" end="24457" title="Seed predation" label="Seed predation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424056" start="24460" end="24500" title="Tritrophic interactions in plant defense" label="Tritrophic interactions in plant defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="24503" end="24511" title="Veganism" label="Veganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="24514" end="24527" title="Vegetarianism" label="Vegetarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="24608" end="24626" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44569" wikidata="Q170574" url="?curid=44569" title="Helen Hunt">
<text>Helen Elizabeth Hunt (born June 15, 1963) is an American actress and director. Her accolades include an Academy Award, four Primetime Emmy Awards, and four Golden Globe Awards.

Hunt rose to fame portraying newlywed Jamie Buchman in the sitcom &quot;Mad About You&quot; (1992–1999), which earned her three Golden Globe Awards for Best Actress and four Primetime Emmy Awards for Lead Actress. Hunt won the Academy Award for Best Actress for starring as a single mother in the romantic comedy film &quot;As Good as It Gets&quot; (1997), and established a film career by starring in &quot;Twister&quot; (1996), &quot;Cast Away&quot; (2000), &quot;What Women Want&quot; (2000), and &quot;Pay It Forward&quot; (2000).

Hunt made her directorial film debut with &quot;Then She Found Me&quot; (2007). For her portrayal of Cheryl Cohen-Greene in &quot;The Sessions&quot; (2012), she gained a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress. Her other notable films include &quot;Bobby&quot; (2006), &quot;Soul Surfer&quot; (2011), and &quot;The Miracle Season&quot; (2018), and she has directed the film &quot;Ride&quot; (2014), and episodes of television series, including &quot;House of Lies&quot; in 2016, &quot;This Is Us&quot; in 2016, &quot;&quot; in 2017, &quot;American Housewife&quot; in 2018, and the premiere episode of the &quot;Mad About You&quot; revival in 2019.

== Early life ==
Helen Hunt was born in Culver City, California. Her mother, Jane Elizabeth (née Novis), worked as a photographer, and her father, Gordon Hunt, was a film, voice and stage director and acting coach. Her uncle, Peter H. Hunt, was also a director. Her maternal grandmother, Dorothy (née Anderson) Fries, was a voice coach. Hunt&#x27;s paternal grandmother was from a German-Jewish family, while Hunt&#x27;s other grandparents were of English descent (her maternal grandfather was born in England), with a Methodist religious background. 

When she was three, Hunt&#x27;s family moved to New York City, where her father directed theatre and Hunt attended plays as a child several times a week. Hunt graduated from Providence High School in Burbank, California. She also studied ballet, and briefly attended the University of California, Los Angeles.

== Career ==
===1970s–1980s===

Hunt began working as a child actress in the 1970s. Her early roles included an appearance on season 2, episode 3 of TV series &quot;Family&quot; (first aired Oct 26, 1976), playing Robin Trask, a classmate of Kristy McNichol. She also had an appearance as Murray Slaughter&#x27;s daughter on &quot;The Mary Tyler Moore Show&quot; in the 1977 episode “Murray Ghosts for Ted”, as the daughter of George Segal&#x27;s main character in &quot;Rollercoaster&quot; (1977), alongside Lindsay Wagner in an episode of &quot;The Bionic Woman&quot;, an appearance in an episode of &quot;Ark II&quot; called &quot;Omega&quot;, and a regular role in the television series &quot;The Swiss Family Robinson&quot;. She appeared as a marijuana-smoking classmate on an episode of &quot;The Facts of Life&quot;. In 1982, Hunt played a young woman who, while on PCP, jumps out of a second-story window, in a made-for-television film called &quot;Desperate Lives&quot; (a scene which she mocked during a &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; monologue in 1994), and she was cast on the ABC sitcom &quot;It Takes Two&quot;, which lasted only one season. In 1983, she starred in &quot;&quot;, with Mickey Rooney and played Tami Maida in the fact-based production &quot;Quarterback Princess&quot;; both were made-for-television films. She also had a recurring role on &quot;St. Elsewhere&quot; as Clancy Williams, the girlfriend of Jack &quot;Boomer&quot; Morrison (David Morse), and had a notable guest appearance as a cancer-stricken mother-to-be in a two-part episode of &quot;Highway to Heaven&quot;.

By the mid and late 1980s, Hunt had begun appearing in studio films aimed at a teenage audience. Her first major film role was that of a punk rock girl in the sci-fi film &quot;Trancers&quot; (1984). She played the friend of an army brat in the comedy &quot;Girls Just Want to Have Fun&quot; (1985), with Sarah Jessica Parker and Shannen Doherty, and appeared as the daughter of a woman on the verge of divorce in Francis Ford Coppola&#x27;s &quot;Peggy Sue Got Married&quot; (1986), alongside Kathleen Turner. In 1987, Hunt starred with Matthew Broderick in &quot;Project X&quot;, as a graduate student assigned to care for chimpanzees used in a secret Air Force project. In 1988, she appeared in &quot;Stealing Home&quot;, as Hope Wyatt, the sister of Billy Wyatt, played by Mark Harmon and a cast featuring Jodie Foster and Harold Ramis. &quot;Next of Kin&quot; (1989) featured her as the pregnant wife of a respectable lawman, opposite Patrick Swayze and Liam Neeson.

===1990s===
In 1990, Hunt appeared with Tracey Ullman and Morgan Freeman in a Wild West version of &quot;The Taming of the Shrew&quot;, at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park. In 1991, Hunt starred in &quot;Trancers II&quot;, the direct-to-video sequel to &quot;Trancers&quot; (1984), and played the lead female role in the sitcom &quot;My Life and Times&quot;, which only aired for 6 episodes. In 1992, she would appear in the drama &quot;The Waterdance&quot; as a married woman having an affair with a writer; in the romantic comedy &quot;Only You&quot;, as a travel agent and the love interest of a doll&#x27;s house designer; in the mockumentary &quot;Bob Roberts&quot;, as Rose Pondell, a field reporter at WLNO; and in &quot;Mr. Saturday Night&quot;, as a young agent named Annie Well. In 1992, Hunt returned for her fourth and final outing as Lena in &quot;Trancers III&quot;, the second sequel of the &quot;Trancers&quot; series including , which was among her five film releases that year.

Hunt came to prominence in North America with the sitcom &quot;Mad About You&quot; (1992–99), in which she starred opposite Paul Reiser, as a public relations specialist and one half of a couple in NYC. She went on to win Emmy Awards for her performances in 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999. For the show&#x27;s final season, Reiser and Hunt received $1 million ($ million today) per episode. She directed several episodes of &quot;Mad About You&quot;, including the series finale.

In 1995, Hunt played the wife of an ex-con living in Queens, alongside Nicolas Cage, in &quot;Kiss of Death&quot;, a very loosely based remake of the 1947 film noir classic of the same name. In the disaster action film &quot;Twister&quot; (1996), Hunt starred with Bill Paxton as storm chasers researching tornadoes. Both actors were temporarily blinded by bright electronic lamps halfway through filming, and needed hepatitis shots after shooting in a particularly unsanitary ditch. &quot;Twister&quot; was the second-highest-grossing film of 1996, behind &quot;Independence Day&quot;. The film sold an estimated 54,688,100 tickets in the US. It made US$494.5 million around the globe.

Hunt went on to win the Academy Award for Best Actress in the romantic comedy &quot;As Good as It Gets&quot; (1997), in which she took on the role of a waitress and single mother who finds herself falling in love with a misanthropic, obsessive-compulsive romance novelist, played by Jack Nicholson. Hunt and Nicholson got along well during the filming, and they connected immediately: &quot;It wasn&#x27;t even what we said&quot;, Hunt added. &quot;It was just some frequency we both could tune into that was very, very compatible.&quot; Author and screenwriter Andrew Horton described their on-screen relationship as being like &quot;fire and ice, oil and water—seemingly complete opposites&quot;. Nonetheless, Hunt was Nicholson&#x27;s perfect counterpart, and delivered &quot;a simply stunning performance&quot;, wrote critic Louise Keller. The film was a tremendous box office success, grossing US$314 million worldwide. In 1998, she played the love interest of Moe Szyslak on &quot;The Simpsons&quot; episode &quot;Dumbbell Indemnity&quot;, and played Viola in Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Twelfth Night&quot;, at Lincoln Center in New York.

===2000s===
Two of Hunt&#x27;s four film releases in 2000—the comedy &quot;Dr. T &amp; the Women&quot; and the drama &quot;Pay It Forward&quot;—were both released in October. While the first featured her as one of the women that encompass the everyday life of a wealthy gynecologist, opposite Richard Gere, the second starred her as the love interest of a physically and emotionally scarred grade school teacher, played by Kevin Spacey. Critic Roger Ebert highlighted her performance in &quot;Pay It Forward&quot;, despite finding the film itself to be &quot;too emotionally manipulative&quot;. Her other two 2000 films—the romantic comedy &quot;What Women Want&quot;, and the drama &quot;Cast Away&quot;— were released in December, to outstanding box office receipts. In &quot;What Women Want&quot;, Hunt starred with Mel Gibson as the co-worker and love interest of a Chicago executive, and in &quot;Cast Away&quot;, she portrayed the long-term girlfriend of a FedEx employee marooned on an uninhabited island, alongside Tom Hanks.

Hunt starred in Woody Allen&#x27;s &quot;The Curse of the Jade Scorpion&quot; (2001), as an efficiency expert hypnotized by a crooked hypnotist into stealing jewels. Despite the film&#x27;s limited success, Roger Ebert asserted: &quot;Hunt in particular has fun with a wisecracking dame role that owes something, perhaps, to Rosalind Russell in &quot;His Girl Friday&quot;.&quot; In 2003, Hunt returned to Broadway in Yasmina Reza&#x27;s &quot;Life x 3&quot;, and in 2004, she starred in the drama &quot;A Good Woman&quot;, as a femme fatale in 1930s NYC. &quot;AV Club&quot;, in its review for the latter, remarked: &quot;Helen Hunt looks embarrassingly out of place trying to play an infamous seductress&quot;. She played a socialite, as part of an ensemble cast, in Emilio Estevez&#x27;s drama &quot;Bobby&quot; (2006), about the hours leading up to the Robert F. Kennedy assassination. As a member of the cast, she was nominated for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Cast in a Motion Picture but won the Hollywood Film Festival Award for Best Ensemble Cast.

Hunt made her feature film directorial debut in &quot;Then She Found Me&quot; (2007), in which she also starred as a 39-year-old Brooklyn elementary school teacher, who after years is contacted by the flamboyant host of a local talk show, played by Bette Midler, who introduces herself as her biological mother. After first reading Elinor Lipman&#x27;s novel, she tried to interest numerous studios in the material, and her unsuccessful efforts led her to begin writing the screenplay and raising funds to produce it herself. Upon its release, Ruthe Stein of the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; observed, &quot;You would think that frontloading &quot;Then She Found Me&quot; with so much plot would make it play like a soap opera. But Hunt saves the movie from this fate in two ways. First she turns in a touchingly real performance, the best of her big-screen career. Forget that &quot;As Good as It Gets&quot; won her an Oscar. She&#x27;s eons better and more realistic in this one [...] By directing &quot;Then She Found Me&quot;, Helen becomes its savior as well [...] Hunt knows when to rein in the Divine Miss M instead of allowing her to go into full Kabuki mode. [She] also coaxes pitch-perfect performances from Broderick and Firth.&quot;

===2010s===

Hunt starred in the dramedy &quot;Every Day&quot; (2010), as one half of a married couple pulled apart by increasing responsibilities. According to &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, the film &quot;comes as a reminder of [Hunt&#x27;s] talent for understatement, and a wish to see more of her&quot;. In the biographical drama &quot;Soul Surfer&quot; (2011), she played the mother of the Hawaiian-born champion surfer Bethany Hamilton, on whose life the film was based. Her first wide release since 2001&#x27;s &quot;The Curse of the Jade Scorpion&quot;, &quot;Soul Surfer&quot; made US$47.1 million internationally.

Hunt starred as sex surrogate Cheryl Cohen-Greene in &quot;The Sessions&quot; (2012), alongside John Hawkes and William H. Macy. The role required Hunt to perform multiple scenes of full-frontal nudity, on which she further said: &quot;Being naked was challenging, but even more than that was the vulnerability. I felt vulnerable because I was naked. I felt vulnerable because we were having such a vulnerable moment in this character&#x27;s life. This was a real journey that someone had gone on, and I wanted to do right by that.&quot; Her performance was acclaimed by critics and earned her several award nominations, including an Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actress. Todd McCarthy of &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; wrote: &quot;Hunt&#x27;s performance may be physically bold but is equally marked by its maturity and composure.&quot;

Hunt played research geneticist Mary-Claire King in the independent drama &quot;Decoding Annie Parker&quot; (2013), which was released to a mixed critical response. She wrote and directed the drama &quot;Ride&quot; (2014), in which she also starred as a mother who travels cross-country to California to be with her son after he decides to drop out of school and become a surfer. Rotten Tomatoes&#x27; critical consensus read: &quot;&quot;Ride&quot; reaffirms Helen Hunt&#x27;s immense acting talent —but suggests that she still needs time to develop as a director.&quot;

In &quot;The Miracle Season&quot; (2018), based on the true story of the Iowa City West High School volleyball team, Hunt played Kathy Bresnahan, a volleyball coach. In 2019, Hunt appeared in the BBC series &quot;World on Fire&quot; as journalist Nancy Campbell, a character inspired by real-life war correspondent Clare Hollingworth, and reprised the role of Jamie Buchman in the &quot;Mad About You&quot; revival, which premiered in the form of a limited series, by Spectrum Originals. In December 2018, Hunt was a guest narrator at Disney&#x27;s Candlelight Processional at Walt Disney World.

===2020s===
In 2020, Hunt appeared in the crime drama film &quot;The Night Clerk&quot; alongside Tye Sheridan. In December 2020, it was reported that Hunt would appear in a leading role in the Starz series &quot;Blindspotting&quot;, created by Daveed Diggs and Rafael Casal and based on their 2018 film of the same name. In September 2022, she starred in the European premiere of &quot;Eureka Day&quot; at The Old Vic theatre in London.

== Personal life ==
In 1994, Hunt started dating actor Hank Azaria. They married in 1999, and divorced 17 months later. In 2001, Hunt began a relationship with producer Matthew Carnahan. In 2004, they had a daughter. The couple split in August 2017.

Hunt was one of the demonstrators at the 2017 Women&#x27;s March held on January 21 in Los Angeles, California.

==Filmography==
==Awards and nominations==
== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q170574" start="0" end="20" title="Helen Hunt" label="Helen Elizabeth Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q64759972" start="79" end="92" title="List of awards and nominations received by Helen Hunt" label="Her accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="104" end="117" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="124" end="145" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="156" end="175" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q752365" start="250" end="263" title="Mad About You" label="Mad About You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255210" start="306" end="342" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Musical or Comedy" label="Golden Globe Awards for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287335" start="352" end="390" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series" label="Primetime Emmy Awards for Lead Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="405" end="435" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q221594" start="502" end="520" title="As Good as It Gets" label="As Good as It Gets"/>
<link wikidata="Q683663" start="586" end="593" title="Twister (1996 film)" label="Twister"/>
<link wikidata="Q213411" start="614" end="623" title="Cast Away" label="Cast Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q156394" start="644" end="659" title="What Women Want" label="What Women Want"/>
<link wikidata="Q467248" start="684" end="698" title="Pay It Forward (film)" label="Pay It Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321387" start="762" end="779" title="Then She Found Me" label="Then She Found Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092714" start="815" end="834" title="Cheryl Cohen-Greene" label="Cheryl Cohen-Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q514416" start="844" end="856" title="The Sessions (2012 film)" label="The Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="903" end="944" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q679657" start="984" end="989" title="Bobby (2006 film)" label="Bobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156089" start="1010" end="1021" title="Soul Surfer (film)" label="Soul Surfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48965022" start="1046" end="1064" title="The Miracle Season" label="The Miracle Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029188" start="1115" end="1119" title="Ride (2014 film)" label="Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549157" start="1185" end="1198" title="House of Lies" label="House of Lies"/>
<link wikidata="Q24068191" start="1220" end="1230" title="This Is Us" label="This Is Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q24192303" start="1274" end="1292" title="American Housewife" label="American Housewife"/>
<link wikidata="Q493378" start="1424" end="1447" title="Culver City, California" label="Culver City, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110904" start="1531" end="1542" title="Gordon Hunt (director)" label="Gordon Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174448" start="1610" end="1623" title="Peter H. Hunt" label="Peter H. Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="1765" end="1778" title="History of the Jews in Germany" label="German-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="1832" end="1839" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1886" end="1893" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="1903" end="1912" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1985" end="1998" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683718" start="2111" end="2133" title="Providence High School (Burbank, California)" label="Providence High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="2137" end="2156" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="2208" end="2245" title="University of California at Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628689" start="2537" end="2553" title="Murray Slaughter" label="Murray Slaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q615944" start="2579" end="2604" title="The Mary Tyler Moore Show" label="The Mary Tyler Moore Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q449900" start="2675" end="2687" title="George Segal" label="George Segal"/>
<link wikidata="Q340911" start="2719" end="2732" title="Rollercoaster (1977 film)" label="Rollercoaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q234456" start="2757" end="2771" title="Lindsay Wagner" label="Lindsay Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216258" start="2795" end="2811" title="The Bionic Woman" label="The Bionic Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791638" start="2856" end="2862" title="Ark II" label="Ark II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767711" start="2945" end="2970" title="The Swiss Family Robinson (1975 TV series)" label="The Swiss Family Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="2996" end="3005" title="cannabis (drug)" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517403" start="3047" end="3064" title="The Facts of Life (TV series)" label="The Facts of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q407324" start="3121" end="3124" title="Phencyclidine" label="PCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264938" start="3205" end="3220" title="Desperate Lives" label="Desperate Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="3338" end="3341" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3839223" start="3355" end="3367" title="It Takes Two (1982 TV series)" label="It Takes Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q104081" start="3448" end="3461" title="Mickey Rooney" label="Mickey Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681205" start="3473" end="3483" title="Tami Maida" label="Tami Maida"/>
<link wikidata="Q116480" start="3519" end="3539" title="Quarterback Princess" label="Quarterback Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068952" start="3623" end="3636" title="St. Elsewhere" label="St. Elsewhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q296370" start="3715" end="3726" title="David Morse" label="David Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304435" start="3829" end="3846" title="Highway to Heaven" label="Highway to Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448717" start="4032" end="4040" title="Trancers" label="Trancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153191" start="4113" end="4140" title="Girls Just Want to Have Fun (film)" label="Girls Just Want to Have Fun"/>
<link wikidata="Q170530" start="4160" end="4180" title="Sarah Jessica Parker" label="Sarah Jessica Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q207598" start="4185" end="4200" title="Shannen Doherty" label="Shannen Doherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="4269" end="4289" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q903257" start="4303" end="4324" title="Peggy Sue Got Married" label="Peggy Sue Got Married"/>
<link wikidata="Q222008" start="4349" end="4364" title="Kathleen Turner" label="Kathleen Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q28755" start="4393" end="4410" title="Matthew Broderick" label="Matthew Broderick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407141" start="4420" end="4429" title="Project X (1987 film)" label="Project X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736594" start="4559" end="4572" title="Stealing Home" label="Stealing Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q296774" start="4632" end="4643" title="Mark Harmon" label="Mark Harmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="4665" end="4677" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q286890" start="4682" end="4694" title="Harold Ramis" label="Harold Ramis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003850" start="4702" end="4713" title="Next of Kin (1989 film)" label="Next of Kin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49004" start="4795" end="4809" title="Patrick Swayze" label="Patrick Swayze"/>
<link wikidata="Q58444" start="4814" end="4825" title="Liam Neeson" label="Liam Neeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q130549" start="4868" end="4881" title="Tracey Ullman" label="Tracey Ullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48337" start="4886" end="4900" title="Morgan Freeman" label="Morgan Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q332387" start="4933" end="4956" title="The Taming of the Shrew" label="The Taming of the Shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060845" start="4971" end="4988" title="Delacorte Theater" label="Delacorte Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="4992" end="5004" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997419" start="5037" end="5048" title="Trancers II" label="Trancers II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945856" start="5167" end="5184" title="My Life and Times" label="My Life and Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061012" start="5270" end="5284" title="The Waterdance" label="The Waterdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q501436" start="5371" end="5379" title="Only You (1992 film)" label="Only You"/>
<link wikidata="Q888219" start="5486" end="5497" title="Bob Roberts" label="Bob Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199372" start="5561" end="5579" title="Mr. Saturday Night" label="Mr. Saturday Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795228" start="5694" end="5706" title="Trancers III" label="Trancers III"/>
<link wikidata="Q752365" start="5893" end="5906" title="Mad About You" label="Mad About You"/>
<link wikidata="Q430922" start="5954" end="5965" title="Paul Reiser" label="Paul Reiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="6360" end="6366" title="Queens, NYC" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q42869" start="6378" end="6390" title="Nicolas Cage" label="Nicolas Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000941" start="6401" end="6414" title="Kiss of Death (1995 film)" label="Kiss of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197547" start="6457" end="6479" title="Kiss of Death (1947 film)" label="1947 film noir classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q683663" start="6532" end="6539" title="Twister (1996 film)" label="Twister"/>
<link wikidata="Q110374" start="6572" end="6583" title="Bill Paxton" label="Bill Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760612" start="6587" end="6600" title="Storm chasing" label="storm chasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="6613" end="6620" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6819" end="6855" title="1996 in film#Highest-grossing films" label="second-highest-grossing film of 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q105387" start="6870" end="6886" title="Independence Day (1996 film)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="7019" end="7049" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q221594" start="7079" end="7097" title="As Good as It Gets" label="As Good as It Gets"/>
<link wikidata="Q39792" start="7278" end="7292" title="Jack Nicholson" label="Jack Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q646166" start="7961" end="7972" title="Moe Szyslak" label="Moe Szyslak"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="7982" end="7994" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342730" start="8015" end="8033" title="Dumbbell Indemnity" label="Dumbbell Indemnity"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="8061" end="8072" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q221211" start="8086" end="8099" title="Twelfth Night" label="Twelfth Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="8110" end="8124" title="Lincoln Center" label="Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254108" start="8214" end="8235" title="Dr. T &amp;amp; the Women" label="Dr. T &amp;amp; the Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q467248" start="8262" end="8276" title="Pay It Forward (film)" label="Pay It Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q48410" start="8432" end="8444" title="Richard Gere" label="Richard Gere"/>
<link wikidata="Q25144" start="8562" end="8574" title="Kevin Spacey" label="Kevin Spacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="8583" end="8594" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q156394" start="8785" end="8800" title="What Women Want" label="What Women Want"/>
<link wikidata="Q213411" start="8828" end="8837" title="Cast Away" label="Cast Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q42229" start="8958" end="8968" title="Mel Gibson" label="Mel Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q459477" start="9102" end="9107" title="FedEx" label="FedEx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="9162" end="9171" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="9190" end="9201" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q335508" start="9215" end="9245" title="The Curse of the Jade Scorpion" label="The Curse of the Jade Scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q233854" start="9499" end="9515" title="Rosalind Russell" label="Rosalind Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066714" start="9525" end="9540" title="His Girl Friday" label="His Girl Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q297794" start="9592" end="9604" title="Yasmina Reza" label="Yasmina Reza"/>
<link wikidata="Q470753" start="9618" end="9626" title="Life x 3" label="Life x 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537544" start="9678" end="9690" title="A Good Woman (film)" label="A Good Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="9703" end="9715" title="femme fatale" label="femme fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q220918" start="9943" end="9957" title="Emilio Estevez" label="Emilio Estevez"/>
<link wikidata="Q679657" start="9977" end="9982" title="Bobby (2006 film)" label="Bobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187550" start="10031" end="10062" title="Assassination of Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q518675" start="10115" end="10174" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Cast in a Motion Picture" label="Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Cast in a Motion Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q763083" start="10187" end="10216" title="Hollywood Film Festival" label="Hollywood Film Festival Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321387" start="10296" end="10313" title="Then She Found Me" label="Then She Found Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q190631" start="10491" end="10503" title="Bette Midler" label="Bette Midler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361154" start="10574" end="10587" title="Elinor Lipman" label="Elinor Lipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="10811" end="10834" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="10965" end="10975" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q221594" start="11133" end="11151" title="As Good as It Gets" label="As Good as It Gets"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="11169" end="11174" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q199701" start="11404" end="11410" title="Kabuki" label="Kabuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4188983" start="11542" end="11551" title="Every Day (2010 film)" label="Every Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="11662" end="11679" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156089" start="11835" end="11846" title="Soul Surfer (film)" label="Soul Surfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q234216" start="11920" end="11936" title="Bethany Hamilton" label="Bethany Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019680" start="11982" end="11994" title="wide release" label="wide release"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092714" start="12150" end="12169" title="Cheryl Cohen-Greene" label="Cheryl Cohen-Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q514416" start="12173" end="12197" title="The Sessions (2012 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Sessions&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q459384" start="12216" end="12227" title="John Hawkes (actor)" label="John Hawkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q224159" start="12232" end="12247" title="William H. Macy" label="William H. Macy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068392" start="12302" end="12321" title="Nudity in film" label="full-frontal nudity"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="12754" end="12759" title="Academy Award" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="12775" end="12798" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="12823" end="12845" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q437741" start="13004" end="13020" title="Mary-Claire King" label="Mary-Claire King"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249542" start="13052" end="13073" title="Decoding Annie Parker" label="Decoding Annie Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029188" start="13176" end="13180" title="Ride (2014 film)" label="Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="13352" end="13367" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q48965022" start="13554" end="13572" title="The Miracle Season" label="The Miracle Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064316" start="13618" end="13644" title="Iowa City West High School" label="Iowa City West High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="13645" end="13655" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q60786672" start="13758" end="13771" title="World on Fire (TV series)" label="World on Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113742" start="13860" end="13878" title="Clare Hollingworth" label="Clare Hollingworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805197" start="14013" end="14031" title="Spectrum Originals" label="Spectrum Originals"/>
<link wikidata="Q115862463" start="14080" end="14118" title="Disney&amp;#x27;s Candlelight Processional" label="Disney&amp;#x27;s Candlelight Processional"/>
<link wikidata="Q206859" start="14122" end="14139" title="Walt Disney World" label="Walt Disney World"/>
<link wikidata="Q55080133" start="14207" end="14222" title="The Night Clerk" label="The Night Clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q760896" start="14239" end="14251" title="Tye Sheridan" label="Tye Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q106816260" start="14354" end="14367" title="Blindspotting (TV series)" label="Blindspotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q20973977" start="14386" end="14398" title="Daveed Diggs" label="Daveed Diggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q65029106" start="14403" end="14415" title="Rafael Casal" label="Rafael Casal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47064265" start="14435" end="14461" title="Blindspotting" label="2018 film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q113714306" start="14528" end="14538" title="Eureka Day" label="Eureka Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q868806" start="14548" end="14559" title="The Old Vic" label="The Old Vic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202056" start="14635" end="14646" title="Hank Azaria" label="Hank Azaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790269" start="14749" end="14765" title="Matthew Carnahan" label="Matthew Carnahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28100410" start="14872" end="14895" title="2017 Women&amp;#x27;s March" label="2017 Women&amp;#x27;s March"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="14918" end="14941" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44572" wikidata="Q299164" url="?curid=44572" title="Hackney">
<text>Hackney may refer to:
==Places==
=== London ===
* Hackney (parish), the originally medieval ancient parish
* Hackney, London, a district in London
* Hackney District (Metropolis), a local government district within the metropolitan area of London from 1855 to 1894
* Metropolitan Borough of Hackney, a local government area based on the ancient parish boundaries from 1900 to 1965
* Hackney (electoral division), a division of the Greater London Council from 1965 to 1973
* London Borough of Hackney, a local authority area created in 1965
* Hackney Central, a sub-district of Hackney which forms the commercial and administrative centre
* Hackney Wick, a sub-district of Hackney
* South Hackney, a sub-district of Hackney
* West Hackney, a sub-district of Hackney
* Hackney Central railway station
* Hackney Downs railway station
* Hackney Wick railway station
* Hackney Downs, an open space in Hackney
* Hackney Marshes, an open space in Hackney
* Hackney North and Stoke Newington (UK Parliament constituency)
* Hackney (UK Parliament constituency)
* Hackney South and Shoreditch (UK Parliament constituency)
* Hackney Central (ward), a political division of the council
* Hackney Downs (ward), a political division of the council
* Hackney College
* Hackney Wick Stadium
* Hackney Empire, a theatre and concert venue
* Hackney RFC, a rugby union club

===Elsewhere===
* Hackney, Derbyshire, a village near the town of Matlock, England
* Hackney, Guyana, a village
* Hackney, Kansas, United States
* Hackney, Missouri, United States
* Hackney, South Australia, a suburb of Adelaide, Australia

==Other uses==
* Hackney (automobile)
* Hackney (surname)
* Hackney horse, a breed of horse
* Hackney pony, a pony breed
* Hackney carriage, taxicabs in London and elsewhere popularly known as &#x27;black cabs&#x27;
* Hackney, a type of taxicab in the Republic of Ireland which cannot be &quot;hailed&quot; on the street

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q299164" start="0" end="7" title="Hackney" label="Hackney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637340" start="50" end="66" title="Hackney (parish)" label="Hackney (parish)"/>
<link wikidata="Q58888182" start="109" end="124" title="Hackney, London" label="Hackney, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637357" start="149" end="178" title="Hackney District (Metropolis)" label="Hackney District (Metropolis)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796224" start="267" end="298" title="Metropolitan Borough of Hackney" label="Metropolitan Borough of Hackney"/>
<link wikidata="Q123125641" start="383" end="411" title="Hackney (electoral division)" label="Hackney (electoral division)"/>
<link wikidata="Q205679" start="474" end="499" title="London Borough of Hackney" label="London Borough of Hackney"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861606" start="542" end="557" title="Hackney Central" label="Hackney Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q121623" start="640" end="652" title="Hackney Wick" label="Hackney Wick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567400" start="682" end="695" title="South Hackney" label="South Hackney"/>
<link wikidata="Q42847231" start="725" end="737" title="West Hackney" label="West Hackney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220302" start="767" end="798" title="Hackney Central railway station" label="Hackney Central railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572236" start="801" end="830" title="Hackney Downs railway station" label="Hackney Downs railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003534" start="833" end="861" title="Hackney Wick railway station" label="Hackney Wick railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637359" start="864" end="877" title="Hackney Downs" label="Hackney Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777438" start="906" end="921" title="Hackney Marshes" label="Hackney Marshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138286" start="950" end="1012" title="Hackney North and Stoke Newington (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Hackney North and Stoke Newington (UK Parliament constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637336" start="1015" end="1051" title="Hackney (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Hackney (UK Parliament constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113086" start="1054" end="1111" title="Hackney South and Shoreditch (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Hackney South and Shoreditch (UK Parliament constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637347" start="1114" end="1136" title="Hackney Central (ward)" label="Hackney Central (ward)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637360" start="1176" end="1196" title="Hackney Downs (ward)" label="Hackney Downs (ward)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001837" start="1236" end="1251" title="Hackney College" label="Hackney College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637382" start="1254" end="1274" title="Hackney Wick Stadium" label="Hackney Wick Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637363" start="1277" end="1291" title="Hackney Empire" label="Hackney Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637375" start="1323" end="1334" title="Hackney RFC" label="Hackney RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637333" start="1374" end="1393" title="Hackney, Derbyshire" label="Hackney, Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637331" start="1441" end="1456" title="Hackney, Guyana" label="Hackney, Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637337" start="1470" end="1485" title="Hackney, Kansas" label="Hackney, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q27985200" start="1503" end="1520" title="Hackney, Missouri" label="Hackney, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637334" start="1538" end="1562" title="Hackney, South Australia" label="Hackney, South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637338" start="1614" end="1634" title="Hackney (automobile)" label="Hackney (automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16870378" start="1637" end="1654" title="Hackney (surname)" label="Hackney (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q635926" start="1657" end="1670" title="Hackney horse" label="Hackney horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112880" start="1691" end="1703" title="Hackney pony" label="Hackney pony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273735" start="1720" end="1736" title="Hackney carriage" label="Hackney carriage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1826" end="1868" title="Taxis by country#Ireland" label="type of taxicab in the Republic of Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44575" wikidata="Q159950" url="?curid=44575" title="Russo-Japanese War">
<text>The Russo-Japanese War (8 February 1904 – 5 September 1905) was fought between the Russian Empire and the Empire of Japan over rival imperial ambitions in Manchuria and the Korean Empire. The major land battles of the war were fought on the Liaodong Peninsula and near Mukden in Southern Manchuria, with naval battles taking place in the Yellow Sea and the Sea of Japan.

Russia had pursued an expansionist policy in Siberia and the Far East since the reign of Ivan the Terrible in the 16th century. At the end of the First Sino-Japanese War, the Treaty of Shimonoseki of 1895 had ceded the Liaodong Peninsula and Port Arthur to Japan before the Triple Intervention, in which Russia, Germany, and France convinced Japan to relinquish its claim. Japan feared that Russia would impede its plans to establish a sphere of influence in mainland Asia, especially as Russia built the Trans-Siberian Railroad, began making inroads in Korea, and acquired a lease of the Liaodong Peninsula and Port Arthur from China in 1898. Japan signed the Anglo-Japanese Alliance in 1902, and began offering to recognize Russia&#x27;s dominance in Manchuria in exchange for recognition of Korea as part of Japan&#x27;s sphere of influence. However, this was rejected by Russia.

After negotiations broke down, Japan opened hostilities in a surprise attack on the Russian Pacific Fleet at Port Arthur on . Both sides declared war, and Japanese troops landed in Korea, crossed the Yalu River into Manchuria in May, and landed more forces on the Liaodong Peninsula. In August, the Japanese laid siege to Port Arthur, which eventually fell in January 1905. In March 1905, Japanese troops took Mukden, the Manchurian capital, after heavy fighting. The Russian Baltic Fleet, which had sailed over seven months and 18,000 nautical miles (33,000 km) from the Baltic Sea, arrived in the region in May and was intercepted and destroyed by the Japanese Combined Fleet at the Battle of Tsushima. The war was concluded with the Treaty of Portsmouth (), mediated by US President Theodore Roosevelt. 

The treaty recognized Japanese interests in Korea, and awarded to Japan Russia&#x27;s lease on the Liaodong Peninsula, control of the Russian-built South Manchuria Railway, and the southern half of the island of Sakhalin (Karafuto). The complete military victory of an Asian and non-Western nation over a European and Western power surprised international observers, and transformed the global balance of power, with the Empire of Japan emerging as a great power and the Russian Empire declining in prestige among the European powers. Russia&#x27;s incurrence of substantial casualties and losses for a cause which resulted in a humiliating defeat contributed to internal unrest culminating in the 1905 Russian Revolution, during which the Russian autocracy was forced to make concessions.

== Historical background ==

=== Modernization of Japan ===
After the Meiji Restoration in 1868, the Meiji government endeavoured to assimilate Western ideas, technological advances and ways of warfare. By the late 19th century, Japan had transformed itself into a modernized industrial state. The Japanese wanted to be recognized as equal with the Western powers. The Meiji Restoration had been intended to make Japan a modernized state, not a Westernized one, and Japan was an imperialist power, looking towards overseas expansionism.

In the years 1869–1873, the &quot;Seikanron&quot; (&quot;Conquer Korea Argument&quot;) had bitterly divided the Japanese elite: one faction wanted to conquer Korea immediately, another wanted to wait until Japan was further modernized before embarking on a war to conquer Korea; significantly, no one in the Japanese elite ever accepted the idea that the Koreans had the right to be independent, with only the question of timing dividing the two factions. In much the same way that Europeans used the &quot;backwardness&quot; of African and Asian nations as a reason for why they had to conquer them, for the Japanese elite the &quot;backwardness&quot; of China and Korea was proof of the inferiority of those nations, thus giving the Japanese the &quot;right&quot; to conquer them.

Count Inoue Kaoru, the foreign minister, gave a speech in 1887 saying &quot;What we must do is to transform our empire and our people, make the empire like the countries of Europe and our people like the peoples of Europe,&quot; going on to say that the Chinese and Koreans had essentially forfeited their right to be independent by not modernizing. Much of the pressure for an aggressive foreign policy in Japan came from below, with the advocates of a &quot;people&#x27;s rights&quot; movement calling for an elected parliament also favouring an ultra-nationalist line that took it for granted the Japanese had the &quot;right&quot; to annex Korea, as the &quot;people&#x27;s rights&quot; movement was led by those who favoured invading Korea in the years 1869–1873.

As part of the modernization process in Japan, social Darwinist ideas about the &quot;survival of the fittest&quot; were common from the 1880s onward and many ordinary Japanese resented the heavy taxes imposed by the government to modernize Japan, demanding something tangible like an overseas colony as a reward for their sacrifices.

Furthermore, the educational system of Meiji Japan was meant to train the schoolboys to be soldiers when they grew up, and as such, Japanese schools indoctrinated their students into &quot;Bushidō&quot; (&quot;way of the warrior&quot;), the fierce code of the samurai. Having indoctrinated the younger generations into &quot;Bushidō&quot;, the Meiji elite found themselves faced with a people who clamored for war, and regarded diplomacy as a weakness.

=== Pressure from the people ===
The British Japanologist Richard Storry wrote that the biggest misconception about Japan in the West was that the Japanese people were the &quot;docile&quot; instruments of the elite, when in fact much of the pressure for Japan&#x27;s wars from 1894 to 1941 came from the ordinary people, who demanded a &quot;tough&quot; foreign policy, and tended to engage in riots and assassination when foreign policy was perceived to be pusillanimous.

Though the Meiji oligarchy refused to allow liberal democracy, they did seek to appropriate some of the demands of the &quot;people&#x27;s rights&quot; movement by allowing an elected Imperial Diet in 1890 (with limited powers and an equally limited franchise) and by pursuing an aggressive foreign policy towards Korea.

In 1884, Japan had encouraged a coup in the Kingdom of Korea by a pro-Japanese reformist faction, which led to the conservative government calling upon China for help, leading to a clash between Chinese and Japanese soldiers in Seoul. At the time, Tokyo did not feel ready to risk a war with China, and the crisis was ended by the Convention of Tientsin, which left Korea more strongly in the Chinese sphere of influence, though it did give the Japanese the right to intervene in Korea. All through the 1880s and early 1890s, the government in Tokyo was regularly criticized for not being aggressive enough in Korea, leading Japanese historian Masao Maruyama to write: Just as Japan was subject to pressure from the Great Powers, so she would apply pressure to still weaker countriesa clear case of the transfer psychology. In this regard it is significant that ever since the Meiji period demands for a tough foreign policy have come from the common people, that is, from those who are at the receiving end of oppression at home.

=== Russian Eastern expansion ===
Tsarist Russia, as a major imperial power, had ambitions in the East. By the 1890s it had extended its realm across Central Asia to Afghanistan, absorbing local states in the process. The Russian Empire stretched from Poland in the west to the Kamchatka Peninsula in the east. With its construction of the Trans-Siberian Railway to the port of Vladivostok, Russia hoped to further consolidate its influence and presence in the region. In the Tsushima incident of 1861 Russia had directly assaulted Japanese territory.

=== First Sino-Japanese War (1894–95) ===
The first major war the Empire of Japan fought following the Meiji Restoration was against China, from 1894 to 1895. The war revolved around the issue of control and influence over Korea under the rule of the Joseon dynasty. From the 1880s onward, there had been vigorous competition for influence in Korea between China and Japan. The Korean court was prone to factionalism, and at the time was badly divided between a reformist camp that was pro-Japanese and a more conservative faction that was pro-Chinese. In 1884, a pro-Japanese coup attempt was put down by Chinese troops, and a &quot;residency&quot; under General Yuan Shikai was established in Seoul. A peasant rebellion led by the Tonghak religious movement led to a request by the Korean government for the Qing dynasty to send in troops to stabilize the country. The Empire of Japan responded by sending their own force to Korea to crush the Tonghak and installed a puppet government in Seoul. China objected and war ensued. Hostilities proved brief, with Japanese ground troops routing Chinese forces on the Liaodong Peninsula and nearly destroying the Chinese Beiyang Fleet in the Battle of the Yalu River. Japan and China signed the Treaty of Shimonoseki, which ceded the Liaodong Peninsula and the island of Taiwan to Japan. After the peace treaty, Russia, Germany, and France forced Japan to withdraw from the Liaodong Peninsula. The leaders of Japan did not feel that they possessed the strength to resist the combined might of Russia, Germany and France, and so gave in to the ultimatum. At the same time, the Japanese did not abandon their attempts to force Korea into the Japanese sphere of influence. On 8 October 1895, Queen Min of Korea, the leader of the anti-Japanese and pro-Chinese faction at the Korean court was murdered by Japanese agents within the halls of the Gyeongbokgung palace, an act that backfired badly as it turned Korean public opinion against Japan. In early 1896, King Gojong of Korea fled to the Russian legation in Seoul, believing that his life was in danger from Japanese agents, and Russian influence in Korea started to predominate. In the aftermath of the flight of the King, a popular uprising overthrew the pro-Japanese government and several cabinet ministers were lynched in the streets.

In 1897, Russia occupied the Liaodong Peninsula, built the Port Arthur fortress, and based the Russian Pacific Fleet in the port. Russia&#x27;s acquisition of Port Arthur was primarily an anti-British move to counter the British occupation of Wei-hai-Wei, but in Japan this was perceived as an anti-Japanese move. Germany occupied Jiaozhou Bay, built the Tsingtao fortress, and based the German East Asia Squadron in this port. Between 1897 and 1903, the Russians built the Chinese Eastern Railway (CER) in Manchuria. The Chinese Eastern Railroad was owned jointly by the Russian and Chinese governments, but the company&#x27;s management was entirely Russian, the line was built to the Russian gauge and Russian troops were stationed in Manchuria to protect rail traffic on the CER from bandit attacks. The headquarters of the CER company was located in the new Russian-built city of Harbin, the &quot;Moscow of the Orient&quot;. From 1897 onwards, Manchuriawhile still nominally part of the &quot;Great Qing Empire&quot;started to resemble more and more a Russian province.

=== Russian encroachment ===
In December 1897, a Russian fleet appeared off Port Arthur. After three months, in 1898, China and Russia negotiated a convention by which China leased (to Russia) Port Arthur, Talienwan and the surrounding waters. The two parties further agreed that the convention could be extended by mutual agreement. The Russians clearly expected such an extension, for they lost no time in occupying the territory and in fortifying Port Arthur, their sole warm-water port on the Pacific coast and of great strategic value. A year later, to consolidate their position, the Russians began to build a new railway from Harbin through Mukden to Port Arthur, the South Manchurian Railroad. The development of the railway became a contributory factor to the Boxer Rebellion, when Boxer forces burned the railway stations.

The Russians also began to make inroads into Korea. A large point of Russia&#x27;s growing influence in Korea was Gojong&#x27;s internal exile to the Russian legation. A pro-Russian cabinet emerged in the Korean Empire. In 1901, Tsar Nicholas II told Prince Henry of Prussia, &quot;I do not want to seize Korea but under no circumstances can I allow Japan to become firmly established there. That will be a &quot;casus belli&quot;.&quot; By 1898 they had acquired mining and forestry concessions near the Yalu and Tumen rivers, causing the Japanese much anxiety. Japan decided to attack before the Russians completed the Trans-Siberian Railway.

=== Boxer Rebellion ===

The Russians and the Japanese both contributed troops to the Eight-Nation Alliance sent in 1900 to quell the Boxer Rebellion and to relieve the international legations besieged in the Chinese capital, Beijing. Russia had already sent 177,000 soldiers to Manchuria, nominally to protect its railways under construction. Though the Qing imperial army and the Boxer rebels united to fight against the invasion, they were quickly overrun and ejected from Manchuria. After the Boxer Rebellion, 100,000 Russian soldiers were stationed in Manchuria. The Russian troops settled in and despite assurances they would vacate the area after the crisis, by 1903 the Russians had not established a timetable for withdrawal and had actually strengthened their position in Manchuria.

=== Pre-war negotiations ===
The Japanese statesman Itō Hirobumi started to negotiate with the Russians. He regarded Japan as too weak to evict the Russians militarily, so he proposed giving Russia control over Manchuria in exchange for Japanese control of northern Korea. Of the five &quot;Genrō&quot; (elder statesmen) who made up the Meiji oligarchy, Itō Hirobumi and Count Inoue Kaoru opposed the idea of war against Russia on financial grounds, while Katsura Tarō, Komura Jutarō and Field Marshal Yamagata Aritomo favored war. Meanwhile, Japan and Britain had signed the Anglo-Japanese Alliance in 1902 – the British seeking to restrict naval competition by keeping the Russian Pacific seaports of Vladivostok and Port Arthur from their full use. Japan&#x27;s alliance with the British meant, in part, that if any nation allied itself with Russia during any war against Japan, then Britain would enter the war on Japan&#x27;s side. Russia could no longer count on receiving help from either Germany or France without the danger of British involvement in the war. With such an alliance, Japan felt free to commence hostilities if necessary.

The 1890s and 1900s marked the height of the &quot;Yellow Peril&quot; propaganda by the German government, and the German Emperor Wilhelm II () often wrote letters to his cousin Emperor Nicholas II of Russia, praising him as the &quot;saviour of the white race&quot; and urging Russia forward in Asia. From November 1894 onward, Wilhelm had been writing letters praising Nicholas as Europe&#x27;s defender from the &quot;Yellow Peril&quot;, assuring the Tsar that God Himself had &quot;chosen&quot; Russia to defend Europe from the alleged Asian threat. On 1 November 1902 Wilhelm wrote to Nicholas that &quot;certain symptoms in the East seem to show that Japan is becoming a rather restless customer&quot; and &quot;it is evident to every unbiased mind that Korea must and will be Russian&quot;. Wilhelm ended his letter with the warning that Japan and China would soon unite against Europe, writing: Twenty to thirty million Chinese, supported by a half dozen Japanese divisions, led by competent, intrepid Japanese officers, full of hatred for Christianitythat is a vision of the future that cannot be contemplated without concern, and it is not impossible. On the contrary, it is the realisation of the yellow peril, which I described a few years ago and I was ridiculed by the majority of people for my graphic depiction of it ... Your devoted friend and cousin, Willy, Admiral of the Atlantic.

Wilhelm aggressively encouraged Russia&#x27;s ambitions in Asia because France, Russia&#x27;s closest ally since 1894, was less than supportive of Russian expansionism in Asia, and it was believed in Berlin that German support of Russia might break up the Franco-Russian alliance and lead to a new German–Russian alliance.
The French had made it clear that they disapproved of Nicholas&#x27;s forward policy in Asia; the French Premier Maurice Rouvier (in office: May to December 1887) publicly declaring that the Franco-Russian alliance applied only in Europe, not to Asia,
and that France would remain neutral if Japan attacked Russia. The American president Theodore Roosevelt (in office 1901–1909), who was attempting to mediate the Russian–Japanese dispute, complained that Wilhelm&#x27;s &quot;Yellow Peril&quot; propaganda, which strongly implied that Germany might go to war against Japan in support of Russia, encouraged Russian intransigence. On 24 July 1905, in a letter to the British diplomat Cecil Spring Rice, Roosevelt wrote that Wilhelm bore partial responsibility for the war as &quot;he has done all he could to bring it about&quot;, charging that Wilhelm&#x27;s constant warnings about the &quot;Yellow Peril&quot; had made the Russians uninterested in compromise as Nicholas believed that Germany would intervene if Japan attacked.

The implicit promise of German support suggested by Wilhelm&#x27;s &quot;Yellow Peril&quot; speeches and letters to Nicholas led many decision-makers in Saint Petersburg to believe that Russia&#x27;s military weaknesses in the Far East (like the uncompleted Trans-Siberian railroad line) did not matterthey assumed that the &quot;Reich&quot; would come to Russia&#x27;s assistance if war should come. In fact, neither Wilhelm nor his Chancellor Prince Bernhard von Bülow (in office: 1900–1909) had much interest in East Asia, and Wilhelm&#x27;s letters to Nicholas praising him as Europe&#x27;s saviour against the &quot;Yellow Peril&quot; were really meant to provoke change in the balance of power in Europe, as Wilhelm believed that any Russian entanglement with Japan would break up the Franco-Russian alliance and lead to Nicholas signing an alliance with Germany. This was especially the case as Germany had embarked upon the &quot;Tirpitz Plan&quot; and a policy of &quot;Weltpolitik&quot; (from 1897) meant to challenge Britain&#x27;s position as the world&#x27;s leading power. Since Britain was allied to Japan, if Germany could manipulate Russia and Japan into going to war with each other, this in turn would allegedly lead to Russia turning towards Germany.

Furthermore, Wilhelm believed if a Russian–German alliance emerged, France would be compelled to join it. He also hoped that having Russia pursue an expansionist policy in Asia would distract and keep Russia out of the Balkans, thus removing the main source of tension between Russia and Germany&#x27;s ally Austria-Hungary. During the war, Nicholas, who took at face value Wilhelm&#x27;s &quot;Yellow Peril&quot; speeches, placed much hope in German intervention on his side. More than once Nicholas chose to continue the war out of the belief that the Kaiser would come to his aid.

Despite previous assurances that Russia would completely withdraw from Manchuria the forces it had sent to crush the Boxer Rebellion by 8 April 1903, that day passed with no reduction in Russian forces in that region. In Japan, university students demonstrated both against Russia and against their own government for not taking any action. On 28 July 1903 Kurino Shin&#x27;ichirō, the Japanese minister in Saint Petersburg, was instructed to present his country&#x27;s view opposing Russia&#x27;s consolidation plans in Manchuria. On 3 August 1903 the Japanese minister handed in the following document to serve as the basis for further negotiations:
# Mutual engagement to respect the independence and territorial integrity of the Chinese and Korean empires and to maintain the principle of equal opportunity for the commerce and industry of all nations in those countries.
# Reciprocal recognition of Japan&#x27;s preponderating interests in Korea and Russia&#x27;s special interests in railway enterprises in Manchuria, and of the right of Japan to take in Korea and of Russia to take in Manchuria such measures as may be necessary for the protection of their respective interests as above defined, subject, however, to the provisions of article I of this agreement.
# Reciprocal undertaking on the part of Russia and Japan not to impede development of those industrial and commercial activities respectively of Japan in Korea and of Russia in Manchuria, which are not inconsistent with the stipulations of article I of this agreement. Additional engagement on the part of Russia not to impede the eventual extension of the Korean railway into southern Manchuria so as to connect with the East China and Shan-hai-kwan–Newchwang lines.
# Reciprocal engagement that in case it is found necessary to send troops by Japan to Korea, or by Russia to Manchuria, for the purpose either of protecting the interests mentioned in article II of this agreement, or of suppressing insurrection or disorder calculated to create international complications, the troops so sent are in no case to exceed the actual number required and are to be forthwith recalled as soon as their missions are accomplished.
# Recognition on the part of Russia of the exclusive right of Japan to give advice and assistance in the interest of reform and good government in Korea, including necessary military assistance.
# This agreement to supplant all previous arrangements between Japan and Russia respecting Korea.
On 3 October 1903 the Russian minister to Japan, Roman Rosen, presented to the Japanese government the Russian counter proposal as the basis of negotiations, as follows:
# Mutual engagement to respect the independence and territorial integrity of the Korean Empire.
# Recognition by Russia of Japan&#x27;s preponderating interests in Korea and of the right of Japan to give advice and assistance to Korea tending to improve the civil administration of the empire without infringing the stipulations of article I.
# Engagement on the part of Russia not to impede the commercial and industrial undertakings of Japan in Korea, nor to oppose any measures taken for the purpose of protecting them so long as such measures do not infringe the stipulations of article I.
# Recognition of the right of Japan to send for the same purpose troops to Korea, with the knowledge of Russia, but their number not to exceed that actually required, and with the engagement on the part of Japan to recall such troops as soon as their mission is accomplished.
# Mutual engagement not to use any part of the territory of Korea for strategical purposes nor to undertake on the coasts of Korea any military works capable of menacing the freedom of navigation in the Straits of Korea.
# Mutual engagement to consider that part of the territory of Korea lying to the north of the 39th parallel as a neutral zone into which neither of the contracting parties shall introduce troops.
# Recognition by Japan of Manchuria and its littoral as in all respects outside her sphere of interest.
# This agreement to supplant all previous agreements between Russia and Japan respecting Korea.

During the Russian–Japanese talks, the Japanese historian Hirono Yoshihiko noted, &quot;once negotiations commenced between Japan and Russia, Russia scaled back its demands and claims regarding Korea bit by bit, making a series of concessions that Japan regarded as serious compromises on Russia&#x27;s part&quot;. The war might not have broken out had not the issues of Korea and Manchuria become linked. The Korean and Manchurian issues had become linked as the Prime Minister of Japan, Katsura Tarō (in office 1901–1906), decided if war did come, that Japan was more likely to have the support of the United States and Great Britain if the war could be presented as a struggle for free trade against the highly protectionist Russian empire, in which case, Manchuria, which was the larger market than Korea, was more likely to engage Anglo-American sympathies. Throughout the war, Japanese propaganda presented the recurring theme of Japan as a &quot;civilized&quot; power (that supported free trade and would implicitly allow foreign businesses into the resource-rich region of Manchuria) vs. Russia the &quot;uncivilized&quot; power (that was protectionist and wanted to keep the riches of Manchuria all to itself).

Emperor Gojong of Korea (King from 1864 to 1897, Emperor from 1897 to 1907) came to believe that the issue dividing Japan and Russia was Manchuria, and chose to pursue a policy of neutrality as the best way of preserving Korean independence as the crisis mounted. In a series of reports to Beijing, Hu Weide, the Chinese ambassador in Saint Petersburg from July 1902 to September 1907, looked closely at whether a Russian or a Japanese victory would be favourable to China, and argued that the latter was preferable, as he maintained a Japanese victory presented the better chance for China to regain sovereignty over Manchuria. In December 1903 China decided to remain neutral if war came, because though Japan was the only power capable of evicting Russia from Manchuria, the extent of Japanese ambitions in Manchuria was not clear to Beijing.

Russian–Japanese negotiations then followed, although by early January 1904 the Japanese government had realised that Russia was not interested in settling the Manchurian or Korean issues. Instead, Russia&#x27;s goal was buying timevia diplomacyto further build up militarily. In December 1903, Wilhelm wrote in a marginal note on a diplomatic dispatch about his role in inflaming Russo-Japanese relations:Since 97Kiaochowwe have never left Russia in any doubt that we would cover her back in Europe, in case she decided to pursue a bigger policy in the Far East that might lead to military complications (with the aim of relieving our eastern border from the fearful pressure and threat of the massive Russian army!). Whereupon, Russia took Port Arthur and &quot;trusting us&quot;, took her fleet &quot;out of the Baltic&quot;, thereby making herself &quot;vulnerable to us&quot; by sea. In Danzig 01 and Reval 02, the same assurance was given again, with result that entire Russian divisions from Poland and European Russia were and are being sent to the Far East. This would not had happened if our governments had not been in agreement!
A recurring theme of Wilhelm&#x27;s letters to Nicholas was that &quot;Holy Russia&quot; had been &quot;chosen&quot; by God to save the &quot;entire white race&quot; from the &quot;Yellow Peril&quot;, and that Russia was &quot;entitled&quot; to annex all of Korea, Manchuria, and northern China up to Beijing. Wilhelm went on to assure Nicholas that once Russia had defeated Japan, this would be a deadly blow to British diplomacy, and that the two emperors, the self-proclaimed &quot;Admiral of the Atlantic&quot; and the &quot;Admiral of the Pacific&quot;, would rule Eurasia together, making them able to challenge British sea power as the resources of Eurasia would make their empires immune to a British blockade, and thus allowing Germany and Russia to &quot;divide up the best&quot; of the British colonies in Asia between them.

Nicholas had been prepared to compromise with Japan, but after receiving a letter from Wilhelm attacking him as a coward for his willingness to compromise with the Japanese (who, Wilhelm never ceasing reminding Nicholas, represented the &quot;Yellow Peril&quot;) for the sake of peace, became more obstinate. Wilhelm had written to Nicholas stating that the question of Russian interests in Manchuria and Korea was beside the point, saying instead it was a matter of Russia:...undertaking the protection and defence of the White Race, and with it, Christian civilization, against the Yellow Race. And whatever the Japs are determined to ensure the domination of the Yellow Race in East Asia, to put themselves at its head and organise and lead it into battle against the White Race. That is the kernel of the situation, and therefore there can be very little doubt about where the sympathies of all half-way intelligent Europeans should lie. England betrayed Europe&#x27;s interests to America in a cowardly and shameful way over the Panama Canal question, so as to be left in &#x27;peace&#x27; by the Yankees. Will the &#x27;Tsar&#x27; likewise betray the interests of the White Race to the Yellow as to be &#x27;left in peace&#x27; and not embarrass the Hague tribunal too much?.
When Nicholas replied that he still wanted peace, Wilhelm wrote back in a telegram &quot;You innocent angel!&quot;, telling his advisors &quot;This is the language of an innocent angel. But not that of a White Tsar!&quot; Nevertheless, Tokyo believed that Russia was not serious about seeking a peaceful solution to the dispute. On 13 January 1904, Japan proposed a formula by which Manchuria would remain outside Japan&#x27;s sphere of influence and, reciprocally, Korea outside Russia&#x27;s. On 21 December 1903, the Katsura cabinet voted to go to war against Russia.

By 4 February 1904, no formal reply had been received from Saint Petersburg. On 6 February the Japanese minister to Russia, Kurino Shin&#x27;ichirō, was recalled, and Japan severed diplomatic relations with Russia.

Potential diplomatic resolution of territorial concerns between Japan and Russia failed; historians have argued that this directly resulted from the actions of Emperor Nicholas II. Crucially, Nicholas mismanaged his government. Although certain scholars contend that the situation arose from the determination of Nicholas II to use the war against Japan to spark a revival in Russian patriotism, no historical evidence supports this claim. The Tsar&#x27;s advisors did not support the war, foreseeing problems in transporting troops and supplies from European Russia to the East. The Tsar himself repeatedly delayed negotiations with the Japanese government as he believed that he was protected by God and the autocracy. The Japanese understanding of this can be seen in a telegram from Japanese minister of foreign affairs, Komura, to the minister to Russia, in which he stated:

...the Japanese government have at all times during the progress of the negotiations made it a special point to give prompt answers to all propositions of the Russian government. The negotiations have now been pending for no less than four months, and they have not yet reached a stage where the final issue can with certainty be predicted. In these circumstances the Japanese government cannot but regard with grave concern the situation for which the delays in negotiations are largely responsible.

Some scholars have suggested that Nicholas II dragged Japan into war intentionally, in hopes of reviving Russian nationalism. This notion conflicts with a comment made by Nicholas to Kaiser Wilhelm of Germany, saying there would be no war because he &quot;did not wish it&quot;.
This does not reject the claim that Russia played an aggressive role in the East, which it did; rather, it means that Russia unwisely calculated and supposed that Japan would not go to war against Russia&#x27;s far larger and seemingly superior navy and army. Nicholas held the Japanese in contempt as &quot;yellow monkeys&quot;, and he took for granted that the Japanese would simply yield in the face of Russia&#x27;s superior power, which thus explains his unwillingness to compromise. Evidence of Russia&#x27;s false sense of security and superiority to Japan is seen by Russian reference to Japan&#x27;s choosing war as a big mistake.

== Status of combatants ==

=== Japan ===

Japan had conducted detailed studies of the Russian Far East and Manchuria prior to the war and, as it was mandatory for Japanese officers to speak one foreign language, Japan had access to superior maps during the conflict. The Japanese army relied on conscription, introduced in 1873, to maintain its military strength and to provide a large army in times of war. This system of conscription gave Japan a large pool of reserves to draw upon. The Active army and the 1st line reserve (used to bring the active army to wartime strength) totalled 380,000; the 2nd line reserve contained 200,000; the conscript reserve a further 50,000; and the kokumin (akin to a national guard or militia) 220,000. This amounted to 850,000 trained troops available for service, in addition to 4,250,000 men in the untrained reserve.

Immediately available to Japan on the declaration of war were 257,000 infantry, 11,000 cavalry and 894 pieces of artillery. These figures were divided between the Imperial Guards division, 12 regular divisions, 2 cavalry brigades, 2 artillery brigades, 13 reserve brigades, depot troops and the garrison of Taiwan. A regular Japanese division contained 11,400 infantry, 430 cavalry and 36 guns – the guns being organised into batteries of 6. Though another 4 divisions and 4 reserve brigades were formed in 1904, no further formations were created as the reserves were used to replace losses sustained in combat. Japanese reserves were given a full year of training before entering combat, though as the war progressed this was reduced to 6 months due to high casualties. The Japanese army did not follow the European convention of implementing Corps, thus there were no corps troops or command and the Japanese divisions were immediately subordinate to armies.

Olender gives a different appraisal of Japanese strength, maintaining that there were 350,000 men of the standing army and 1st reserve, with an additional 850,000 trained men in reserve, creating a total trained force of 1,200,000 men. The breakdown of the Japanese standing army was different too, with Olender giving each Japanese division 19,000 men including auxiliary troops; he also states that the 13 reserve brigades contained 8,000 men each and mentions 20 fortress battalions, which is omitted by Connaughton. It is further stated that the Japanese army possessed 1,080 field guns and between 120 and 150 heavy guns at the war&#x27;s commencement.
Japanese cavalry was not considered the elite of the army as was the case in Russia; instead Japanese cavalry primarily acted as scouts and fought dismounted, armed with carbine and sword; this was reflected in the fact that each cavalry brigade contained 6 machine guns.

=== Russia ===
There is no consensus over how many Russian troops were present in the Far East around the time of the commencement of the war. One estimate states that the Russian army possessed 60,000 infantry, 3,000 cavalry and 164 guns, mostly at Vladivostok and Port Arthur with a portion at Harbin. This was reinforced by the middle of February to 95,000 with 45,000 at Vladivostok, 8,000 at Harbin, 9,000 at Haicheng, 11,000 on the Yalu River and 22,000 at Port Arthur.

Olender gives the figure at 100,000 men including 8 infantry divisions, fortress troops and support troops. The entire Russian army in 1904 amounted to 1,200,000 men in 29 Corps. The Russian plan was immensely flawed as the Russians possessed only 24,000 potential reinforcements east of Lake Baikal when the war commenced. They would be reinforced by 35,000 men after 4 months and a further 60,000 men 10 months after the commencement of the war at which point they would take the offensive. This plan was based on the erroneous belief that the Japanese army could only mobilise 400,000 with them being unable to field more than 250,000 in an operational sense and 80,000–100,000 of their operational strength being necessary to secure supply lines and therefore only 150,000–170,000 Japanese soldiers would be available for field action. The possibility of Port Arthur being taken was dismissed entirely.

An alternative figure for forces in the Far East is given at over 150,000 men and 266 guns, with Vladivostok and Port Arthur containing a combined force of 45,000 men and with an additional 55,000 engaged in guarding lines of communication, leaving only 50,000 troops to take the field.

Unlike the Japanese, the Russians did utilise the Corps system and in fact maintained two distinct styles of Corps: the European and the Siberian. The two corps both possessed two divisions and their corresponding troop numbers, but a Siberian Division was much smaller, containing only 3,400 men and 20 guns, with a corps containing around 12,000 men and lacking both artillery and divisional guns. Russia only possessed two Siberian Corps, both unprepared for war. After war was declared, this number was raised to seven as the conflict progressed. The European Corps in comparison contained 28,000 soldiers and 112 guns with 6 such corps sent to the Far East during the war – a further three being dispatched that did not arrive before the war ended.

Russian Logistics were hampered by the fact that the only connection to European Russia was the Trans-Siberian Railway, which remained incomplete as the railway was not connected at Lake Baikal. A single train would take between 15 and 40 days to traverse the railway, with the common figure being closer to 40 days. A single battalion would take a month to transport from Moscow to Shenyang. After the line&#x27;s eventual completion, 20 trains ran daily and by the conclusion of the war some 410,000 soldiers, 93,000 horses and 1,000 guns had been transported.

The tactics utilised by the Russians were outdated. Russian infantry still held to the maxim of Suvorov over a century after his death. The Russian command still used strategies from the Crimean war, attacking en echelon across a wide front in closed formations; it was not uncommon for Russian higher command to bypass their intermediate commanders and issue orders directly to battalions, thus creating confusion during combat.

=== Ship distribution ===
== Declaration of war ==
Japan issued a declaration of war on 8 February 1904. However, three hours before Japan&#x27;s declaration of war was received by the Russian government, and without warning, the Imperial Japanese Navy attacked the Russian Far East Fleet at Port Arthur.

Tsar Nicholas II was stunned by news of the attack. He could not believe that Japan would commit an act of war without a formal declaration, and had been assured by his ministers that the Japanese would not fight. When the attack came, according to Cecil Spring Rice, first secretary at the British Embassy, it left the Tsar &quot;almost incredulous&quot;.

Russia declared war on Japan eight days later. Japan, in response, made reference to the Russian attack on Sweden in 1808 without declaration of war, although the requirement to mediate disputes between states before commencing hostilities was made international law in 1899, and again in 1907, with the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907.

The Principality of Montenegro also declared war on Japan in gratitude for Russia&#x27;s political support of the Montenegrin prince. The gesture was symbolic and no soldiers from the army were ever deployed in the far East but a few Montenegrins volunteered and joined the Russian army.

The Qing Empire favoured the Japanese position and even offered military aid, but Japan declined it. However, Yuan Shikai sent envoys to Japanese generals several times to deliver foodstuffs and alcoholic drinks. Native Manchurians joined the war on both sides as hired troops.

== Campaign of 1904 ==
Port Arthur, on the Liaodong Peninsula in the south of Manchuria, had been fortified into a major naval base by the Russian Imperial Army. Since it needed to control the sea in order to fight a war on the Asian mainland, Japan&#x27;s first military objective was to neutralize the Russian fleet at Port Arthur.

=== Battle of Port Arthur ===

On the night of 8 February 1904, the Japanese fleet under Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō opened the war with a surprise torpedo boat destroyer attack on the Russian ships at Port Arthur. The attack heavily damaged the and , the heaviest battleships in Russia&#x27;s Far Eastern theatre, and the 6,600 ton protected cruiser . These attacks developed into the Battle of Port Arthur the next morning. A series of indecisive naval engagements followed, in which Admiral Tōgō was unable to attack the Russian fleet successfully as it was protected by the shore batteries of the harbour, and the Russians were reluctant to leave the harbour for the open seas, especially after the death of Admiral Stepan Osipovich Makarov from a naval mine on 13 April 1904. Although the actual Battle of Port Arthur was indecisive, the initial attacks had a devastating psychological effect on Russia, which had been confident about the prospect of war. The Japanese had seized the initiative while the Russians waited in port.

These engagements provided cover for a Japanese landing near Incheon in Korea. From Incheon the Japanese occupied Hanseong and then the rest of Korea. By the end of April, the Japanese Imperial Army under Kuroki Tamemoto was ready to cross the Yalu River into Russian-occupied Manchuria.

=== Blockade of Port Arthur ===
The Japanese attempted to deny the Russians use of Port Arthur. During the night of 13–14 February, the Japanese attempted to block the entrance to Port Arthur by sinking several concrete-filled steamers in the deep water channel to the port, but they sank too deep to be effective. A similar attempt to block the harbour entrance during the night of 3–4 May also failed. In March, the charismatic Vice Admiral Makarov had taken command of the First Russian Pacific Squadron with the intention of breaking out of the Port Arthur blockade.

On 12 April 1904, two Russian pre-dreadnought battleships, the flagship and the , slipped out of port but struck Japanese mines off Port Arthur. The &quot;Petropavlovsk&quot; sank almost immediately, while the &quot;Pobeda&quot; had to be towed back to port for extensive repairs.

On 15 April 1904, the Russian government made overtures threatening to seize the British war correspondents who were taking the ship into war zones to report for the London-based &quot;Times&quot; newspaper, citing concerns about the possibility of the British giving away Russian positions to the Japanese fleet.

The Russians quickly learned, and soon employed, the Japanese tactic of offensive minelaying. On 15 May 1904, two Japanese battleships, the and the , were lured into a recently laid Russian minefield off Port Arthur, each striking at least two mines. The &quot;Hatsuse&quot; sank within minutes, taking 450 sailors with her, while the &quot;Yashima&quot; sank while under tow towards Korea for repairs. On 23 June 1904, a breakout attempt by the Russian squadron, now under the command of Admiral Wilgelm Vitgeft, failed. By the end of the month, Japanese artillery were firing shells into the harbour.

=== Siege of Port Arthur ===

The siege of Port Arthur commenced in April 1904. Japanese troops tried numerous frontal assaults on the fortified hilltops overlooking the harbour, which were defeated with Japanese casualties in the thousands. With the aid of several batteries of 11-inch (280 mm) L/10 howitzers, the Japanese were eventually able to capture the key hilltop bastion in December 1904. With a spotter at the end of a phone line located at this vantage point, the long-range artillery was able to shell the Russian fleet, which was unable to retaliate against the land-based artillery invisible over the other side of hilltop, and was unable or unwilling to sail out against the blockading fleet. Four Russian battleships and two cruisers were sunk in succession, with the fifth and last battleship being forced to scuttle a few weeks later. Thus, all capital ships of the Russian fleet in the Pacific were sunk. This is probably the only example in military history when such a scale of devastation was achieved by land-based artillery against major warships.
Meanwhile, attempts to relieve the besieged city by land also failed, and, after the Battle of Liaoyang in late August, the northern Russian force that might have been able to relieve Port Arthur retreated to Mukden (Shenyang). Major General Anatoly Stessel, commander of the Port Arthur garrison, believed that the purpose of defending the city was lost after the fleet had been destroyed. In general, the Russian defenders were suffering disproportionate casualties each time the Japanese attacked. In particular, several large underground mines were exploded in late December, resulting in the costly capture of a few more pieces of the defensive line. Stessel, therefore, decided to surrender to the surprised Japanese generals on 2 January 1905. He made his decision without consulting either the other military staff present, or the Tsar and military command, all of whom disagreed with the decision. Stessel was convicted by a court-martial in 1908 and sentenced to death on account of an incompetent defense and for disobeying orders. He was later pardoned.

=== Anglo–Japanese intelligence co-operation ===
Even before the war, British and Japanese intelligence had co-operated against Russia due to the Anglo-Japanese Alliance. During the war, Indian Army stations in Malaya and China often intercepted and read wireless and telegraph cable traffic relating to the war, which was shared with the Japanese. In their turn, the Japanese shared information about Russia with the British with one British official writing of the &quot;perfect quality&quot; of Japanese intelligence. In particular, British and Japanese intelligence gathered much evidence that Germany was supporting Russia in the war as part of a bid to disturb the balance of power in Europe, which led to British officials increasingly perceiving Germany as a threat to the international order.

=== Battle of Yalu River ===

In contrast to the Japanese strategy of rapidly gaining ground to control Manchuria, Russian strategy focused on fighting delaying actions to gain time for reinforcements to arrive via the long Trans-Siberian Railway, which was incomplete near Irkutsk at the time. On 1 May 1904, the Battle of Yalu River became the first major land battle of the war; Japanese troops stormed a Russian position led by General Mikhail Zasulich after crossing the river. The defeat of the Russian Eastern Detachment removed the perception that the Japanese would be an easy enemy, that the war would be short, and that Russia would be the overwhelming victor. This was also the first battle in decades to be an Asian victory over a European power and marked Russia&#x27;s inability to match Japan&#x27;s military prowess. Japanese troops proceeded to land at several points on the Manchurian coast, and in a series of engagements, drove the Russians back towards Port Arthur. The subsequent battles, including the Battle of Nanshan on 25 May 1904, were marked by heavy Japanese losses largely from attacking entrenched Russian positions.

=== Battle of the Yellow Sea ===
With the death of Admiral Stepan Makarov during the siege of Port Arthur in April 1904, Admiral Wilgelm Vitgeft was appointed commander of the battle fleet and was ordered to make a sortie from Port Arthur and deploy his force to Vladivostok. Flying his flag in the French-built pre-dreadnought , Vitgeft proceeded to lead his six battleships, four cruisers, and 14 torpedo boat destroyers into the Yellow Sea in the early morning of 10 August 1904. Waiting for him was Admiral Tōgō and his fleet of four battleships, 10 cruisers, and 18 torpedo boat destroyers.

At approximately 12:15, the battleship fleets obtained visual contact with each other, and at 13:00 with Tōgō crossing Vitgeft&#x27;s &quot;T&quot;, they commenced main battery fire at a range of about eight miles, the longest ever conducted up to that time. For about thirty minutes the battleships pounded one another until they had closed to less than four miles and began to bring their secondary batteries into play. At 18:30, a hit from one of Tōgō&#x27;s battleships struck Vitgeft&#x27;s flagship&#x27;s bridge, killing him instantly.

With the &quot;Tsesarevich&quot;″s helm jammed and their admiral killed in action, she turned from her battle line, causing confusion among her fleet. However, Tōgō was determined to sink the Russian flagship and continued pounding her, and it was saved only by the gallant charge of the American-built , whose captain successfully drew away Tōgō&#x27;s heavy fire from the Russian flagship. Knowing of the impending battle with the battleship reinforcements arriving from Russia (the Baltic Fleet), Tōgō chose not to risk his battleships by pursuing his enemy as they turned about and headed back into Port Arthur, thus ending naval history&#x27;s longest-range gunnery duel up to that time and the first modern clash of steel battleship fleets on the high seas.

=== Baltic Fleet redeploys ===
Meanwhile, the Russians were preparing to reinforce their Far East Fleet by sending the Baltic Fleet, under the command of Admiral Zinovy Rozhestvensky. After a false start caused by engine problems and other mishaps, the squadron finally departed on 15 October 1904, and sailed halfway around the world from the Baltic Sea to the Pacific via the Cape Route around the Cape of Good Hope in the course of a seven-month odyssey that was to attract worldwide attention. The Dogger Bank incident on 21 October 1904, where the Russian fleet fired on British fishing boats that they mistook for enemy torpedo boats, nearly sparked a war with the United Kingdom (an ally of Japan, but neutral, unless provoked). During the voyage, the fleet separated into a portion that went through the Suez Canal while the larger battleships went around the Cape of Good Hope.

=== Effects on civilians ===
During the fighting in Manchuria, there were Russian troops that looted and burned some Chinese villages, raped women and often killed those who resisted or did not understand what they wanted. The Russian justification for all this was that Chinese civilians, being Asian, must have been helping their fellow Asians (the Japanese) inflict defeat on the Russians, and therefore deserved to be punished. The Russian troops were gripped by the fear of the &quot;Yellow Peril&quot;, and saw all Asians, not just the Japanese, as the enemy. All of the Russian soldiers were much feared by the Chinese population of Manchuria, but it was the Cossacks whom they feared the most on the account of their brutality and insatiable desire to loot. Largely because of the more disciplined behavior of the Japanese, the Han and Manchu population of Manchuria tended to be pro-Japanese. Russian soldiers also reportedly raped Korean women, for example in the city of Chongju. The Japanese were also prone to looting, albeit in a considerably less brutal manner than the Russians, and summarily executed any Chinese or Manchu whom they suspected of being spies. The city of Liaoyang had the misfortune to be sacked three times within three days: first by the Russians, then by the Chinese police, and finally by the Japanese.

The Japanese hired Chinese bandits known variously as the honghuzi, hunghutze, or &quot;khunkhuzy&quot; to engage in guerrilla warfare by attacking Russian supply columns. Only once did the honghuzi attack Japanese forces, and that attack was apparently motivated by the honghuzi mistaking the Japanese forces for a Russian one. Zhang Zuolin, a prominent bandit leader and the future &quot;Old Marshal&quot; who would rule Manchuria as a warlord between 1916 and 1928, worked as a honghuzi for the Japanese. Manchuria was still officially part of the Chinese Empire, and the Chinese civil servants tried their best to be neutral as Russian and Japanese troops marched across Manchuria. In the parts of Manchuria occupied by the Japanese, Tokyo appointed &quot;civil governors&quot; who worked to improve health, sanitation and the state of the roads. These activities were also self-interested, as improved roads lessened Japanese logistics problems while improved health amongst the Chinese lessened the dangers of diseases infecting the Japanese troops. By contrast, the Russians made no effort to improve sanitation or health amongst the Chinese, and destroyed everything when they retreated. Many Chinese tended to see the Japanese as the lesser evil.

== Campaign of 1905 ==

With the fall of Port Arthur, the Japanese 3rd Army could continue northward to reinforce positions south of Russian-held Mukden. With the onset of the severe Manchurian winter, there had been no major land engagements since the Battle of Shaho the previous year. The two sides camped opposite each other along 60 to of front lines south of Mukden.

=== Battle of Sandepu ===
The Russian Second Army under General Oskar Gripenberg, between 25 and 29 January, attacked the Japanese left flank near the town of Sandepu, almost breaking through. This caught the Japanese by surprise. However, without support from other Russian units the attack stalled, Gripenberg was ordered to halt by Kuropatkin and the battle was inconclusive. The Japanese knew that they needed to destroy the Russian army in Manchuria before Russian reinforcements arrived via the Trans-Siberian railroad.

=== Battle of Mukden ===

The Battle of Mukden commenced on 20 February 1905. In the following days Japanese forces proceeded to assault the right and left flanks of Russian forces surrounding Mukden, along a front. Approximately half a million men were involved in the fighting. Both sides were well entrenched and were backed by hundreds of artillery pieces. After days of harsh fighting, added pressure from the flanks forced both ends of the Russian defensive line to curve backwards. Seeing they were about to be encircled, the Russians began a general retreat, fighting a series of fierce rearguard actions, which soon deteriorated in the confusion and collapse of Russian forces. On 10 March 1905, after three weeks of fighting, General Kuropatkin decided to withdraw to the north of Mukden. The Russians suffered an estimated 90,000 casualties in the battle.

The retreating Russian Manchurian Army formations disbanded as fighting units, but the Japanese failed to destroy them completely. The Japanese themselves had suffered heavy casualties and were in no condition to pursue. Although the Battle of Mukden was a major defeat for the Russians and was the most decisive land battle ever fought by the Japanese, the final victory still depended on the navy.

=== Battle of Tsushima ===

After a stopover of several weeks at the minor port of Nossi-Bé, Madagascar, that had been reluctantly allowed by neutral France in order not to jeopardize its relations with its Russian ally, the Russian Baltic fleet proceeded to Cam Ranh Bay in French Indochina passing on its way through the Singapore Strait between 7 and 10 April 1905. The fleet finally reached the Sea of Japan in May 1905. The logistics of such an undertaking in the age of coal power was astounding. The squadron required approximately 500,000 tons of coal to complete the journey, yet by international law, it was not allowed to coal at neutral ports, forcing the Russian authorities to acquire a large fleet of colliers to supply the fleet at sea. The weight of the ships&#x27; stores needed for such a long journey was to be another major problem.
The Russian Second Pacific Squadron (the renamed Baltic Fleet) sailed 18,000 nautical miles (33,000 km) to relieve Port Arthur only to hear the demoralizing news that Port Arthur had fallen while it was still at Madagascar. Admiral Rozhestvensky&#x27;s only hope now was to reach the port of Vladivostok. There were three routes to Vladivostok, with the shortest and most direct passing through Tsushima Strait between Korea and Japan. However, this was also the most dangerous route as it passed between the Japanese home islands and the Japanese naval bases in Korea.

Admiral Tōgō was aware of Russian progress and understood that, with the fall of Port Arthur, the Second and Third Pacific squadrons would try to reach the only other Russian port in the Far East, Vladivostok. Battle plans were laid down and ships were repaired and refitted to intercept the Russian fleet.

The Japanese Combined Fleet, which had originally consisted of six battleships, was now down to four battleships and one second class battleship (two had been lost to mines), but still retained its cruisers, destroyers, and torpedo boats. The Russian Second Pacific Squadron contained eight battleships, including four new battleships of the , as well as cruisers, destroyers and other auxiliaries for a total of 38 ships.

By the end of May, the Second Pacific Squadron was on the last leg of its journey to Vladivostok, taking the shorter, riskier route between Korea and Japan, and travelling at night to avoid discovery. Unfortunately for the Russians, while in compliance with the rules of war, the two trailing hospital ships had continued to burn their lights, which were spotted by the Japanese armed merchant cruiser &quot;Shinano Maru&quot;. Wireless communication was used to inform Togo&#x27;s headquarters, where the Combined Fleet was immediately ordered to sortie. Still receiving reports from scouting forces, the Japanese were able to position their fleet to &quot;cross the &quot;T&quot;&quot; of the Russian fleet. The Japanese engaged the Russians in the Tsushima Straits on 27–28 May 1905. The Russian fleet was virtually annihilated, losing eight battleships, numerous smaller vessels, and more than 5,000 men, while the Japanese lost three torpedo boats and 116 men. Only three Russian vessels escaped to Vladivostok, while six others were interned in neutral ports. After the Battle of Tsushima, a combined Japanese Army and Navy operation commanded by Admiral Kataoka Shichirō occupied Sakhalin Island to force the Russians into suing for peace.

== Peace and aftermath ==
=== Treaty of Portsmouth ===
Military leaders and senior tsarist officials agreed before the war that Russia was a much stronger nation and had little to fear from the Empire of Japan. The fanatical zeal of the Japanese infantrymen astonished the Russians, who were dismayed by the apathy, backwardness, and defeatism of their own soldiers. Russian soldiers fought fiercely but this was contrasted by the cautiousness of their officers, who sometimes chose to retreat without a good reason, and the Russian commander Kuropatkin on two occasions prohibited his subordinates from counter-attacking the Japanese. In both of the major battles in the fall of 1904 (Liaoyang and Shaho), Kuropatkin ordered a withdrawal. As a result of this leadership the Russians were always reacting to the Japanese. After the loss of Russia&#x27;s main supply base and headquarters at Mukden, Kuropatkin was relieved of command, and his replacement, Linevich, planned on going on the offensive but peace talks began before then. The Russian mobilization was initially of older reservists, with less training (some having no experience with the Mosin-Nagant rifle) and no interest in the war in the Far East. It was not until after the Battle of Mukden that new recruits and younger reservists began arriving, and by the summer of 1905 the Russian army fielded almost one million well-equipped and -trained soldiers in the Far East against an exhausted Japanese army, but the naval defeat at Tsushima made negotiations more desired.

The defeats of the Army and Navy shook Russian confidence. Throughout 1905, the Imperial Russian government was rocked by revolution. The population was against escalation of the war. The empire was certainly capable of sending more troops, but this would make little difference in the outcome due to the poor state of the economy, the embarrassing defeats of the Russian Army and Navy by the Japanese, and the relative unimportance to Russia of the disputed land, which made the war extremely unpopular. 
Both sides accepted the offer of United States President Theodore Roosevelt to mediate. Meetings were held in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, with Sergei Witte leading the Russian delegation and Baron Komura leading the Japanese delegation. The Treaty of Portsmouth was signed on 5 September 1905 at the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard. Witte became Russian Prime Minister the same year.

After courting the Japanese, Roosevelt decided to support the Tsar&#x27;s refusal to pay indemnities, a move that policymakers in Tokyo interpreted as signifying that the United States had more than a passing interest in Asian affairs. Russia recognized Korea as part of the Japanese sphere of influence and agreed to evacuate Manchuria. Japan would annex Korea in 1910 (Japan–Korea Treaty of 1910), with scant protest from other powers. From 1910 until the end of its rule of Korea in 1945, the Japanese adopted a strategy of using the Korean Peninsula as a gateway to the Asian continent and making Korea&#x27;s economy subordinate to Japanese economic interests.

Russia also signed over its 25-year leasehold rights to Port Arthur, including the naval base and the peninsula around it, and ceded the southern half of Sakhalin Island to Japan. Sakhalin would be taken back by the Soviet Union following the defeat of the Japanese in World War II.

Roosevelt earned the Nobel Peace Prize for his effort. George E. Mowry concludes that Roosevelt handled the arbitration well, doing an &quot;excellent job of balancing Russian and Japanese power in the Orient, where the supremacy of either constituted a threat to growing America&quot;. As Japan had won every major battle on land and sea and as the Japanese people, who had received news about victory after victory did not understand that the costs of the war had pushed their nation to the verge of bankruptcy, the Japanese public was enraged by the Treaty of Portsmouth as many Japanese had expected the war to end with Russia ceding the Russian Far East to Japan and for Russia to pay an indemnity. The United States was widely blamed in Japan for the Treaty of Portsmouth with Roosevelt having allegedly &quot;cheated&quot; Japan out of its rightful claims at the peace conference. On 5 September 1905 the Hibiya incendiary incident – as the anti-American riots were euphemistically described – erupted in Tokyo and lasted for three days, forcing the government to declare martial law.

The Treaty of Portsmouth overlooked Montenegro&#x27;s participation in the war against Japan, leaving the two countries still technically belligerents until 2006, when the Japanese prime minister dispatched the Vice-Minister of Foreign affairs (Akiko Yamanaka) with a personal letter from him for the Prime Minister of Montenegro formally ending the war.

=== Casualties ===
Sources do not agree on a precise number of deaths from the war because of a lack of body counts for confirmation. The number of Japanese Army dead in combat or died of wounds is put at around 59,000 with around 27,000 additional casualties from disease, and between 6,000 and 12,000 wounded. Estimates of Russian Army dead range from around 34,000 to around 53,000 men with a further 9,000–19,000 dying of disease and around 75,000 captured. The total number of dead for both sides is generally stated as around 130,000 to 170,000.

After the siege of Port Arthur in 1905, General Nogi Maresuke, who led the Japanese army during the siege, felt so guilty about the loss of many Japanese soldiers that he wanted to commit ritual suicide, but the Japanese Emperor Meiji refused to allow it; instead, Maresuke mentored the future Emperor Hirohito and built hospitals. After Emperor Meiji died in 1912, Maresuke and his wife committed suicide, 7 years after the siege of Port Arthur.

=== Political consequences ===
This was the first major military victory in the modern era of an Asian power over a European nation. Russia&#x27;s defeat was met with shock in the West and across the Far East. Japan&#x27;s prestige rose greatly as it came to be seen as a modern nation. Concurrently, Russia lost virtually its entire Pacific and Baltic fleets, and also much international esteem. This was particularly true in the eyes of Germany and Austria-Hungary before World War I. Russia was France&#x27;s and Serbia&#x27;s ally; its loss of prestige emboldened Germany in planning for war with France and supporting Austria-Hungary&#x27;s war with Serbia.

==== Effects on Russia ====
The defeat of 1905 led in the short term to Russian military reforms that allowed it to face Germany in World War I.

Though there had been popular support for the war among the Russian public following the Japanese attack at Port Arthur in 1904, that popular support soon turned to discontent after suffering multiple defeats at the hands of the Japanese forces. For many Russians, the immediate shock of unexpected humiliation at the hands of Japan caused the conflict to be viewed as a metaphor for the shortcomings of the Romanov autocracy. This discontent added fuel to the simmering Russian Revolution of 1905, an event Nicholas II had hoped to avoid by taking intransigent negotiating stances. To quell the uprising, Nicholas II issued the October Manifesto, which included only limited reforms such as the Duma and failed to address the societal problems of Russia at the time. Twelve years later, that discontent would boil over into the February Revolution of 1917.

In Poland, which Russia partitioned in the late 18th century, and where Russian rule already caused two major uprisings, the population was so restless that an army of 250,000–300,000larger than the one facing the Japanesehad to be stationed to put down the unrest. Russia had mobilized thousands of Polish reservists during the war with Japan, contributing to unrest. Contemporary reports found that some Poles preferred death over fighting the Japanese for Russia.

Some political leaders of the Polish insurrection movement (in particular, Józef Piłsudski) sent emissaries to Japan to collaborate on sabotage and intelligence gathering within the Russian Empire and even plan a Japanese-aided uprising.

==== Effects on Japan ====

Japan had become the rising Asian power and had proven that its military could fight the major powers in Europe with success. Most Western powers were stunned that the Japanese not only prevailed but decisively defeated Russia. In the Russo-Japanese War, Japan had also portrayed a sense of readiness in taking a more active and leading role in Asian affairs, which in turn had led to widespread nationalism throughout the region.

Although the war had ended in a victory for Japan, Japanese public opinion was shocked by the very restrained peace terms which were negotiated at the war&#x27;s end. Widespread discontent spread through the populace upon the announcement of the treaty terms, causing the Hibiya incendiary incident. Riots erupted in major cities in Japan following the incident, including demonstrations in front of the US Legation in Tokyo. Two specific requirements, expected after such a costly victory, were especially lacking: territorial gains and monetary reparations to Japan. The peace accord led to feelings of distrust, as the Japanese had intended to retain all of Sakhalin Island but were forced to settle for half of it after being pressured by the United States, with President Roosevelt opting to support Nicholas II&#x27;s stance on not ceding territory or paying reparations. The Japanese had wanted reparations to help families recover from lost fathers and sons as well as heavy taxation by the government to finance the war. Without them, they were at a loss. The outcome of the Portsmouth peace negotiations, mediated by the U.S., was received by the general Japanese population with disbelief on September 5 and 6 when all the major newspapers reported the content of the signed treaty in lengthy editorials.

As a result, the wartime government, the First Katsura Cabinet, which remained in power for the longest period (1,681 days) in the history of Japanese democracy to date, declared martial law to suppress the riots on September 6 (one day after the signing in Portsmouth). Martial law was lifted on November 29 after more than 2,000 people were arrested, but the Cabinet resigned on December 22 after ratifying the treaty on October 10, as if taking the responsibility for a lost war.

== Assessment ==
=== Historical significance ===
The Russo-Japanese War introduced a number of characteristics that came to define 20th-century politics and warfare. Many of the innovations brought by the Industrial Revolution, such as rapid-firing artillery and machine guns, as well as more accurate rifles, were first tested on a mass scale. Military operations on both sea and land showed that modern warfare had undergone a considerable change since the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71. Most army commanders had previously envisioned using these weapon systems to dominate the battlefield on an operational and tactical level but, as events played out, the technological advances forever altered the conditions of war too.

For East Asia this was the first confrontation in thirty years involving two modern armed forces. The advanced weaponry led to massive casualties. Neither Japan nor Russia had prepared for the number of deaths that would occur in this new kind of warfare, and neither had the resources to compensate for such losses. This also left its impression on society at large, with the emergence of transnational and nongovernmental organizations, like the Red Cross, becoming prominent after the war. The consequent identification of common problems and challenges began the slow process that came to dominate much of the 20th century.

It has also been argued that the conflict had characteristics of what was later to be described as &quot;total war&quot;. These included the mass mobilization of troops into battle and the need for so extensive a supply of equipment, armaments, and supplies that both domestic support and foreign aid were required. It is also argued that domestic response in Russia to the inefficiencies of the tsarist government set in motion the eventual dissolution of the Romanov dynasty.

=== Reception around the world ===

To the Western powers, Japan&#x27;s victory demonstrated the emergence of a new Asian regional power. With the Russian defeat, some scholars have argued that the war had set in motion a change in the global world order with the emergence of Japan as not only a regional power, but rather, the main Asian power. Rather more than the possibilities of diplomatic partnership were emerging, however. The US and Australian reaction to the changed balance of power brought by the war was mixed with fears of a Yellow Peril eventually shifting from China to Japan. American figures such as W. E. B. Du Bois and Lothrop Stoddard saw the victory as a challenge to western supremacy. This was reflected in Austria, where Baron Christian von Ehrenfels interpreted the challenge in racial as well as cultural terms, arguing that &quot;the absolute necessity of a radical sexual reform for the continued existence of the western races of men has ... been raised from the level of discussion to the level of a scientifically proven fact&quot;. To stop the Japanese &quot;Yellow Peril&quot; would require drastic changes to society and sexuality in the West.

Certainly the Japanese success increased self-confidence among anti-colonial nationalists in colonised Asian countries – Vietnamese, Indonesians, Indians and Filipinos – and to those in declining countries like the Ottoman Empire and Persia in immediate danger of being absorbed by the Western powers. It also encouraged the Chinese who, despite having been at war with the Japanese only a decade before, still considered Westerners the greater threat. As Sun Yat-sen commented, &quot;We regarded that Russian defeat by Japan as the defeat of the West by the East. We regarded the Japanese victory as our own victory&quot;. Even in far-off Tibet the war was a subject of conversation when Sven Hedin visited the Panchen Lama in February 1907. While for Jawaharlal Nehru, then only an aspiring politician in British India, &quot;Japan&#x27;s victory lessened the feeling of inferiority from which most of us suffered. A great European power had been defeated, thus Asia could still defeat Europe as it had done in the past.&quot; And in the Ottoman Empire too, the Committee of Union and Progress embraced Japan as a role model.

Like many Asians, many African Americans welcomed the Japanese victory as a blow against global white supremacy. Whether left or right, moderate or radical, black politicians and activists saw Japan as a role model that showed that the white man should not underestimate non-white nations. Joseph Bryant, writing in The Colored American Magazine, claimed that the Japanese victory marked &quot;the beginning of a new era&quot; and predicted that Japan&#x27;s rise would mean the death of &quot;absolute Aryan domination of the world&quot; and that in the next century Asians, not Europeans, would lead civilization.

In Europe, subject populations were similarly encouraged. James Joyce&#x27;s novel &quot;Ulysses&quot;, set in Dublin in 1904, contains hopeful Irish allusions as to the outcome of the war. And in partitioned Poland the artist Józef Mehoffer chose 1905 to paint his &quot;Europa Jubilans&quot; (Europe rejoicing), which portrays an aproned maid taking her ease on a sofa against a background of Eastern artefacts. Painted following demonstrations against the war and Russian cultural suppression, and in the year of Russia&#x27;s defeat, its subtly coded message looks forward to a time when the Tsarist masters will be defeated in Europe as they had been in Asia.

The significance of the war was clear too for Socialist thinkers:

=== Military results ===
Russia had lost two of its three fleets. Only its Black Sea Fleet remained, the result of the 1878 Treaty of Berlin which had prevented the fleet from leaving the Black Sea through the Bosphorus, since Turkey and Britain would not waive the relevant clauses. The Berlin treaty superseded the London Straits Convention of 1841, which had been favourable to Russia. 

Japan became the sixth-most powerful naval force by combined tonnage, while the Russian Navy declined to one barely stronger than that of Austria–Hungary. The actual costs of the war were large enough to affect the Russian economy and, despite grain exports, the nation developed an external balance of payments deficit. The cost of military re-equipment and re-expansion after 1905 pushed the economy further into deficit, although the size of the deficit was obscured.

The Japanese were on the offensive for most of the war and used massed infantry assaults against defensive positions, which would later become the standard of all European armies during World War I. The battles of the Russo-Japanese War, in which machine guns and artillery took a heavy toll on Russian and Japanese troops, were a precursor to the trench warfare of World War I. A German military advisor sent to Japan, Jakob Meckel, had a tremendous impact on the development of the Japanese military training, tactics, strategy, and organization. His reforms were credited with Japan&#x27;s overwhelming victory over China in the First Sino-Japanese War of 1894–1895. However, his over-reliance on infantry in offensive campaigns also led to a large number of Japanese casualties.
Military and economic exhaustion affected both countries. Japanese historians regard this war as a turning point for Japan, and a key to understanding the reasons why Japan may have failed militarily and politically later. After the war, acrimony was felt at every level of Japanese society, and it became the consensus within Japan that their nation had been treated as the defeated power during the peace conference. As time went on, this feeling, coupled with the sense of &quot;arrogance&quot; at becoming a Great Power, grew and added to growing Japanese hostility towards the West, and fuelled Japan&#x27;s military and imperial ambitions. Furthermore, Japan&#x27;s substantiated interests in Korea and Liaodong led to the creation of a Kwantung Army, which became an autonomous and increasingly powerful regional force. Only five years after the war, Japan &quot;de jure&quot; annexed Korea as part of its colonial empire. Two decades after that, the Kwantung Army staged an incident that led to the invasion of Manchuria in the Mukden Incident; the Kwantung Army eventually came to be heavily involved in the state&#x27;s politics and administration, leading to a series of localized conflicts with Chinese regional warlords that finally extended into the Second Sino-Japanese War in 1937. As a result, most Chinese historians consider the Russo-Japanese War as a key development in Japan&#x27;s spiral into militarism in the 1920s–30s.

Following the victory of the Battle of Tsushima, Japan&#x27;s erstwhile British ally presented a lock of Admiral Nelson&#x27;s hair to the Imperial Japanese Navy, judging its performance then as on a par with Britain&#x27;s victory at Trafalgar in 1805. It is still on display at Kyouiku Sankoukan, a public museum maintained by the Japan Self-Defence Force. Nevertheless, there was a consequent shift in British strategic thinking, resulting in enlargement of its naval docks at Auckland, New Zealand; Bombay, British India; Fremantle and Sydney, Australia; Simon&#x27;s Town, Cape Colony; Singapore and British Hong Kong. The naval war confirmed the direction of the British Admiralty&#x27;s thinking in tactical terms even as it undermined its strategic grasp of a changing world. Tactical orthodoxy, for example, assumed that a naval battle would imitate the conditions of stationary combat and that ships would engage in one long line sailing on parallel courses; but more flexible tactical thinking would now be required as a firing ship and its target manoeuvred independently.

== Military attachés and observers ==

Military and civilian observers from every major power closely followed the course of the war. Most were able to report on events from the perspective of embedded positions within the land and naval forces of both Russia and Japan. These military attachés and other observers prepared first-hand accounts of the war and analytical papers. In-depth observer narratives of the war and more narrowly focused professional journal articles were written soon after the war; these post-war reports conclusively illustrated the battlefield destructiveness of this conflict. This was the first time the tactics of entrenched positions for infantry defended with machine guns and artillery became vitally important. Both would become dominant factors in World War I. Even though entrenched positions had already been a significant part of both the Franco-Prussian War and the American Civil War, it is now apparent that the high casualty counts, and the tactical lessons readily available to observer nations, were completely disregarded in preparations for war in Europe, and during much of the course of World War I.

In 1904–1905, Ian Standish Monteith Hamilton was the military attaché of the British Indian Army serving with the Imperial Japanese Army in Manchuria. As one of the several military attachés from Western countries, he was the first to arrive in Japan after the start of the war.
He therefore would be recognized as the dean of multi-national attachés and observers in this conflict, although out-ranked by British field marshal, William Gustavus Nicholson, 1st Baron Nicholson, who was later to become chief of the Imperial General Staff.

== Economics ==
Despite its gold reserves of 106.3 million pounds, Russia&#x27;s pre-war financial situation was not enviable. The country had large budget deficits year after year, and was largely dependent on borrowed money.

Russia&#x27;s war effort was funded primarily by France, in a series of loans totalling 800 million francs (£30.4 million); another loan in the amount of 600 million francs was agreed upon, but later cancelled. These loans were extended within a climate of mass bribing of the French press (made necessary by Russia&#x27;s precarious economic and social situation and poor military performance). Although initially reluctant to participate in the war, the French government and major banks were co-operative since it became clear that Russian and French economic interests were tied. In addition to French money, Russia secured a loan in the amount of 500 million marks (£24.5 million) from Germany, who also financed Japan&#x27;s war effort.

Japan&#x27;s pre-war gold reserves were a modest £11.7 million; a major portion of the total cost of the war was covered by money borrowed from the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States. During his canvassing expedition in London, the Japanese vice-governor of the Bank of Japan Takahashi Korekiyo met Jacob Schiff, an American banker and head of Kuhn, Loeb &amp; Co. Schiff, in response to Russia&#x27;s anti-Jewish pogroms and sympathetic to Japan&#x27;s cause, extended a critical series of loans to the Empire of Japan, in the amount of 200 million US dollars (£41.2 million). He also raised loans from the Rothschild family in Britain. Japan&#x27;s total war expenditure was 2,150 million yen, of which 38%, or 820 million yen, was raised overseas.

== List of battles ==

* 8 February 1904: Battle of Port Arthur: naval battle, inconclusive
* 9 February 1904: Battle of Chemulpo Bay: naval battle, Japanese victory
* 30 April – 1 May 1904: Battle of Yalu River, Japanese victory
* 25–26 May 1904: Battle of Nanshan: Japanese victory
* 14–15 June 1904: Battle of Te-li-Ssu: Japanese victory
* 17 July 1904: Battle of Motien Pass: Japanese victory
* 24 July 1904: Battle of Tashihchiao: Japanese victory
* 31 July 1904: Battle of Hsimucheng: Japanese victory
* 10 August 1904: Battle of the Yellow Sea,: naval battle, Japanese victory
* 14 August 1904: Battle off Ulsan: naval battle, Japanese victory
* 20 August 1904: Battle of Korsakov: naval battle, Japanese victory
* 19 August 1904 – 2 January 1905: Siege of Port Arthur, Japanese victory
* 25 August – 3 September 1904: Battle of Liaoyang: Japanese victory
* 5–17 October 1904 Battle of Shaho: Inconclusive
* 26–27 January 1905: Battle of Sandepu: Inconclusive
* 21 February – 10 March 1905: Battle of Mukden: Japanese victory
* 27–28 May 1905: Battle of Tsushima: naval battle, decisive Japanese victory
* 7–31 July 1905: Invasion of Sakhalin: Japanese victory

== Cultural legacy ==

=== Visual arts ===
The Russo-Japanese War was covered by dozens of foreign journalists who sent back sketches that were turned into lithographs and other reproducible forms. Propaganda images were circulated by both sides, often in the form of postcards and based on insulting racial stereotypes. These were produced not only by the combatants but by those from European countries who supported one or the other side or had a commercial or colonial stake in the area. War photographs were also popular, appearing in both the press and in book form.

In Russia, the war was covered by anonymous satirical graphic luboks for sale in markets, recording the war for the domestic audience. Around 300 were made before their creation was banned by the Russian government. Their Japanese equivalents were woodblock prints. These had been common during the Sino-Japanese war a decade earlier and celebrations of the new conflict tended to repeat the same imagery and situations. But by this time in Japan postcards had become the most common form of communication and they soon replaced prints as a medium for topographical imagery and war reportage. In some ways, however, they were still dependent on the print for their pictorial conventions, not least in issuing the cards in series that assembled into a composite scene or design, either as diptychs, triptychs or even more ambitious formats. However, captioning swiftly moved from the calligraphic side inscription to a printed title below, and not just in Japanese but in English and other European languages. There was a lively sense that these images served not only as mementoes but also as propaganda statements.

War artists were to be found on the Russian side and even figured among the casualties. Vasily Vereshchagin went down with the &quot;Petropavlovsk&quot;, Admiral Makarov&#x27;s flagship, when it was sunk by mines. However, his last work, a picture of a council of war presided over by the admiral, was recovered almost undamaged. Another artist, Mykola Samokysh, first came to notice for his reports during the war and the paintings worked up from his diary sketch-books. Other depictions appeared after the event. The two by the Georgian naïve painter Niko Pirosmani from 1906 must have been dependent on newspaper reports since he was not present. Then, in 1914 at the outset of World War I, Yury Repin made an episode during the Battle of Yalu River the subject of a broad heroic canvas.

=== Music ===
On either side, there were lyrics lamenting the necessity of fighting in a foreign land, far from home. One of the earliest of several Russian songs still performed today was the waltz &quot;Amur&#x27;s Waves&quot; (&quot;Amurskie volny&quot;), which evokes the melancholy of standing watch on the motherland far east frontier.

Two others grew out of incidents during the war. &quot;On the Hills of Manchuria&quot; (&quot;Na sopkah Manchzhurii&quot;; 1906) is another waltz composed by Ilya Shatrov, a decorated military musician whose regiment suffered badly in the Battle of Mukden. Originally only the music was published, and the words by Stepan Petrov were added later.

The second song, &quot;Variag&quot;, commemorates the Battle of Chemulpo Bay in which that cruiser and the gunboat &quot;Korietz&quot; steamed out to confront an encircling Japanese squadron rather than surrender. That act of heroism was first celebrated in a German song by Rudolf Greintz in 1907, which was quickly translated into Russian and sung to a martial accompaniment. These lyrics mourned the fallen lying in their graves and threatened revenge.

Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov also reacted to the war by composing the satirical opera &quot;The Golden Cockerel&quot;, completed in 1907. Although it was ostensibly based on a verse fairy tale by Alexander Pushkin written in 1834, the authorities quickly realised its true target and immediately banned it from performance. The opera was premiered in 1909, after Rimsky-Korsakov&#x27;s death, and even then with modifications required by the censors.

=== Poetry ===
Some Japanese poetry dealing with the war has remained popular more than a century later. General Nogi Maresuke&#x27;s &quot;Outside the Goldland Fortress&quot; was learned by generations of schoolchildren and valued for its bleak stoicism. The army surgeon Mori Ōgai kept a verse diary which tackled such themes as racism, strategic mistakes, and the ambiguities of victory, which has gained appreciation with historical hindsight. In the present day there is also a growing appreciation of Yosano Akiko&#x27;s parting poem to her brother as he left for the war, which includes the critical lines:

Even the Emperor Meiji himself entered the poetic lists, writing in answer to all the lamentations about death in a foreign land that the patriotic soul returns to the homeland.

European treatments were similarly varied. Jane H. Oakley attempted an epic treatment of the conflict in 86 cantos. The French poet Blaise Cendrars was later to represent himself as on a Russian train on its way to Manchuria at the time in his &quot;La prose du Transsibérien et de la Petite Jehanne de France&quot; (1913) and energetically evoked the results of the war along the way:

Much later, the Scottish poet Douglas Dunn devoted an epistolary poem in verse to the naval war in &quot;The Donkey&#x27;s Ears: Politovsky&#x27;s Letters Home&quot; (2000). This follows the voyage of the Russian Imperial Navy flagship &quot;Kniaz&quot; to its sinking at the Battle of Tsushima.

=== Fiction ===
Fictional coverage of the war in English began even before it was over. An early example was Allen Upward&#x27;s &quot;The International Spy&quot;. Set in both Russia and Japan, it ends with the Dogger Bank incident involving the Baltic Fleet. The political thinking displayed there is typical of the time. There is great admiration for the Japanese, who were British allies. Russia is in turmoil, but the main impetus towards war is not imperialism as such but commercial forces. &quot;Every student of modern history has remarked the fact that all recent wars have been promoted by great combinations of capitalists. The causes which formerly led to war between nation and nation have ceased to operate&quot; (p. 40). The true villain plotting in the background, however, is the German Emperor, seeking to destabilise the European balance of power in his country&#x27;s favour. Towards the end of the novel, the narrator steals a German submarine and successfully foils a plot to involve the British in the war. The submarine motif reappeared in George Griffith&#x27;s science fiction novel, &quot;The Stolen Submarine&quot; (1904), although in this case it is a French super-submarine which its developer sells to the Russians for use against the Japanese in another tale of international intrigue.

Though most English-language fiction of the period took the Japanese side, the Rev. W. W. Walker&#x27;s Canadian novella, &quot;Alter Ego&quot;, is an exception. It features a Canadian volunteer in the Russian army who, on his return, agrees to talk about his experiences to an isolated upcountry community and relates his part in the Battle of Mukden. Though this incident only occupies two of the book&#x27;s six chapters, it is used to illustrate the main message there, that war is &quot;anti-Christian and barbarous, except in a defensive sense&quot; (Ch. 3).
Various aspects of the war were also common in contemporary children&#x27;s fiction. Categorised as Boys&#x27; Own adventure stories, they offer few insights into the conflict, being generally based on news articles and sharing without any reflection in the contemporary culture of imperialism. Among these, Herbert Strang was responsible for two novels: &quot;Kobo&quot; told from the Japanese side, and &quot;Brown of Moukden&quot; viewed from the Russian side. Three more were written by the prolific American author, Edward Stratemeyer: &quot;Under the Mikado&#x27;s Flag&quot;, &quot;At the Fall of Port Arthur&quot;, and &quot;Under Togo for Japan, or Three Young Americans on Land and Sea&quot; (1906). Two other English-language stories begin with the action at Port Arthur and follow the events thereafter: &quot;A Soldier of Japan: a tale of the Russo-Japanese War&quot; by Captain Frederick Sadleir Brereton, and &quot;The North Pacific&quot; by Willis Boyd Allen (1855–1938). Two more also involve young men fighting in the Japanese navy: Americans in &quot;For the Mikado&quot; by Kirk Munroe, and a temporarily disgraced English officer in &quot;Under the Ensign of the Rising Sun&quot; by Harry Collingwood, the pen-name of William Joseph Cosens Lancaster (1851–1922), whose speciality was naval fiction.

Another literary genre affected by the outcome of the war was invasion literature, either fuelled by racialist fears or generated by the international power struggle. Shunrō Oshikawa&#x27;s novel &quot;The Submarine Battleship&quot; (&quot;Kaitei Gunkan&quot;) was published in 1900 before the actual fighting began but shared the imperial tensions that produced it. It is the story of an armoured ram-armed submarine involved in a Russo-Japanese conflict. Three other novels appeared in 1908 and are thought of as significant now because of their prophetic dimension. American author Arthur Wellesley Kipling (1885–1947) prefaced his &quot;The New Dominion – A Tale of Tomorrow&#x27;s Wars&quot; with a note counselling future vigilance. The scenario there is an attack by German and Japanese allies which the US and British navies victoriously fend off. In Germany itself an air attack on the American fleet is described by Ferdinand Heinrich Grautoff (1871–1935), writing under the name Parabellum, in his novel &quot;Banzai!&quot;. Published in Berlin in 1908, it was translated into English the following year. An Australian author using the pseudonym Charles H. Kirmess first serialised his &quot;The Commonwealth Crisis&quot; and then revised it for book publication as &quot;The Australian Crisis&quot; in 1909. It is set in 1912 and told from the standpoint of 1922, following a military invasion of Australia&#x27;s Northern Territory and colonisation by Japanese settlers.

Most Russian fictional accounts of the war had a documentary element. Alexey Novikov-Priboy served in the Baltic Fleet and wrote about the conflict on his return, but his early work was suppressed. It was not until the changed political climate under Soviet rule that he began writing his historical epic &quot;Tsushima&quot;, based on his own experiences on board the battleship as well as on testimonies of fellow sailors and government archives. The first part was published in 1932, the second in 1935, and the whole novel was later awarded the Stalin Prize. It describes the heroism of Russian sailors and certain officers whose defeat, in accordance with the new Soviet thinking, was due to the criminal negligence of the Imperial Naval command. A German novel by Frank Thiess, originally published as &quot;Tsushima&quot; in 1936 (and later translated as &quot;The Voyage of Forgotten Men&quot;), covered the same journey round the world to defeat.

Later there appeared a first-hand account of the siege of Port Arthur by Alexander Stepanov (1892–1965). He had been present there as the 12-year-old son of a battery commander and his novel, &quot;Port Arthur: a historical narrative&quot; (1944), is based on his own diaries and his father&#x27;s notes. The work is considered one of the best historical novels of the Soviet period. A later novel in which the war appears is Valentin Pikul&#x27;s &quot;The Three Ages of Okini-San&quot; (1981). Centred on the life of Vladimir Kokovtsov, who rose through the ranks to admiral of the Russian fleet, it covers the period from the Russo-Japanese War through to the February and October Revolutions. A much later Russian genre novel uses the period of the war as background. This is Boris Akunin&#x27;s &quot;The Diamond Chariot&quot; (2003), in the first part of which the detective Erast Fandorin is charged with protecting the Trans-Siberian Railway from Japanese sabotage.

The main historical novel dealing with the war from the Japanese side is Shiba Ryōtarō&#x27;s &quot;Clouds Above the Hill&quot;, published serially in several volumes between 1968 and 1972, and translated in English in 2013. The closely researched story spans the decade from the Sino-Japanese War to the Russo-Japanese War and went on to become the nation&#x27;s favourite book.

== Filmography ==

* &quot;Port Arthur&quot; (1936)
* &quot;Kreiser Varyag&quot; (1946)
* &quot;Nichiro sensō shōri no hishi: Tekichū ōdan sanbyaku-ri&quot; (1957)
* &quot;Meiji tennô to nichiro daisenso&quot; (1958)
* &quot;&quot;Battle of the Japan Sea&quot;&quot; (1969, , &quot;Nihonkai-Daikaisen&quot;) depicts the naval battles of the war, the attacks on the Port Arthur highlands, and the subterfuge and diplomacy of Japanese agents in Sweden. Admiral Togo is portrayed by Toshiro Mifune.
* &quot;The Battle of Tsushima&quot; (1975) documentary, depiction of the naval Battle of Tsushima
* &quot;The Battle of Port Arthur&quot; (1980, sometimes referred as &quot;203 Kochi&quot;), depiction of the Siege of Port Arthur
* &quot;Battle Anthem&quot; (1983, 日本海大海戦・海ゆかば, Nihonkai-Daikasen: Umi Yukaba) Toshiro Mifune reprises his role as Admiral Togo from &quot;Battle of the Japan Sea&quot; (1969)
* &quot;Reilly, Ace of Spies&quot; (1983). Russian-born British spy Sidney Reilly&#x27;s role in providing intelligence that allowed the Japanese surprise attack that started the Siege of Port Arthur is dramatised in the second episode of this TV series.
* &quot;Saka no Ue no Kumo&quot;, of which the third series dealt with the war period (December 2011)
* &quot;Golden Kamuy&quot; (2018), an anime adaptation of the manga of the same name. The story takes place just after the Russo-Japanese War, and features many flashbacks and references to it. Several of its principal characters are veteran Japanese army men who fought in the Siege of Port Arthur.
* &quot;The Prisoner of Sakura&quot; (2019, , &quot;Sorokin no mita saka&quot;, , &quot;V plenu u sakury&quot;), a joint Japan-Russia co-production, which was based on the true story of a prison camp in Matsuyama, Ehime Prefecture, during the war. The movie is centered around the romance between a Russian officer, a prisoner of war, and a Japanese nurse who find themselves on opposing sides of the war.

== See also ==

* Foreign policy of the Russian Empire
* Kaneko Kentarō
* Outline of war
* List of warships sunk during the Russo-Japanese War
* Korea under Japanese rule
* Manchuria under Qing rule
* Baron Rosen
* Russian Imperialism in Asia and the Russo-Japanese War
* Western imperialism in Asia
* Japan-Montenegro relations
* Japan-Russia relations
* Montenegro-Russia relations
* Soviet-Japanese War

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* online 
* In 
* 
* 
* Kowner, Rotem. &quot; Historical Dictionary of the Russo-Japanese War&quot;, also published as &quot;The A to Z of the Russo-Japanese War &quot; (2009) excerpt 
* In .
* 
* 
* In .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== Further reading ==

* Corbett, Sir Julian. &quot;Maritime Operations in the Russo-Japanese War 1904–1905&quot;. (1994) Originally classified, and in two volumes, .
* Dower, John W., Throwing off Asia III, Woodblock prints of the Russo-Japanese War, 2008, MIT Visualizing Cultures 
* Hall, Richard C. &quot;The Next War: The Influence of the Russo-Japanese War on Southeastern Europe and the Balkan Wars of 1912–1913.&quot; &quot;Journal of Slavic Military Studies&quot; 17.3 (2004): 563–577.
* Hough, Richard A. &quot;The Fleet That Had To Die&quot;. Ballantine Books. (1960).
* Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs, &quot;Correspondence Regarding the Negotiations between Japan and Russia (1903–1904), Presented to the Imperial Diet, March 1904&quot; (Tokyo, 1904)
* Jentschura, Hansgeorg; Dieter Jung, Peter Mickel. &quot;Warships of the Imperial Japanese Navy, 1869–1945.&quot; United States Naval Institute, Annapolis, Maryland, 1977. Originally published in German as &quot;Die Japanischen Kriegschiffe 1869–1945&quot; in 1970, translated into English by David Brown and Antony Preston. .
* Kowner, Rotem, ed. &quot;The Impact of the Russo-Japanese War&quot; (Routledge, 2007)
* Kowner, Rotem. &quot;Historical Dictionary of the Russo-Japanese War&quot;. Scarecrow. .
* Matsumura Masayoshi, Ian Ruxton (trans.), &quot;Baron Kaneko and the Russo-Japanese War (1904–05)&quot;, Lulu Press 2009 
* Murray, Nicholas (2013). &quot;The Rocky Road to the Great War: the Evolution of Trench Warfare to 1914.&quot; Dulles, Virginia, Potomac Books 
* Morris, Edmund (2002). &quot;Theodore Rex&quot;, Google Books . New York: Random House. 
* Novikov-Priboy, Aleksei. &quot;Tsushima&quot;. (An account from a seaman aboard the , which was captured at Tsushima). London: George Allen &amp; Unwin Ltd. (1936).
* Okamoto, Shumpei (1970). &quot;The Japanese Oligarchy and the Russo-Japanese War&quot;. Columbia University Press.
* 
* Pleshakov, Constantine. &quot;The Tsar&#x27;s Last Armada: The Epic Voyage to the Battle of Tsushima&quot;. . (2002).
* Podalko, Petr E. &quot;&#x27;Weak ally&#x27;or &#x27;strong enemy?&#x27;: Japan in the eyes of Russian diplomats and military agents, 1900–1907.&quot; &quot;Japan Forum&quot; 28#3 (2016).
* 
* Tomitch, V. M. &quot;Warships of the Imperial Russian Navy&quot;. Volume 1, Battleships. (1968).

===Illustrations===
* Gerbig-Fabel, Marco. &quot;Photographic artefacts of war 1904–1905: the Russo-Japanese war as transnational media event.&quot; &quot;European Review of History – Revue européenne d&#x27;histoire&quot; 15.6 (2008): 629–642.
* Saaler, Sven und Inaba Chiharu (Hg.). &quot;Der Russisch-Japanische Krieg 1904/05 im Spiegel deutscher Bilderbogen&quot;, Deutsches Institut für Japanstudien Tokyo, (2005).
* Sharf, Frederick A. and James T. Ulak, eds. &quot;A Well-Watched War: Images from the Russo-Japanese Front, 1904–1905&quot; (Newbury, MA, 2000), the catalogue of the show at the Sackler Gallery in Washington, DC,
* Westwood, J. N. &quot;Russia against Japan, 1904–1905 : a new look at the Russo-Japanese War&quot; (1986) online

===Historiography===
* Hamby, Joel E. &quot;Striking the Balance: Strategy and Force in the Russo-Japanese War.&quot; &quot;Armed Forces &amp; Society&quot; 30.3 (2004): 325–356.
* Seager, Robert. &quot;Alfred Thayer Mahan: The Man And His Letters&quot;. (1977) .
* van der Oye, David Schimmelpenninck. &quot;Rewriting the Russo-Japanese War: A Centenary Retrospective.&quot; &quot;The Russian Review&quot; 67.1 (2008): 78–87. online
* Won-soo, Kim. &quot;Trends in the Study of the Russo-Japanese War in Korea and Future Tasks-Third-party perspective on the origins of the war.&quot; &quot;International Journal of Korean History&quot; 7 (2005): 1–28. online

== External links ==
* 
* RussoJapaneseWar.com , Russo-Japanese War research society.
* BFcollection.net, Database of Russian Army Jewish soldiers injured, killed, or missing in action from the war.
* BYU.edu, Text of the Treaty of Portsmouth:.
* Flot.com, Russian Navy history of war.
* Frontiers.loc.gov , Russo-Japanese Relations in the Far East. Meeting of Frontiers (Library of Congress)
* CSmonitor.com, Treaty of Portsmouth now seen as global turning point from the &quot;Christian Science Monitor&quot;, by Robert Marquand, 30 December 2005.
* Stanford.edu, Lyrics, translation and melody of the song &quot;On the hills of Manchuria&quot; (&quot;Na sopkah Manchzhurii&quot;).
* Google Map with battles of Russo-Japanese War and other important events.
* See more Russo-Japanese War Maps at the Persuasive Cartography, The PJ Mode Collection, Cornell University Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="4" end="22" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="83" end="97" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="106" end="121" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="155" end="164" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233" start="173" end="186" title="Korean Empire" label="Korean Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q326917" start="241" end="259" title="Liaodong Peninsula" label="Liaodong Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="269" end="275" title="Shenyang" label="Mukden"/>
<link wikidata="Q37960" start="338" end="348" title="Yellow Sea" label="Yellow Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27092" start="357" end="369" title="Sea of Japan" label="Sea of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="417" end="424" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="433" end="441" title="Russian Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996" start="461" end="478" title="Ivan the Terrible" label="Ivan the Terrible"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="518" end="541" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q269655" start="547" end="568" title="Treaty of Shimonoseki" label="Treaty of Shimonoseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085373" start="614" end="625" title="Lüshun Port" label="Port Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q696874" start="646" end="665" title="Triple Intervention" label="Triple Intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q593682" start="808" end="827" title="sphere of influence" label="sphere of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="877" end="900" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q541195" start="1033" end="1056" title="Anglo-Japanese Alliance" label="Anglo-Japanese Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363925" start="1315" end="1332" title="Battle of Port Arthur" label="a surprise attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165355" start="1340" end="1361" title="Pacific Fleet (Russia)" label="Russian Pacific Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q55498" start="1456" end="1466" title="Yalu River" label="Yalu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="1666" end="1672" title="Mukden" label="Mukden"/>
<link wikidata="Q805787" start="1732" end="1744" title="Baltic Fleet" label="Baltic Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q93318" start="1792" end="1806" title="Nautical mile" label="nautical miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="1828" end="1838" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q697037" start="1910" end="1933" title="Japanese Combined Fleet" label="Japanese Combined Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q208127" start="1941" end="1959" title="Battle of Tsushima" label="Battle of Tsushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q548067" start="1992" end="2012" title="Treaty of Portsmouth" label="Treaty of Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="2042" end="2060" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q696419" start="2212" end="2235" title="South Manchuria Railway" label="South Manchuria Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="2276" end="2284" title="Sakhalin" label="Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="2515" end="2526" title="great power" label="great power"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="2762" end="2785" title="1905 Russian Revolution" label="1905 Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="2925" end="2942" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q370290" start="3427" end="3436" title="Seikanron" label="Seikanron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="4177" end="4182" title="Count" label="Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q493818" start="4183" end="4194" title="Inoue Kaoru" label="Inoue Kaoru"/>
<link wikidata="Q711511" start="4631" end="4672" title="Freedom and People&amp;#x27;s Rights Movement" label="&amp;quot;people&amp;#x27;s rights&amp;quot; movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q202261" start="4994" end="5010" title="Social Darwinism" label="social Darwinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q721322" start="5033" end="5056" title="survival of the fittest" label="survival of the fittest"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="5241" end="5247" title="colony" label="colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q183738" start="5472" end="5479" title="Bushido" label="Bushidō"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="6229" end="6238" title="oligarchy" label="oligarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="6256" end="6273" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202384" start="6396" end="6409" title="Imperial Diet (Japan)" label="Imperial Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="6578" end="6594" title="Kingdom of Korea" label="Kingdom of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q705189" start="6865" end="6887" title="Convention of Tientsin" label="Convention of Tientsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143571" start="7178" end="7192" title="Masao Maruyama (scholar)" label="Masao Maruyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="7716" end="7728" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="7732" end="7743" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="7844" end="7863" title="Kamchatka Peninsula" label="Kamchatka Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="7906" end="7928" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430253" start="8042" end="8059" title="Tsushima incident" label="Tsushima incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="8244" end="8257" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="against China"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="8370" end="8376" title="Joseon" label="Joseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="8783" end="8794" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q904958" start="8852" end="8859" title="Donghak" label="Tonghak"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="8929" end="8941" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="9110" end="9115" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q326917" start="9232" end="9250" title="Liaodong Peninsula" label="Liaodong Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q702430" start="9285" end="9298" title="Beiyang Fleet" label="Beiyang Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q385180" start="9306" end="9330" title="Battle of the Yalu River (1894)" label="Battle of the Yalu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q269655" start="9359" end="9380" title="Treaty of Shimonoseki" label="Treaty of Shimonoseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q696874" start="9504" end="9556" title="Triple Intervention" label="forced Japan to withdraw from the Liaodong Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q464503" start="9853" end="9862" title="Empress Myeongseong" label="Queen Min"/>
<link wikidata="Q482485" start="10005" end="10018" title="Gyeongbokgung" label="Gyeongbokgung"/>
<link wikidata="Q257425" start="10125" end="10140" title="Gojong of Korea" label="Gojong of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q488535" start="10141" end="10169" title="Korea royal refuge at the Russian legation" label="fled to the Russian legation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085373" start="10515" end="10526" title="Port Arthur naval base" label="Port Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165355" start="10551" end="10572" title="Pacific Fleet (Russia)" label="Russian Pacific Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q373023" start="10699" end="10710" title="Weihai" label="Wei-hai-Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q489170" start="10787" end="10799" title="Jiaozhou Bay" label="Jiaozhou Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q706563" start="10811" end="10828" title="Siege of Tsingtao" label="Tsingtao fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q702819" start="10851" end="10869" title="East Asia Squadron" label="East Asia Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q39158" start="10930" end="10953" title="Chinese Eastern Railway" label="Chinese Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956" start="11341" end="11347" title="Harbin" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q716291" start="11739" end="11748" title="Talienwan" label="Talienwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956" start="12166" end="12172" title="Harbin" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="12181" end="12187" title="Mukden" label="Mukden"/>
<link wikidata="Q696419" start="12208" end="12233" title="South Manchuria Railway" label="South Manchurian Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="12302" end="12317" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177009" start="12324" end="12364" title="Boxers attacks on Chinese Eastern Railway" label="Boxer forces burned the railway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q488535" start="12481" end="12533" title="Gojong&amp;#x27;s internal exile to the Russian legation" label="Gojong&amp;#x27;s internal exile to the Russian legation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233" start="12572" end="12585" title="Korean Empire" label="Korean Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="12596" end="12612" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Tsar Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q57569" start="12618" end="12641" title="Prince Henry of Prussia (1862–1929)" label="Prince Henry of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45635" start="12780" end="12791" title="casus belli" label="casus belli"/>
<link wikidata="Q55498" start="12872" end="12876" title="Yalu river" label="Yalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q55499" start="12881" end="12886" title="Tumen river" label="Tumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q320404" start="13099" end="13120" title="Eight-Nation Alliance" label="Eight-Nation Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q174971" start="13859" end="13871" title="Itō Hirobumi" label="Itō Hirobumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q493818" start="14184" end="14195" title="Inoue Kaoru" label="Inoue Kaoru"/>
<link wikidata="Q159048" start="14263" end="14275" title="Katsura Tarō" label="Katsura Tarō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140896" start="14277" end="14290" title="Komura Jutarō" label="Komura Jutarō"/>
<link wikidata="Q297636" start="14309" end="14325" title="Yamagata Aritomo" label="Yamagata Aritomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q541195" start="14383" end="14406" title="Anglo-Japanese Alliance" label="Anglo-Japanese Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499276" start="15004" end="15016" title="Yellow Peril" label="Yellow Peril"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="15083" end="15093" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q243799" start="16427" end="16461" title="Franco-Russian Alliance" label="France, Russia&amp;#x27;s closest ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q471293" start="16791" end="16806" title="Maurice Rouvier" label="Maurice Rouvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="17016" end="17034" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052356" start="17361" end="17378" title="Cecil Spring Rice" label="Cecil Spring Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="17862" end="17878" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q60113" start="18161" end="18179" title="Bernhard von Bülow" label="Bernhard von Bülow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413483" start="18392" end="18418" title="European balance of power" label="balance of power in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q843809" start="18647" end="18659" title="Tirpitz Plan" label="Tirpitz Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q340202" start="18688" end="18699" title="Weltpolitik" label="Weltpolitik"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="19289" end="19304" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398905" start="19923" end="19946" title="Shinichiro Kurino" label="Kurino Shin&amp;#x27;ichirō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967035" start="22102" end="22113" title="Roman Rosen" label="Roman Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q159048" start="24200" end="24212" title="Katsura Tarō" label="Katsura Tarō"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="24395" end="24405" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="25939" end="25948" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761621" start="27546" end="27555" title="sea power" label="sea power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398905" start="29735" end="29758" title="Shin&amp;#x27;ichirō Kurino" label="Kurino Shin&amp;#x27;ichirō"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="29995" end="30006" title="Nicholas II" label="Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q154232" start="37972" end="37979" title="Alexander Suvorov" label="Suvorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="38063" end="38074" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448421" start="38086" end="38096" title="Echelon formation" label="en echelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q334516" start="38373" end="38391" title="declaration of war" label="declaration of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="38537" end="38559" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165355" start="38573" end="38595" title="Pacific Fleet (Russia)" label="Russian Far East Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052356" start="38862" end="38879" title="Cecil Spring Rice" label="Cecil Spring Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373981" start="38904" end="38919" title="Embassy of the United Kingdom, Moscow" label="British Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q736268" start="39060" end="39092" title="Finnish War" label="Russian attack on Sweden in 1808"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39181" end="39210" title="Declaration of war#Agreed Procedure for the Opening of Hostilities according to the Hague Convention" label="before commencing hostilities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39275" end="39309" title="Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907#Hague Convention of 1899" label="Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q386496" start="39312" end="39342" title="Kingdom of Montenegro" label="The Principality of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q283255" start="39426" end="39444" title="Nicholas I of Montenegro" label="Montenegrin prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="39605" end="39616" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="39711" end="39722" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q296785" start="40312" end="40327" title="Tōgō Heihachirō" label="Tōgō Heihachirō"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="40359" end="40381" title="torpedo boat destroyer" label="torpedo boat destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363925" start="40597" end="40618" title="Battle of Port Arthur" label="Battle of Port Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q315847" start="40931" end="40955" title="Stepan Osipovich Makarov" label="Stepan Osipovich Makarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q20934" start="41308" end="41315" title="Incheon" label="Incheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319672" start="41452" end="41467" title="Kuroki Tamemoto" label="Kuroki Tamemoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q55498" start="41491" end="41501" title="Yalu River" label="Yalu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q315847" start="41979" end="41986" title="Stepan Makarov" label="Makarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051067" start="42138" end="42153" title="pre-dreadnought" label="pre-dreadnought"/>
<link wikidata="Q164236" start="42479" end="42496" title="war correspondent" label="war correspondent"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="42569" end="42586" title="The Times" label="&amp;quot;Times&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q702377" start="43127" end="43143" title="Battle of the Yellow Sea" label="breakout attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387366" start="43202" end="43217" title="Wilgelm Vitgeft" label="Wilgelm Vitgeft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43605" end="43619" title="28 cm howitzer L/10" label="L/10 howitzers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194368" start="44173" end="44185" title="capital ship" label="capital ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440191" start="44467" end="44485" title="Battle of Liaoyang" label="Battle of Liaoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="44599" end="44607" title="Shenyang" label="Shenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524487" start="44624" end="44639" title="Anatoly Stessel" label="Anatoly Stessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q88222" start="44924" end="44929" title="Mining (military)" label="mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="45316" end="45329" title="court-martial" label="court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q541195" start="45595" end="45618" title="Anglo-Japanese Alliance" label="Anglo-Japanese Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="45636" end="45647" title="British Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="45660" end="45666" title="British Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576" start="46526" end="46533" title="Irkutsk" label="Irkutsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273445" start="46566" end="46586" title="Battle of Yalu River (1904)" label="Battle of Yalu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q887944" start="46692" end="46708" title="Mikhail Zasulich" label="Mikhail Zasulich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409298" start="47278" end="47295" title="Battle of Nanshan" label="Battle of Nanshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q315847" start="47462" end="47476" title="Stepan Makarov" label="Stepan Makarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387366" start="47532" end="47547" title="Wilgelm Vitgeft" label="Wilgelm Vitgeft"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633520" start="47618" end="47624" title="sortie" label="sortie"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="47666" end="47677" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843" start="47785" end="47792" title="cruiser" label="cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="47802" end="47825" title="torpedo boat destroyers" label="torpedo boat destroyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141302" start="48110" end="48147" title="Crossing the T" label="crossing Vitgeft&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;T&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q805787" start="49428" end="49440" title="Baltic Fleet" label="Baltic Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q453702" start="49471" end="49491" title="Zinovy Rozhestvensky" label="Zinovy Rozhestvensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903677" start="49687" end="49697" title="Cape Route" label="Cape Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="49709" end="49726" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q81690" start="49811" end="49831" title="Dogger Bank incident" label="Dogger Bank incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="50177" end="50194" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q192623" start="50291" end="50297" title="Looting" label="looted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499276" start="50686" end="50698" title="Yellow Peril" label="Yellow Peril"/>
<link wikidata="Q213169" start="51179" end="51186" title="Chongju" label="Chongju"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981247" start="51596" end="51604" title="honghuzi" label="honghuzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q197358" start="51867" end="51879" title="Zhang Zuolin" label="Zhang Zuolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q623329" start="52836" end="52847" title="Lüshunkou" label="Port Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="52941" end="52947" title="Mukden" label="Mukden"/>
<link wikidata="Q920679" start="53048" end="53063" title="Battle of Shaho" label="Battle of Shaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995312" start="53233" end="53249" title="Oskar Grippenberg" label="Oskar Gripenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q527156" start="53504" end="53514" title="Aleksey Kuropatkin" label="Kuropatkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q527156" start="54432" end="54450" title="General Kuropatkin" label="General Kuropatkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330558" start="55048" end="55056" title="Nossi-Bé" label="Nossi-Bé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="55058" end="55068" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072051" start="55224" end="55236" title="Cam Ranh Bay" label="Cam Ranh Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="55240" end="55256" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q205655" start="55288" end="55304" title="Singapore Strait" label="Singapore Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q52055" start="56214" end="56229" title="Tsushima Strait" label="Tsushima Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q697037" start="56711" end="56725" title="Combined Fleet" label="Combined Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833880" start="57384" end="57396" title="rules of war" label="rules of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569963" start="57501" end="57523" title="armed merchant cruiser" label="armed merchant cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118800" start="57530" end="57542" title="Shinano Maru (1900)" label="Shinano Maru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141302" start="57774" end="57809" title="Crossing the T" label="&amp;quot;cross the &amp;quot;T&amp;quot;&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375111" start="58283" end="58299" title="Kataoka Shichirō" label="Kataoka Shichirō"/>
<link wikidata="Q4538445" start="58300" end="58324" title="Japanese invasion of Sakhalin" label="occupied Sakhalin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q25638012" start="58352" end="58367" title="suing for peace" label="suing for peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440191" start="59056" end="59064" title="Battle of Liaoyang" label="Liaoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q920679" start="59069" end="59074" title="Battle of Shaho" label="Shaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q384091" start="59261" end="59267" title="Battle of Mukden" label="Mukden"/>
<link wikidata="Q888207" start="59326" end="59334" title="Nikolai Linevich" label="Linevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q49191" start="60525" end="60550" title="Portsmouth, New Hampshire" label="Portsmouth, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q155329" start="60557" end="60569" title="Sergei Witte" label="Sergei Witte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140896" start="60605" end="60617" title="Komura Jutarō" label="Baron Komura"/>
<link wikidata="Q548067" start="60655" end="60675" title="Treaty of Portsmouth" label="Treaty of Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778836" start="60714" end="60739" title="Portsmouth Naval Shipyard" label="Portsmouth Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q495558" start="61164" end="61190" title="Japan–Korea Treaty of 1910" label="Japan–Korea Treaty of 1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="61614" end="61622" title="Sakhalin" label="Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="61765" end="61782" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479134" start="61799" end="61814" title="George E. Mowry" label="George E. Mowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q710671" start="62656" end="62682" title="Hibiya incendiary incident" label="Hibiya incendiary incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q386496" start="62873" end="62890" title="Kingdom of Montenegro" label="Montenegro&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q130852" start="63018" end="63032" title="Junichiro Koizumi" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700991" start="63082" end="63096" title="Akiko Yamanaka" label="Akiko Yamanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353252" start="63138" end="63166" title="Prime Minister of Montenegro" label="Prime Minister of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435473" start="63297" end="63307" title="body count" label="body count"/>
<link wikidata="Q210800" start="63756" end="63784" title="Siege of Port Arthur" label="siege of Port Arthur in 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q468122" start="63786" end="63807" title="Nogi Maresuke" label="General Nogi Maresuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q133462" start="63934" end="63948" title="Seppuku" label="ritual suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q174231" start="63967" end="63980" title="Emperor Meiji" label="Emperor Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q34479" start="64040" end="64056" title="Hirohito" label="Emperor Hirohito"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="64274" end="64284" title="Modern history" label="modern era"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="64645" end="64660" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="64710" end="64716" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="65475" end="65501" title="Russian Revolution of 1905" label="Russian Revolution of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q109878" start="65633" end="65650" title="October Manifesto" label="October Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="65833" end="65852" title="February Revolution" label="February Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="65887" end="65923" title="Partitions of Poland" label="partitioned in the late 18th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355920" start="65963" end="65982" title="List of Polish uprisings" label="two major uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318712" start="66117" end="66127" title="Revolution in the Kingdom of Poland (1905–1907)" label="the unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="66406" end="66421" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Józef Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q710671" start="67302" end="67328" title="Hibiya incendiary incident" label="Hibiya incendiary incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="67691" end="67706" title="Sakhalin Island" label="Sakhalin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q548067" start="68114" end="68143" title="Portsmouth Treaty" label="Portsmouth peace negotiations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11600463" start="68388" end="68409" title="First Katsura Cabinet" label="First Katsura Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="68526" end="68537" title="Martial Law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="69290" end="69309" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="69967" end="69995" title="nongovernmental organization" label="nongovernmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="70007" end="70016" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q154605" start="70293" end="70302" title="total war" label="total war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499276" start="71207" end="71219" title="Yellow Peril" label="Yellow Peril"/>
<link wikidata="Q158060" start="71286" end="71302" title="W. E. B. Du Bois" label="W. E. B. Du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871107" start="71307" end="71323" title="Lothrop Stoddard" label="Lothrop Stoddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q78603" start="71420" end="71443" title="Christian von Ehrenfels" label="Christian von Ehrenfels"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="72063" end="72077" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q189326" start="72082" end="72088" title="Qajar dynasty" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="72304" end="72315" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="72488" end="72493" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q154759" start="72537" end="72547" title="Sven Hedin" label="Sven Hedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q717400" start="72560" end="72572" title="Thubten Choekyi Nyima, 9th Panchen Lama" label="Panchen Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="72601" end="72617" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="72888" end="72902" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559352" start="72912" end="72943" title="Committee of Union and Progress" label="Committee of Union and Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q16918513" start="73293" end="73322" title="The Colored American Magazine" label="The Colored American Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="73652" end="73663" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511" start="73683" end="73690" title="Ulysses (novel)" label="Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354695" start="73821" end="73835" title="Józef Mehoffer" label="Józef Mehoffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="74402" end="74417" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048169" start="74451" end="74467" title="Treaty of Berlin (1878)" label="Treaty of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="74537" end="74546" title="Bosphorus" label="Bosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q700363" start="74644" end="74669" title="London Straits Convention" label="London Straits Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="75010" end="75029" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="75538" end="75552" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q63779" start="75610" end="75622" title="Jakob Meckel" label="Jakob Meckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="75822" end="75845" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001676" start="75902" end="75911" title="Offensive (military)" label="offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="76485" end="76496" title="Great Power" label="Great Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q646394" start="76716" end="76729" title="Kwantung Army" label="Kwantung Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q242099" start="77009" end="77024" title="Mukden Incident" label="Mukden Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="77237" end="77261" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q702868" start="77389" end="77399" title="Japanese militarism" label="militarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208127" start="77448" end="77466" title="Battle of Tsushima" label="Battle of Tsushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q83235" start="77524" end="77545" title="Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount Nelson" label="Admiral Nelson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q171416" start="77654" end="77663" title="Battle of Trafalgar" label="Trafalgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="77899" end="77907" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="77922" end="77928" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="77930" end="77943" title="British Raj" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q606212" start="77945" end="77954" title="Fremantle" label="Fremantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013370" start="77978" end="77995" title="Simon&amp;#x27;s Town" label="Simon&amp;#x27;s Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q370736" start="77997" end="78008" title="Cape Colony" label="Cape Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054923" start="78024" end="78041" title="British Hong Kong" label="British Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="78088" end="78105" title="British Admiralty" label="British Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334995" start="78698" end="78706" title="embedded journalist" label="embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="79382" end="79401" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="79410" end="79428" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q699617" start="79668" end="79698" title="Ian Standish Monteith Hamilton" label="Ian Standish Monteith Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="79731" end="79750" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="80068" end="80081" title="field marshal" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q336722" start="80083" end="80130" title="William Gustavus Nicholson, 1st Baron Nicholson" label="William Gustavus Nicholson, 1st Baron Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568142" start="80169" end="80191" title="Imperial General Staff" label="Imperial General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046879" start="80222" end="80234" title="gold reserve" label="gold reserve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80253" end="80259" title="Pound sterling#Gold standard" label="pounds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80522" end="80528" title="french franc#Latin Monetary Union" label="francs"/>
<link wikidata="Q560355" start="81086" end="81091" title="German gold mark" label="marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q315842" start="81453" end="81471" title="Takahashi Korekiyo" label="Takahashi Korekiyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q215801" start="81476" end="81488" title="Jacob Schiff" label="Jacob Schiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759732" start="81521" end="81541" title="Kuhn, Loeb &amp;amp; Co." label="Kuhn, Loeb &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q247735" start="81565" end="81598" title="Anti-Jewish pogroms in the Russian Empire" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s anti-Jewish pogroms"/>
<link wikidata="Q159386" start="81785" end="81802" title="Rothschild family" label="Rothschild family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363925" start="81971" end="81992" title="Battle of Port Arthur" label="Battle of Port Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q876274" start="81994" end="82006" title="naval battle" label="naval battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192118" start="82040" end="82062" title="Battle of Chemulpo Bay" label="Battle of Chemulpo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q876274" start="82064" end="82076" title="naval battle" label="naval battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273445" start="82120" end="82140" title="Battle of Yalu River (1904)" label="Battle of Yalu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409298" start="82177" end="82194" title="Battle of Nanshan" label="Battle of Nanshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619692" start="82232" end="82251" title="Battle of Te-li-Ssu" label="Battle of Te-li-Ssu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469370" start="82286" end="82307" title="Battle of Motien Pass" label="Battle of Motien Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409264" start="82342" end="82363" title="Battle of Tashihchiao" label="Battle of Tashihchiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409166" start="82398" end="82418" title="Battle of Hsimucheng" label="Battle of Hsimucheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q702377" start="82455" end="82479" title="Battle of the Yellow Sea" label="Battle of the Yellow Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q876274" start="82482" end="82494" title="naval battle" label="naval battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q702150" start="82531" end="82547" title="Battle off Ulsan" label="Battle off Ulsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q876274" start="82549" end="82561" title="naval battle" label="naval battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871480" start="82598" end="82616" title="Battle of Korsakov" label="Battle of Korsakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q876274" start="82618" end="82630" title="naval battle" label="naval battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q210800" start="82684" end="82704" title="Siege of Port Arthur" label="Siege of Port Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440191" start="82755" end="82773" title="Battle of Liaoyang" label="Battle of Liaoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q920679" start="82812" end="82827" title="Battle of Shaho" label="Battle of Shaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358032" start="82864" end="82881" title="Battle of Sandepu" label="Battle of Sandepu"/>
<link wikidata="Q384091" start="82927" end="82943" title="Battle of Mukden" label="Battle of Mukden"/>
<link wikidata="Q208127" start="82980" end="82998" title="Battle of Tsushima" label="Battle of Tsushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q876274" start="83000" end="83012" title="naval battle" label="naval battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4538445" start="83058" end="83078" title="Japanese invasion of Sakhalin" label="Invasion of Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133036" start="83254" end="83264" title="lithograph" label="lithograph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83734" end="83740" title="Lubok#Russo-Japanese War lubok" label="luboks"/>
<link wikidata="Q185905" start="83920" end="83936" title="Ukiyo-e" label="woodblock prints"/>
<link wikidata="Q475476" start="84460" end="84468" title="diptychs" label="diptychs"/>
<link wikidata="Q79218" start="84470" end="84478" title="triptych" label="triptych"/>
<link wikidata="Q127017" start="84877" end="84896" title="Vasily Vereshchagin" label="Vasily Vereshchagin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072114" start="85135" end="85150" title="Mykola Samokysh" label="Mykola Samokysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q281108" start="85328" end="85333" title="Naïve art" label="naïve"/>
<link wikidata="Q310896" start="85342" end="85356" title="Niko Pirosmani" label="Niko Pirosmani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993390" start="85979" end="86004" title="On the Hills of Manchuria" label="On the Hills of Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q967916" start="86082" end="86094" title="Ilya Shatrov" label="Ilya Shatrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425322" start="86239" end="86252" title="Skitalets" label="Stepan Petrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192118" start="86326" end="86348" title="Battle of Chemulpo Bay" label="Battle of Chemulpo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153029" start="86358" end="86370" title="Russian cruiser Varyag (1899)" label="that cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q93227" start="86729" end="86752" title="Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov" label="Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q579026" start="86816" end="86835" title="The Golden Cockerel" label="The Golden Cockerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200" start="86920" end="86937" title="Alexander Pushkin" label="Alexander Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q468122" start="87289" end="87302" title="Nogi Maresuke" label="Nogi Maresuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q356960" start="87449" end="87458" title="Mori Ōgai" label="Mori Ōgai"/>
<link wikidata="Q464104" start="87683" end="87695" title="Yosano Akiko" label="Yosano Akiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q174231" start="87800" end="87813" title="Emperor Meiji" label="Emperor Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q123080" start="88102" end="88117" title="Blaise Cendrars" label="Blaise Cendrars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3212012" start="88220" end="88279" title="La prose du Transsibérien et de la Petite Jehanne de France" label="La prose du Transsibérien et de la Petite Jehanne de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252203" start="88387" end="88399" title="Douglas Dunn" label="Douglas Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383630" start="88411" end="88426" title="epistolary poem" label="epistolary poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731928" start="88763" end="88775" title="Allen Upward" label="Allen Upward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119359" start="89718" end="89733" title="George Griffith" label="George Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952614" start="90638" end="90652" title="Boys&amp;#x27; Own" label="Boys&amp;#x27; Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q15976336" start="90846" end="90860" title="Herbert Strang" label="Herbert Strang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293795" start="91059" end="91077" title="Edward Stratemeyer" label="Edward Stratemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498690" start="91430" end="91456" title="Frederick Sadleir Brereton" label="Frederick Sadleir Brereton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415499" start="91632" end="91643" title="Kirk Munroe" label="Kirk Munroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440128" start="91843" end="91856" title="nautical fiction" label="naval fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608088" start="91921" end="91940" title="invasion literature" label="invasion literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505122" start="92026" end="92041" title="Shunrō Oshikawa" label="Shunrō Oshikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143362" start="93414" end="93435" title="Alexey Novikov-Priboy" label="Alexey Novikov-Priboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q758861" start="93893" end="93905" title="State Stalin Prize" label="Stalin Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q92319" start="94114" end="94126" title="Frank Thiess" label="Frank Thiess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364621" start="94727" end="94741" title="Valentin Pikul" label="Valentin Pikul"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="94964" end="94972" title="February Revolution" label="February"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="94977" end="94995" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q125663" start="95081" end="95093" title="Boris Akunin" label="Boris Akunin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966790" start="95107" end="95126" title="The Diamond Chariot" label="The Diamond Chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1912438" start="95182" end="95196" title="Erast Fandorin" label="Erast Fandorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087887" start="95349" end="95362" title="Shiba Ryōtarō" label="Shiba Ryōtarō"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358566" start="95376" end="95397" title="Saka no Ue no Kumo" label="Clouds Above the Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q12151350" start="95678" end="95701" title="Port Arthur (film)" label="&amp;quot;Port Arthur&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4240023" start="95717" end="95731" title="Cruiser &amp;#x27;Varyag&amp;#x27;" label="Kreiser Varyag"/>
<link wikidata="" start="95753" end="95807" title="Nichiro sensō shōri no hishi: Tekichū ōdan sanbyaku-ri" label="Nichiro sensō shōri no hishi: Tekichū ōdan sanbyaku-ri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="95829" end="95860" title="Meiji tennô to nichiro daisenso" label="Meiji tennô to nichiro daisenso"/>
<link wikidata="Q11086456" start="95882" end="95917" title="Battle of the Japan Sea (film)" label="&amp;quot;Battle of the Japan Sea&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q37001" start="96137" end="96151" title="Toshiro Mifune" label="Toshiro Mifune"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96161" end="96183" title="The Battle of Tsushima" label="The Battle of Tsushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="96197" end="96208" title="documentary" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880293" start="96260" end="96285" title="The Battle of Port Arthur" label="The Battle of Port Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96391" end="96404" title="Battle Anthem" label="Battle Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q37001" start="96462" end="96476" title="Toshiro Mifune" label="Toshiro Mifune"/>
<link wikidata="Q11086456" start="96516" end="96551" title="Battle of the Japan Sea (film)" label="&amp;quot;Battle of the Japan Sea&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932217" start="96567" end="96587" title="Reilly, Ace of Spies" label="Reilly, Ace of Spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q171958" start="96627" end="96640" title="Sidney Reilly" label="Sidney Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96684" end="96691" title="Sidney Reilly#Tsarist Russia and the Far East" label="allowed"/>
<link wikidata="Q210800" start="96738" end="96758" title="Siege of Port Arthur" label="Siege of Port Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226783" start="96822" end="96840" title="Saka no Ue no Kumo (TV series)" label="Saka no Ue no Kumo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19781419" start="96924" end="96936" title="Golden Kamuy" label="Golden Kamuy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210800" start="97194" end="97214" title="Siege of Port Arthur" label="Siege of Port Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q65240318" start="97224" end="97246" title="The Prisoner of Sakura" label="The Prisoner of Sakura"/>
<link wikidata="Q200022" start="97419" end="97428" title="Matsuyama" label="Matsuyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q123376" start="97430" end="97446" title="Ehime Prefecture" label="Ehime Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="97534" end="97549" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoner of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628298" start="97641" end="97677" title="Foreign policy of the Russian Empire" label="Foreign policy of the Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192621" start="97680" end="97694" title="Kaneko Kentarō" label="Kaneko Kentarō"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583360" start="97697" end="97711" title="Outline of war" label="Outline of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056475" start="97714" end="97765" title="List of warships sunk during the Russo-Japanese War" label="List of warships sunk during the Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="97768" end="97793" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="Korea under Japanese rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q24969434" start="97796" end="97821" title="Manchuria under Qing rule" label="Manchuria under Qing rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967035" start="97824" end="97835" title="Baron Rosen" label="Baron Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321010" start="97838" end="97892" title="Russian Imperialism in Asia and the Russo-Japanese War" label="Russian Imperialism in Asia and the Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234208" start="97895" end="97922" title="Western imperialism in Asia" label="Western imperialism in Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424244" start="97925" end="97951" title="Japan–Montenegro relations" label="Japan-Montenegro relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336877" start="97954" end="97976" title="Japan–Russia relations" label="Japan-Russia relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398216" start="97979" end="98006" title="Montenegro–Russia relations" label="Montenegro-Russia relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q220602" start="98009" end="98028" title="Soviet-Japanese War" label="Soviet-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890797" start="99181" end="99210" title="United States Naval Institute" label="United States Naval Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q12411320" start="99396" end="99409" title="Rotem Kowner" label="Kowner, Rotem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048117" start="99845" end="99859" title="Edmund Morris (writer)" label="Morris, Edmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781967" start="99874" end="99886" title="Theodore Rex (book)" label="Theodore Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143362" start="99936" end="99959" title="Alexey Novikov-Priboy" label="Novikov-Priboy, Aleksei"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="102418" end="102437" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q284947" start="102525" end="102550" title="Christian Science Monitor" label="Christian Science Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171572" start="102896" end="102922" title="Cornell University Library" label="Cornell University Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44578" wikidata="Q269878" url="?curid=44578" title="Big O notation">
<text>Big &quot;O&quot; notation is a mathematical notation that describes the limiting behavior of a function when the argument tends towards a particular value or infinity. Big O is a member of a family of notations invented by German mathematicians Paul Bachmann, Edmund Landau, and others, collectively called Bachmann–Landau notation or asymptotic notation. The letter O was chosen by Bachmann to stand for &quot;Ordnung&quot;, meaning the order of approximation.

In computer science, big O notation is used to classify algorithms according to how their run time or space requirements grow as the input size grows. In analytic number theory, big O notation is often used to express a bound on the difference between an arithmetical function and a better understood approximation; a famous example of such a difference is the remainder term in the prime number theorem. Big O notation is also used in many other fields to provide similar estimates.

Big O notation characterizes functions according to their growth rates: different functions with the same asymptotic growth rate may be represented using the same O notation. The letter O is used because the growth rate of a function is also referred to as the order of the function. A description of a function in terms of big O notation usually only provides an upper bound on the growth rate of the function.

Associated with big O notation are several related notations, using the symbols , and , to describe other kinds of bounds on asymptotic growth rates.

== Formal definition ==
Let formula_1 the function to be estimated, be a real or complex valued function, and let formula_2 the comparison function, be a real valued function. Let both functions be defined on some unbounded subset of the positive real numbers, and formula_3 be non-zero (often, but not necessarily, strictly positive) for all large enough values of formula_4 One writes
formula_5
and it is read &quot;formula_6 is big O of formula_3&quot; or more often &quot;formula_8 is of the order of formula_3&quot; if the absolute value of formula_8 is at most a positive constant multiple of the absolute value of formula_11 for all sufficiently large values of formula_4 That is, formula_13 if there exists a positive real number formula_14 and a real number formula_15 such that
formula_16
In many contexts, the assumption that we are interested in the growth rate as the variable formula_17 goes to infinity or to zero is left unstated, and one writes more simply that
formula_18
The notation can also be used to describe the behavior of formula_19 near some real number formula_20 (often, formula_21): we say
formula_22
if there exist positive numbers formula_23 and formula_24 such that for all defined formula_25 with formula_26
formula_27
As formula_3 is non-zero for adequately large (or small) values of formula_29 both of these definitions can be unified using the limit superior:
formula_30
if
formula_31
And in both of these definitions the limit point formula_20 (whether formula_33 or not) is a cluster point of the domains of formula_19 and formula_35 i. e., in every neighbourhood of formula_36 there have to be infinitely many points in common. Moreover, as pointed out in the article about the limit inferior and limit superior, the formula_37 (at least on the extended real number line) always exists.

In computer science, a slightly more restrictive definition is common: formula_38 and formula_39 are both required to be functions from some unbounded subset of the positive integers to the nonnegative real numbers; then formula_40 if there exist positive integer numbers formula_14 and formula_42 such that formula_43 for all formula_44

== Example ==
In typical usage the notation is asymptotical, that is, it refers to very large . In this setting, the contribution of the terms that grow &quot;most quickly&quot; will eventually make the other ones irrelevant. As a result, the following simplification rules can be applied:
*If is a sum of several terms, if there is one with largest growth rate, it can be kept, and all others omitted.
*If is a product of several factors, any constants (factors in the product that do not depend on ) can be omitted.
For example, let , and suppose we wish to simplify this function, using notation, to describe its growth rate as approaches infinity. This function is the sum of three terms: , , and . Of these three terms, the one with the highest growth rate is the one with the largest exponent as a function of , namely . Now one may apply the second rule: is a product of and in which the first factor does not depend on . Omitting this factor results in the simplified form . Thus, we say that is a &quot;big O&quot; of . Mathematically, we can write . One may confirm this calculation using the formal definition: let and . Applying the formal definition from above, the statement that is equivalent to its expansion,
formula_45
for some suitable choice of a real number and a positive real number and for all . To prove this, let and . Then, for all :
formula_46
so
formula_47

== Use ==
Big O notation has two main areas of application:
* In mathematics, it is commonly used to describe how closely a finite series approximates a given function, especially in the case of a truncated Taylor series or asymptotic expansion.
* In computer science, it is useful in the analysis of algorithms.

In both applications, the function appearing within the is typically chosen to be as simple as possible, omitting constant factors and lower order terms.

There are two formally close, but noticeably different, usages of this notation:
* infinite asymptotics
* infinitesimal asymptotics.

This distinction is only in application and not in principle, however—the formal definition for the &quot;big O&quot; is the same for both cases, only with different limits for the function argument.

=== Infinite asymptotics ===

Big O notation is useful when analyzing algorithms for efficiency. For example, the time (or the number of steps) it takes to complete a problem of size might be found to be . As grows large, the term will come to dominate, so that all other terms can be neglected —for instance when , the term is 1000 times as large as the term. Ignoring the latter would have negligible effect on the expression&#x27;s value for most purposes. Further, the coefficients become irrelevant if we compare to any other order of expression, such as an expression containing a term or . Even if , if , the latter will always exceed the former once grows larger than , &quot;viz.&quot; . Additionally, the number of steps depends on the details of the machine model on which the algorithm runs, but different types of machines typically vary by only a constant factor in the number of steps needed to execute an algorithm. So the big O notation captures what remains: we write either
:formula_48
or
:formula_49
and say that the algorithm has &quot;order of &quot; time complexity. The sign &quot;&quot; is not meant to express &quot;is equal to&quot; in its normal mathematical sense, but rather a more colloquial &quot;is&quot;, so the second expression is sometimes considered more accurate (see the &quot;Equals sign&quot; discussion below) while the first is considered by some as an abuse of notation.

=== Infinitesimal asymptotics ===
Big O can also be used to describe the error term in an approximation to a mathematical function. The most significant terms are written explicitly, and then the least-significant terms are summarized in a single big O term. Consider, for example, the exponential series and two expressions of it that are valid when is small:
:formula_50
The middle expression (the one with &quot;O&quot;(&quot;x&quot;3)) means the absolute-value of the error &quot;e&quot;&quot;x&quot; − (1 + &quot;x&quot; + &quot;x&quot;2/2) is at most some constant times |&quot;x&quot;3| when &quot;x&quot; is close enough to 0.

== Properties ==
If the function can be written as a finite sum of other functions, then the fastest growing one determines the order of . For example,
:formula_51
In particular, if a function may be bounded by a polynomial in , then as tends to &quot;infinity&quot;, one may disregard &quot;lower-order&quot; terms of the polynomial. The sets and are very different. If is greater than one, then the latter grows much faster. A function that grows faster than for any is called &quot;superpolynomial&quot;. One that grows more slowly than any exponential function of the form is called &quot;subexponential&quot;. An algorithm can require time that is both superpolynomial and subexponential; examples of this include the fastest known algorithms for integer factorization and the function .

We may ignore any powers of inside of the logarithms. The set is exactly the same as . The logarithms differ only by a constant factor (since ) and thus the big O notation ignores that. Similarly, logs with different constant bases are equivalent. On the other hand, exponentials with different bases are not of the same order. For example, and are not of the same order.

Changing units may or may not affect the order of the resulting algorithm. Changing units is equivalent to multiplying the appropriate variable by a constant wherever it appears. For example, if an algorithm runs in the order of , replacing by means the algorithm runs in the order of , and the big O notation ignores the constant . This can be written as . If, however, an algorithm runs in the order of , replacing with gives . This is not equivalent to in general. Changing variables may also affect the order of the resulting algorithm. For example, if an algorithm&#x27;s run time is when measured in terms of the number of &quot;digits&quot; of an input number , then its run time is when measured as a function of the input number itself, because .

=== Product ===
:formula_52
:formula_53

=== Sum ===
If formula_54 and formula_55 then formula_56. It follows that if formula_57 and formula_58 then formula_59. 
=== Multiplication by a constant ===
Let be a nonzero constant. Then formula_60. In other words, if formula_61, then formula_62

== Multiple variables ==
Big &quot;O&quot; (and little o, Ω, etc.) can also be used with multiple variables. To define big &quot;O&quot; formally for multiple variables, suppose formula_19 and formula_64 are two functions defined on some subset of formula_65. We say
:formula_66
if and only if there exist constants formula_24 and formula_68 such that formula_69 for all formula_70 with formula_71 for some formula_72
Equivalently, the condition that formula_73 for some formula_74 can be written formula_75, where formula_76 denotes the Chebyshev norm. For example, the statement
:formula_77
asserts that there exist constants &quot;C&quot; and &quot;M&quot; such that
:formula_78
whenever either formula_79 or formula_80 holds. This definition allows all of the coordinates of formula_70 to increase to infinity. In particular, the statement
:formula_82
(i.e., formula_83) is quite different from
:formula_84
(i.e., formula_85).

Under this definition, the subset on which a function is defined is significant when generalizing statements from the univariate setting to the multivariate setting. For example, if formula_86 and formula_87, then formula_88 if we restrict formula_19 and formula_64 to formula_91, but not if they are defined on formula_92.

This is not the only generalization of big O to multivariate functions, and in practice, there is some inconsistency in the choice of definition.

== Matters of notation ==

=== Equals sign ===
The statement &quot; is &quot; as defined above is usually written as . Some consider this to be an abuse of notation, since the use of the equals sign could be misleading as it suggests a symmetry that this statement does not have. As de Bruijn says, is true but is not. Knuth describes such statements as &quot;one-way equalities&quot;, since if the sides could be reversed, &quot;we could deduce ridiculous things like from the identities and &quot;. In another letter, Knuth also pointed out that
: &quot;the equality sign is not symmetric with respect to such notations&quot;, [as, in this notation,] &quot;mathematicians customarily use the &#x27;=&#x27; sign as they use the word &#x27;is&#x27; in English: Aristotle is a man, but a man isn&#x27;t necessarily Aristotle&quot;.

For these reasons, it would be more precise to use set notation and write (read as: &quot; is an element of &quot;, or &quot; is in the set thinking of as the class of all functions such that for some positive real number . However, the use of the equals sign is customary.

=== Other arithmetic operators ===
Big O notation can also be used in conjunction with other arithmetic operators in more complicated equations. For example, denotes the collection of functions having the growth of &quot;h&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) plus a part whose growth is limited to that of &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;). Thus,
:formula_93
expresses the same as
:formula_94

==== Example ====
Suppose an algorithm is being developed to operate on a set of &quot;n&quot; elements. Its developers are interested in finding a function &quot;T&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) that will express how long the algorithm will take to run (in some arbitrary measurement of time) in terms of the number of elements in the input set. The algorithm works by first calling a subroutine to sort the elements in the set and then perform its own operations. The sort has a known time complexity of &quot;O&quot;(&quot;n&quot;2), and after the subroutine runs the algorithm must take an additional steps before it terminates. Thus the overall time complexity of the algorithm can be expressed as . Here the terms are subsumed within the faster-growing &quot;O&quot;(&quot;n&quot;2). Again, this usage disregards some of the formal meaning of the &quot;=&quot; symbol, but it does allow one to use the big O notation as a kind of convenient placeholder.

=== Multiple uses ===
In more complicated usage, &quot;O&quot;(·) can appear in different places in an equation, even several times on each side. For example, the following are true for formula_95:
formula_96
The meaning of such statements is as follows: for &quot;any&quot; functions which satisfy each &quot;O&quot;(·) on the left side, there are &quot;some&quot; functions satisfying each &quot;O&quot;(·) on the right side, such that substituting all these functions into the equation makes the two sides equal. For example, the third equation above means: &quot;For any function &quot;f&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) = &quot;O&quot;(1), there is some function &quot;g&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) = &quot;O&quot;(&quot;e&quot;&quot;n&quot;) such that &quot;n&quot;&quot;f&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) = &quot;g&quot;(&quot;n&quot;).&quot; In terms of the &quot;set notation&quot; above, the meaning is that the class of functions represented by the left side is a subset of the class of functions represented by the right side. In this use the &quot;=&quot; is a formal symbol that unlike the usual use of &quot;=&quot; is not a symmetric relation. Thus for example does not imply the false statement .

=== Typesetting ===
Big O is typeset as an italicized uppercase &quot;O&quot;, as in the following example: formula_97. In TeX, it is produced by simply typing O inside math mode. Unlike Greek-named Bachmann–Landau notations, it needs no special symbol. However, some authors use the calligraphic variant formula_98 instead.

== Orders of common functions ==

Here is a list of classes of functions that are commonly encountered when analyzing the running time of an algorithm. In each case, &quot;c&quot; is a positive constant and &quot;n&quot; increases without bound. The slower-growing functions are generally listed first.
The statement formula_99 is sometimes weakened to formula_100 to derive simpler formulas for asymptotic complexity. For any formula_101 and formula_102 is a subset of formula_103 for any so may be considered as a polynomial with some bigger order.

== Related asymptotic notations ==
Big &quot;O&quot; is widely used in computer science. Together with some other related notations, it forms the family of Bachmann–Landau notations.

===Little-o notation=== 
Intuitively, the assertion &quot; is &quot; (read &quot; is little-o of &quot; or &quot; is of inferior order to &quot;) means that grows much faster than , or equivalently grows much slower than . As before, let &quot;f&quot; be a real or complex valued function and &quot;g&quot; a real valued function, both defined on some unbounded subset of the positive real numbers, such that &quot;g&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) is strictly positive for all large enough values of &quot;x&quot;. One writes
:formula_104
if for every positive constant there exists a constant formula_105 such that
:formula_106
For example, one has
: formula_107 and formula_108     both as formula_109

The difference between the definition of the big-O notation and the definition of little-o is that while the former has to be true for &quot;at least one&quot; constant &quot;M&quot;, the latter must hold for &quot;every&quot; positive constant , however small. In this way, little-o notation makes a &quot;stronger statement&quot; than the corresponding big-O notation: every function that is little-o of &quot;g&quot; is also big-O of &quot;g&quot;, but not every function that is big-O of &quot;g&quot; is little-o of &quot;g&quot;. For example, formula_110 but 

If &quot;g&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) is nonzero, or at least becomes nonzero beyond a certain point, the relation formula_111 is equivalent to
:formula_112 (and this is in fact how Landau originally defined the little-o notation).

Little-o respects a number of arithmetic operations. For example,
: if is a nonzero constant and formula_113 then formula_114, and
: if formula_115 and formula_116 then formula_117
It also satisfies a transitivity relation:
: if formula_113 and formula_119 then formula_120

=== Big Omega notation ===

Another asymptotic notation is formula_121, read &quot;big omega&quot;. There are two widespread and incompatible definitions of the statement

:formula_122 as formula_123,

where &quot;a&quot; is some real number, formula_124, or formula_125, where &quot;f&quot; and &quot;g&quot; are real functions defined in a neighbourhood of &quot;a&quot;, and where &quot;g&quot; is positive in this neighbourhood.

The Hardy–Littlewood definition is used mainly in analytic number theory, and the Knuth definition mainly in computational complexity theory; the definitions are not equivalent.

==== The Hardy–Littlewood definition ====
In 1914 G.H. Hardy and J.E. Littlewood introduced the new symbol formula_126 which is defined as follows:

:formula_127 as formula_128 if formula_129

Thus formula_130 is the negation of formula_131

In 1916 the same authors introduced the two new symbols formula_132 and formula_133 defined as:

:formula_134 as formula_128 if formula_136

:formula_137 as formula_128 if formula_139

These symbols were used by E. Landau, with the same meanings, in 1924. Authors that followed Landau, however, use a different notation for the same definitions: The symbol formula_132 has been replaced by the current notation formula_141 with the same definition, and formula_142 became formula_143

These three symbols formula_144 as well as formula_145 (meaning that formula_146 and formula_147 are both satisfied), are now currently used in analytic number theory.

===== Simple examples =====

We have

:formula_148 as formula_149

and more precisely

:formula_150 as formula_151

We have

:formula_152 as formula_149

and more precisely

:formula_154 as formula_155

however

:formula_156 as formula_157

==== The Knuth definition ====
In 1976 Donald Knuth published a paper to justify his use of the formula_121-symbol to describe a stronger property. Knuth wrote: &quot;For all the applications I have seen so far in computer science, a stronger requirement ... is much more appropriate&quot;. He defined

:formula_159

with the comment: &quot;Although I have changed Hardy and Littlewood&#x27;s definition of formula_121, I feel justified in doing so because their definition is by no means in wide use, and because there are other ways to say what they want to say in the comparatively rare cases when their definition applies.&quot;

=== Family of Bachmann–Landau notations ===
{g(n)} &lt; \infty&lt;/math&gt;
| formula_161 (Hardy&#x27;s notation) or formula_162 (Knuth notation)
| Of the same order as (Hardy); Big Theta (Knuth)
| is asymptotically bounded by both above (with constant factor formula_163) and below (with constant factor formula_164)
| formula_165 formula_166
| formula_167 and formula_168 
| formula_169
| Asymptotic equivalence
| is equal to asymptotically
| formula_170
| formula_171
| formula_172
| Big Omega in complexity theory (Knuth)
| is bounded below by asymptotically
| formula_173
| formula_174
| formula_175
| Small Omega; Little Omega
| dominates asymptotically
| formula_176
| formula_177
|- #style=&quot;border-top: 2px solid gray;&quot;
| formula_172
| Big Omega in number theory (Hardy–Littlewood)
| formula_179 is not dominated by asymptotically
| formula_180
| formula_181

The limit definitions assume formula_182 for sufficiently large formula_183. The table is (partly) sorted from smallest to largest, in the sense that formula_184 (Knuth&#x27;s version of) formula_185 on functions correspond to formula_186formula_187 on the real line (the Hardy–Littlewood version of formula_188, however, doesn&#x27;t correspond to any such description).

Computer science uses the big formula_189, big Theta formula_190, little formula_191, little omega formula_192 and Knuth&#x27;s big Omega formula_188 notations. Analytic number theory often uses the big formula_189, small formula_191, Hardy&#x27;s formula_196, Hardy–Littlewood&#x27;s big Omega formula_188 (with or without the +, − or ± subscripts) and formula_198 notations. The small omega formula_192 notation is not used as often in analysis.

=== Use in computer science ===

Informally, especially in computer science, the big &quot;O&quot; notation often can be used somewhat differently to describe an asymptotic tight bound where using big Theta Θ notation might be more factually appropriate in a given context. For example, when considering a function &quot;T&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) = 73&quot;n&quot;3 + 22&quot;n&quot;2 + 58, all of the following are generally acceptable, but tighter bounds (such as numbers 2 and 3 below) are usually strongly preferred over looser bounds (such as number 1 below).
#
The equivalent English statements are respectively:
#&quot;T&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) grows asymptotically no faster than &quot;n&quot;100
#&quot;T&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) grows asymptotically no faster than &quot;n&quot;3
#&quot;T&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) grows asymptotically as fast as &quot;n&quot;3.
So while all three statements are true, progressively more information is contained in each. In some fields, however, the big O notation (number 2 in the lists above) would be used more commonly than the big Theta notation (items numbered 3 in the lists above). For example, if &quot;T&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) represents the running time of a newly developed algorithm for input size &quot;n&quot;, the inventors and users of the algorithm might be more inclined to put an upper asymptotic bound on how long it will take to run without making an explicit statement about the lower asymptotic bound.

=== Other notation ===
In their book &quot;Introduction to Algorithms&quot;, Cormen, Leiserson, Rivest and Stein consider the set of functions &quot;f&quot; which satisfy

:formula_200

In a correct notation this set can, for instance, be called &quot;O&quot;(&quot;g&quot;), where

formula_201

The authors state that the use of equality operator (=) to denote set membership rather than the set membership operator (∈) is an abuse of notation, but that doing so has advantages. Inside an equation or inequality, the use of asymptotic notation stands for an anonymous function in the set &quot;O&quot;(&quot;g&quot;), which eliminates lower-order terms, and helps to reduce inessential clutter in equations, for example:

:formula_202

=== Extensions to the Bachmann–Landau notations ===
Another notation sometimes used in computer science is &quot;Õ&quot; (read &quot;soft-O&quot;), which hides polylogarithmic factors. There are two definitions in use: some authors use &quot;f&quot;(&quot;n&quot;) = &quot;Õ&quot;(&quot;g&quot;(&quot;n&quot;)) as shorthand for for some &quot;k&quot;, while others use it as shorthand for . When is polynomial in &quot;n&quot;, there is no difference; however, the latter definition allows one to say, e.g. that formula_203 while the former definition allows for formula_204 for any constant &quot;k&quot;. Some authors write &quot;O&quot;* for the same purpose as the latter definition. Essentially, it is big &quot;O&quot; notation, ignoring logarithmic factors because the growth-rate effects of some other super-logarithmic function indicate a growth-rate explosion for large-sized input parameters that is more important to predicting bad run-time performance than the finer-point effects contributed by the logarithmic-growth factor(s). This notation is often used to obviate the &quot;nitpicking&quot; within growth-rates that are stated as too tightly bounded for the matters at hand (since log&quot;k&quot; &quot;n&quot; is always &quot;o&quot;(&quot;n&quot;ε) for any constant &quot;k&quot; and any ).

Also, the &quot;L&quot; notation, defined as
:formula_205
is convenient for functions that are between polynomial and exponential in terms of 

== Generalizations and related usages ==
The generalization to functions taking values in any normed vector space is straightforward (replacing absolute values by norms), where &quot;f&quot; and &quot;g&quot; need not take their values in the same space. A generalization to functions &quot;g&quot; taking values in any topological group is also possible.
The &quot;limiting process&quot; can also be generalized by introducing an arbitrary filter base, i.e. to directed nets &quot;f&quot; and &quot;g&quot;. The &quot;o&quot; notation can be used to define derivatives and differentiability in quite general spaces, and also (asymptotical) equivalence of functions,
:formula_206
which is an equivalence relation and a more restrictive notion than the relationship &quot;&quot;f&quot; is Θ(&quot;g&quot;)&quot; from above. (It reduces to lim &quot;f&quot; / &quot;g&quot; = 1 if &quot;f&quot; and &quot;g&quot; are positive real valued functions.) For example, 2&quot;x&quot; is Θ(&quot;x&quot;), but is not &quot;o&quot;(&quot;x&quot;).

== History (Bachmann–Landau, Hardy, and Vinogradov notations) ==

The symbol O was first introduced by number theorist Paul Bachmann in 1894, in the second volume of his book &quot;Analytische Zahlentheorie&quot; (&quot;analytic number theory&quot;). The number theorist Edmund Landau adopted it, and was thus inspired to introduce in 1909 the notation o; hence both are now called Landau symbols. These notations were used in applied mathematics during the 1950s for asymptotic analysis.
The symbol formula_121 (in the sense &quot;is not an &quot;o&quot; of&quot;) was introduced in 1914 by Hardy and Littlewood. Hardy and Littlewood also introduced in 1916 the symbols formula_208 (&quot;right&quot;) and formula_209 (&quot;left&quot;), precursors of the modern symbols formula_210 (&quot;is not smaller than a small o of&quot;) and formula_211 (&quot;is not larger than a small o of&quot;). Thus the Omega symbols (with their original meanings) are sometimes also referred to as &quot;Landau symbols&quot;. This notation formula_121 became commonly used in number theory at least since the 1950s.

The symbol formula_198, although it had been used before with different meanings, was given its modern definition by Landau in 1909 and by Hardy in 1910. Just above on the same page of his tract Hardy defined the symbol formula_196, where formula_215 means that both formula_216 and formula_217 are satisfied. The notation is still currently used in analytic number theory. In his tract Hardy also proposed the symbol formula_218, where formula_219 means that formula_220 for some constant formula_221.

In the 1970s the big O was popularized in computer science by Donald Knuth, who proposed the different notation formula_222 for Hardy&#x27;s formula_215, and proposed a different definition for the Hardy and Littlewood Omega notation.

Two other symbols coined by Hardy were (in terms of the modern &quot;O&quot; notation)
:formula_224   and   formula_225

(Hardy however never defined or used the notation formula_226, nor formula_227, as it has been sometimes reported).
Hardy introduced the symbols formula_228 and formula_229 (as well as the already mentioned other symbols) in his 1910 tract &quot;Orders of Infinity&quot;, and made use of them only in three papers (1910–1913). In his nearly 400 remaining papers and books he consistently used the Landau symbols O and o.

Hardy&#x27;s symbols formula_230 and formula_231 (as well as formula_218) are not used anymore. On the other hand, in the 1930s, the Russian number theorist Ivan Matveyevich Vinogradov introduced his notation formula_227, which has been increasingly used in number theory instead of the formula_234 notation. We have
:formula_235
and frequently both notations are used in the same paper.

The big-O originally stands for &quot;order of&quot; (&quot;Ordnung&quot;, Bachmann 1894), and is thus a Latin letter. Neither Bachmann nor Landau ever call it &quot;Omicron&quot;. The symbol was much later on (1976) viewed by Knuth as a capital omicron, probably in reference to his definition of the symbol Omega. The digit zero should not be used.

== See also ==
* Asymptotic computational complexity
* Asymptotic expansion: Approximation of functions generalizing Taylor&#x27;s formula
* Asymptotically optimal algorithm: A phrase frequently used to describe an algorithm that has an upper bound asymptotically within a constant of a lower bound for the problem
* Big O in probability notation: &quot;Op&quot;, &quot;op&quot;
* Limit inferior and limit superior: An explanation of some of the limit notation used in this article
* Master theorem (analysis of algorithms): For analyzing divide-and-conquer recursive algorithms using Big O notation
* Nachbin&#x27;s theorem: A precise method of bounding complex analytic functions so that the domain of convergence of integral transforms can be stated
* Order of approximation
* Order of accuracy
* Computational complexity of mathematical operations

== References and notes ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Growth of sequences — OEIS (Online Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences) Wiki
* Introduction to Asymptotic Notations
* Big-O Notation – What is it good for
*An example of Big O in accuracy of central divided difference scheme for first derivative 
*A Gentle Introduction to Algorithm Complexity Analysis</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="0" end="26" title="Big O notation" label="Big &amp;quot;O&amp;quot; notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q752718" start="73" end="90" title="asymptotic analysis" label="limiting behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="96" end="104" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027788" start="114" end="122" title="Argument of a function" label="argument"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="192" end="211" title="#Related asymptotic notations" label="family of notations"/>
<link wikidata="Q68547" start="246" end="259" title="Paul Gustav Heinrich Bachmann" label="Paul Bachmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q58750" start="261" end="274" title="Edmund Landau" label="Edmund Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="308" end="332" title="Big O notation" label="Bachmann–Landau notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="336" end="355" title="Big O notation" label="asymptotic notation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="412" end="419" title=":wikt:Ordnung#German" label="Ordnung"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100757" start="439" end="461" title="order of approximation" label="order of approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="467" end="483" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="511" end="530" title="Computational complexity theory" label="classify algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843274" start="618" end="640" title="analytic number theory" label="analytic number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q140744" start="719" end="740" title="arithmetic function" label="arithmetical function"/>
<link wikidata="Q386292" start="847" end="867" title="prime number theorem" label="prime number theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="1210" end="1231" title="Big O notation" label="order of the function"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222579" start="1313" end="1324" title="upper bound" label="upper bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="1586" end="1590" title="Real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="1594" end="1601" title="Complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q726212" start="1727" end="1736" title="Bounded set" label="unbounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="1737" end="1743" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="1760" end="1771" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="2041" end="2055" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076611" start="2895" end="2909" title="limit superior" label="limit superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q858223" start="2973" end="2984" title="limit point" label="limit point"/>
<link wikidata="Q858223" start="3029" end="3042" title="cluster point" label="cluster point"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3232" end="3265" title="Limit inferior and limit superior#Real-valued functions" label="limit inferior and limit superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039387" start="3299" end="3324" title="extended real number line" label="extended real number line"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="3507" end="3524" title="natural numbers" label="positive integers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4826" end="4843" title="#Formal definition" label="formal definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="5133" end="5144" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5178" end="5235" title="#Infinitesimal asymptotics" label="how closely a finite series approximates a given function"/>
<link wikidata="Q131187" start="5275" end="5288" title="Taylor series" label="Taylor series"/>
<link wikidata="Q752726" start="5292" end="5312" title="asymptotic expansion" label="asymptotic expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="5319" end="5335" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5357" end="5379" title="#Infinite asymptotics" label="analysis of algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q205" start="5620" end="5628" title="Infinity" label="infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193885" start="5643" end="5656" title="infinitesimal" label="infinitesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q333464" start="5932" end="5952" title="analysis of algorithms" label="analyzing algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q32043" start="6098" end="6102" title="Summand" label="term"/>
<link wikidata="Q50700" start="6345" end="6356" title="coefficient" label="coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100757" start="6403" end="6408" title="Orders of approximation" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7189" end="7200" title="#Equals sign" label="Equals sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q842159" start="7269" end="7286" title="abuse of notation" label="abuse of notation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7362" end="7372" title="Taylor series#Approximation error and convergence" label="error term"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7575" end="7593" title="Exponential function#Formal definition" label="exponential series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846249" start="8677" end="8698" title="integer factorization" label="integer factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202673" start="10678" end="10692" title="Chebyshev norm" label="Chebyshev norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q842159" start="11691" end="11708" title="abuse of notation" label="abuse of notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078285" start="11827" end="11836" title="Nicolaas Govert de Bruijn" label="de Bruijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="11863" end="11868" title="Donald Knuth" label="Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352804" start="12427" end="12439" title="set notation" label="set notation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12467" end="12483" title="Element (mathematics)#Notation and terminology" label="is an element of"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="13054" end="13063" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q621461" start="15085" end="15103" title="symmetric relation" label="symmetric relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301" start="15283" end="15286" title="TeX" label="TeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="16607" end="16618" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16944" end="16976" title="#Formal definition" label="definition of the big-O notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q64861" start="17912" end="17924" title="Transitive relation" label="transitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843274" start="18470" end="18492" title="analytic number theory" label="analytic number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="18529" end="18560" title="computational complexity theory" label="computational complexity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q184337" start="18649" end="18659" title="Godfrey Harold Hardy" label="G.H. Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q353426" start="18664" end="18679" title="John Edensor Littlewood" label="J.E. Littlewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q58750" start="19053" end="19062" title="Edmund Landau" label="E. Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843274" start="19470" end="19492" title="analytic number theory" label="analytic number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="19775" end="19787" title="Donald Knuth" label="Donald Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q752718" start="20798" end="20812" title="Asymptotic analysis" label="asymptotically"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22243" end="22248" title="Upper and lower bounds#Tight bounds" label="tight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141518" start="23568" end="23594" title="Introduction to Algorithms" label="Introduction to Algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524992" start="23602" end="23608" title="Thomas H. Cormen" label="Cormen"/>
<link wikidata="Q93028" start="23610" end="23619" title="Charles E. Leiserson" label="Leiserson"/>
<link wikidata="Q578036" start="23621" end="23627" title="Ronald L. Rivest" label="Rivest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024396" start="23632" end="23637" title="Clifford Stein" label="Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q278142" start="24375" end="24376" title="Õ" label="Õ"/>
<link wikidata="Q181066" start="24576" end="24585" title="shorthand" label="shorthand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395620" start="25006" end="25025" title="Polylogarithmic function" label="logarithmic factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q752718" start="25038" end="25049" title="Asymptotic analysis" label="growth-rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15401695" start="25585" end="25607" title="L-notation" label="&amp;quot;L&amp;quot; notation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25678" end="25688" title="Time complexity#Polynomial time" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25693" end="25704" title="Time complexity#Exponential time" label="exponential"/>
<link wikidata="Q726210" start="25813" end="25832" title="normed vector space" label="normed vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046291" start="26039" end="26056" title="topological group" label="topological group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16545258" start="26160" end="26171" title="filter base" label="filter base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191147" start="26190" end="26194" title="net (mathematics)" label="nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="26277" end="26287" title="derivative" label="derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q783507" start="26293" end="26310" title="differentiability" label="differentiability"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="26411" end="26431" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q68547" start="26877" end="26890" title="Paul Bachmann" label="Paul Bachmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843274" start="26978" end="27000" title="analytic number theory" label="analytic number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q58750" start="27029" end="27042" title="Edmund Landau" label="Edmund Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="28425" end="28437" title="Donald Knuth" label="Donald Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q451330" start="29299" end="29326" title="Ivan Matveyevich Vinogradov" label="Ivan Matveyevich Vinogradov"/>
<link wikidata="Q14408" start="29777" end="29784" title="omicron" label="omicron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9890" start="29840" end="29845" title="Omega" label="Omega"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="29857" end="29861" title="0" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414364" start="29900" end="29935" title="Asymptotic computational complexity" label="Asymptotic computational complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q752726" start="29938" end="29958" title="Asymptotic expansion" label="Asymptotic expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812191" start="30024" end="30056" title="Asymptotically optimal algorithm" label="Asymptotically optimal algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906086" start="30200" end="30229" title="Big O in probability notation" label="Big O in probability notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076611" start="30264" end="30297" title="Limit inferior and limit superior" label="Limit inferior and limit superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q922367" start="30367" end="30406" title="Master theorem (analysis of algorithms)" label="Master theorem (analysis of algorithms)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957141" start="30485" end="30507" title="Nachbin&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Nachbin&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q193756" start="30538" end="30554" title="complex analytic" label="complex analytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q877802" start="30602" end="30620" title="integral transform" label="integral transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100757" start="30638" end="30660" title="Order of approximation" label="Order of approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100567" start="30663" end="30680" title="Order of accuracy" label="Order of accuracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157305" start="30683" end="30734" title="Computational complexity of mathematical operations" label="Computational complexity of mathematical operations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44582" wikidata="Q190388" url="?curid=44582" title="John of the Cross">
<text>St. John of the Cross (; ; né Juan de Yepes y Álvarez; 24 June 1542 – 14 December 1591) was a Spanish Roman Catholic priest, Christian mystic, and Carmelite friar of &quot;Converso&quot; ancestry. He is a major figure of the Counter-Reformation in Spain, and he is one of the 37 Doctors of the Church.

John of the Cross is known for his writings. He was mentored by and corresponded with the older Carmelite nun Teresa of Ávila. Both his poetry and his studies on the development of the soul, particularly his &quot;Noche Obscura&quot;, are considered the summit of mystical Christian literature and among the greatest works of all Spanish literature. He was canonized by Pope Benedict XIII in 1726. In 1926, he was declared a Doctor of the Church by Pope Pius XI, and is also known as the &quot;mystical doctor&quot;.

== Life ==
=== Early life and education ===

He was born Juan de Yepes y Álvarez at Fontiveros, Old Castile, into a &quot;New Christian&quot; family of &quot;Converso&quot; origins (descendants of Iberian Jewish converts to Roman Catholicism) in Fontiveros, near Ávila, a town of around 2,000 people. His father, Gonzalo, was an accountant to richer relatives who were silk merchants. In 1529 Gonzalo married John&#x27;s mother, Catalina, who was an orphan of a lower class; he was rejected by his family and forced to work with his wife as a weaver. John&#x27;s father died in 1545, while John was still only around three years old. Two years later, John&#x27;s older brother, Luis, died, probably as a result of malnourishment due to the poverty to which the family had been reduced. As a result, John&#x27;s mother Catalina moved with John and his surviving brother Francisco, first to Arévalo in 1548, and then in 1551 to Medina del Campo, where she was able to find work.

In Medina, John entered a school for 160 poor children, mostly orphans, to receive a basic education, mainly in Christian doctrine. They were given some food, clothing, and lodging. While studying there, he was chosen to serve as an altar boy at a nearby monastery of Augustinian nuns. Growing up, John worked at a hospital and studied the humanities at a Jesuit school from 1559 to 1563. The Society of Jesus was at that time a new organization, having been founded only a few years earlier by the Spaniard St. Ignatius of Loyola. In 1563 he entered the Carmelite Order, adopting the name John of St. Matthias.

In the following year (1564), he made his first vows and enrolled in Salamanca University, where he studied theology and philosophy. There he met Fray Luis de León, who taught biblical studies (Exegesis, Hebrew, and Aramaic) at the university.

=== Joining the Reform of Teresa of Ávila ===

John was ordained as a priest in 1567. He subsequently thought about joining the strict Carthusian Order, which appealed to him because of its practice of solitary and silent contemplation. His journey from Salamanca to Medina del Campo, probably in September 1567, became pivotal. In Medina he met the influential Carmelite nun Teresa of Ávila. She was staying in Medina to found the second of her new convents. She immediately talked to him about her reformation projects for the Order: she was seeking to restore the purity of the Carmelite Order by reverting to the observance of its &quot;Primitive Rule&quot; of 1209, which had been relaxed by Pope Eugene IV in 1432.

Under the Rule, much of the day and night was to be divided between the recitation of the Liturgy of the Hours, study and devotional reading, the celebration of Mass, and periods of solitude. In the case of friars, time was to be spent evangelizing the population around the monastery. There was to be total abstinence from meat and a lengthy period of fasting from the Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross (14 September) until Easter. There were to be long periods of silence, especially between Compline and Prime. Simpler, coarser, and shorter habits were to be adopted. There was also an injunction against wearing covered shoes (also previously mitigated in 1432). That particular observance distinguished the &quot;discalced&quot;, i.e., barefoot, followers of Teresa from traditional Carmelites, and they would be formally recognized as the separate &quot;Order of Discalced Carmelites&quot; in 1580.

Teresa asked John to delay his entry into the Carthusian order and to follow her. Having spent a final year studying in Salamanca, in August 1568 John traveled with Teresa from Medina to Valladolid, where Teresa intended to found another convent. After a spell at Teresa&#x27;s side in Valladolid, learning more about the new form of Carmelite life, John left Valladolid in October 1568 accompanied by Fray , intending to found a new monastery for Carmelite friars — the first to follow Teresa&#x27;s principles. They were given the use of a derelict house at Duruelo, which had been donated to Teresa. On 28 November 1568, the monastery was established, and on that same day, John changed his name to &quot;John of the Cross.&quot;

Soon after, in June 1570, the friars found the house at Duruelo was too small, and so moved to the nearby town of Mancera de Abajo, midway between Ávila and Salamanca. John moved from the first community to set up a new community at Pastrana in October 1570, and then a further community at Alcalá de Henares, as a house for the academic training of the friars. In 1572 he arrived in Ávila, at Teresa&#x27;s invitation. She had been appointed prioress of the Convent of the Incarnation there in 1571. John became the spiritual director and confessor of Teresa and the other 130 nuns there, as well as for a wide range of laypeople in the city. In 1574, John accompanied Teresa for the foundation of a new religious community in Segovia, returning to Ávila after staying there a week. Aside from the one trip, John seems to have remained in Ávila between 1572 and 1577.
At some time between 1574 and 1577, while praying in a loft overlooking the sanctuary in the Monastery of the Incarnation in Ávila, John had a vision of the crucified Christ, which led him to create his drawing of Christ &quot;from above&quot;. In 1641, this drawing was placed in a small monstrance and kept in Ávila. This same drawing inspired the artist Salvador Dalí&#x27;s 1951 work &quot;Christ of Saint John of the Cross&quot;.

=== Height of Carmelite tensions ===
The years 1575–77 saw a great increase in tensions among Spanish Carmelite friars over the reforms of Teresa and John. Since 1566 the reforms had been overseen by Canonical Visitors from the Dominican Order, with one appointed to Castile and a second to Andalusia. The Visitors had substantial powers: they could move members of religious communities from one house to another or from one province to the next. They could assist religious superiors in the discharge of their office, and could delegate superiors between the Dominican or Carmelite orders. In Castile, the Visitor was Pedro Fernández, who prudently balanced the interests of the Discalced Carmelites with those of the nuns and friars who did not desire reform.

In Andalusia to the south, the Visitor was Francisco Vargas, and tensions rose due to his clear preference for the Discalced friars. Vargas asked them to make foundations in various cities, in contradiction to the express orders from the Carmelite Prior General to curb expansion in Andalusia. As a result, a General Chapter of the Carmelite Order was convened at Piacenza in Italy in May 1576, out of concern that events in Spain were getting out of hand. It concluded by ordering the total suppression of the Discalced houses.

That measure was not immediately enforced. King Philip II of Spain was supportive of Teresa&#x27;s reforms, and so was not immediately willing to grant the necessary permission to enforce the ordinance. The Discalced friars also found support from the papal nuncio to Spain, , Bishop of Padua, who still had ultimate power to visit and reform religious orders. When asked by the Discalced friars to intervene, Nuncio Ormaneto replaced Vargas as Visitor of the Carmelites in Andalusia with Jerónimo Gracián, a priest from the University of Alcalá, who was in fact a Discalced Carmelite friar himself. The nuncio&#x27;s protection helped John avoid problems for a time. In January 1576, John was detained in Medina del Campo by traditional Carmelite friars, but through the nuncio&#x27;s intervention, he was soon released. When Ormaneto died on 18 June 1577, John was left without protection, and the friars opposing his reforms regained the upper hand.

=== Foundations, imprisonment, torture and death ===

On the night of 2 December 1577, a group of Carmelites opposed to reform broke into John&#x27;s dwelling in Ávila and took him prisoner. John had received an order from superiors, opposed to reform, to leave Ávila and return to his original house. John had refused on the basis that his reform work had been approved by the papal nuncio to Spain, a higher authority than these superiors. The Carmelites therefore took John captive. John was taken from Ávila to the Carmelite monastery in Toledo, at that time the order&#x27;s leading monastery in Castile, with a community of 40 friars.

John was brought before a court of friars, accused of disobeying the ordinances of Piacenza. Despite his argument that he had not disobeyed the ordinances, he was sentenced to a term of imprisonment. He was jailed in a monastery where he was kept under a brutal regime that included public lashings before the community at least weekly, and severe isolation in a tiny stifling cell measuring barely . Except when rarely permitted an oil lamp, he had to stand on a bench to read his breviary by the light through the hole into the adjoining room. He had no change of clothing and a penitential diet of water, bread and scraps of salt fish. During his imprisonment, he composed a great part of his most famous poem, &quot;Spiritual Canticle&quot;, as well as a few shorter poems. The paper was passed to him by the friar who guarded his cell. He managed to escape eight months later, on 15 August 1578, through a small window in a room adjoining his cell. (He had managed to pry open the hinges of the cell door earlier that day.)

After being nursed back to health, first by Teresa&#x27;s nuns in Toledo, and then during six weeks at the Hospital of Santa Cruz, John continued with the reforms. In October 1578 he joined a meeting at Almodóvar del Campo of reform supporters, better known as the Discalced Carmelites. There, in part as a result of the opposition faced from other Carmelites, they decided to request from the Pope their formal separation from the rest of the Carmelite order.

At that meeting John was appointed superior of El Calvario, an isolated monastery of around thirty friars in the mountains about away from Beas in Andalusia. During that time he befriended the nun Ana de Jesús, superior of the Discalced nuns at Beas, through his visits to the town every Saturday. While at El Calvario he composed the first version of his commentary on his poem &quot;The Spiritual Canticle&quot;, possibly at the request of the nuns in Beas.

In 1579 he moved to Baeza, a town of around 50,000 people, to serve as rector of a new college, the Colegio de San Basilio, for Discalced friars in Andalusia. It opened on 13 June 1579. He remained in post until 1582, spending much of his time as a spiritual director to the friars and townspeople.

1580 was a significant year in the resolution of disputes between the Carmelites. On 22 June, Pope Gregory XIII signed a decree, entitled &quot;Pia Consideratione&quot;, which authorised the separation of the old (later &quot;calced&quot;) and the newly reformed, &quot;Discalced&quot; Carmelites. The Dominican friar Juan Velázquez de las Cuevas was appointed to oversee the decision. At the first General Chapter of the Discalced Carmelites, in Alcalá de Henares on 3 March 1581, John of the Cross was elected one of the &quot;Definitors&quot; of the community, and wrote a constitution for them. By the time of the Provincial Chapter at Alcalá in 1581, there were 22 houses, some 300 friars and 200 nuns among the Discalced Carmelites.

In November 1581, John was sent by Teresa to help Ana de Jesús to found a convent in Granada. Arriving in January 1582, she set up a convent, while John stayed in the monastery of Los Mártires, near the Alhambra, becoming its prior in March 1582. While there, he learned of Teresa&#x27;s death in October of that year.

In February 1585, John travelled to Málaga where he established a convent for Discalced nuns. In May 1585, at the General Chapter of the Discalced Carmelites in Lisbon, John was elected Vicar Provincial of Andalusia, a post which required him to travel frequently, making annual visitations to the houses of friars and nuns in Andalusia. During this time he founded seven new monasteries in the region, and is estimated to have travelled around 25,000 km.

In June 1588, he was elected third Councillor to the Vicar General for the Discalced Carmelites, Father Nicolas Doria. To fulfill this role, he had to return to Segovia in Castile, where he also took on the role of prior of the monastery. After disagreeing in 1590–1 with some of Doria&#x27;s remodelling of the leadership of the Discalced Carmelite Order, John was removed from his post in Segovia, and sent by Doria in June 1591 to an isolated monastery in Andalusia called La Peñuela. There he fell ill, and travelled to the monastery at Úbeda for treatment. His condition worsened, however, and he died there of erysipelas on 14 December 1591.

== Veneration ==
The morning after John&#x27;s death huge numbers of townspeople in Úbeda entered the monastery to view his body; in the crush, many were able to take home bits of his habit. He was initially buried at Úbeda, but, at the request of the monastery in Segovia, his body was secretly moved there in 1593. The people of Úbeda, however, unhappy at this change, sent a representative to petition the pope to move the body back to its original resting place. Pope Clement VIII, impressed by the petition, issued a Brief on 15 October 1596 ordering the return of the body to Úbeda. Eventually, in a compromise, the superiors of the Discalced Carmelites decided that the monastery at Úbeda would receive one leg and one arm of the corpse from Segovia (the monastery at Úbeda had already kept one leg in 1593, and the other arm had been removed as the corpse passed through Madrid in 1593, to form a relic there). A hand and a leg remain visible in a reliquary at the Oratory of San Juan de la Cruz in Úbeda, a monastery built in 1627 though connected to the original Discalced monastery in the town founded in 1587.

The head and torso were retained by the monastery at Segovia. They were venerated until 1647, when on orders from Rome designed to prevent the veneration of remains without official approval, the remains were buried in the ground. In the 1930s they were disinterred, and are now sited in a side chapel in a marble case above a special altar.

Proceedings to beatify John began between 1614 and 1616. He was eventually beatified in 1675 by Pope Clement X, and was canonized by Benedict XIII in 1726. When his feast day was added to the General Roman Calendar in 1738, it was assigned to 24 November, since his date of death was impeded by the then-existing octave of the Feast of the Immaculate Conception. This obstacle was removed in 1955 and in 1969 Pope Paul VI moved it to the &quot;dies natalis&quot; (birthday to heaven) of John, 14 December. The Church of England and the Episcopal Church honor him on the same date. In 1926, he was declared a Doctor of the Church by Pope Pius XI after the definitive consultation of Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange OP, professor of philosophy and theology at the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, &quot;Angelicum&quot; in Rome.

== Literary works ==
 John of the Cross is considered one of the foremost poets in Spanish. Although his complete poems add up to fewer than 2,500 verses, two of them, the &quot;Spiritual Canticle&quot; and the &quot;Dark Night of the Soul&quot;, are widely considered masterpieces of Spanish poetry, both for their formal style and their rich symbolism and imagery. His theological works often consist of commentaries on the poems. All the works were written between 1578 and his death in 1591.

The &quot;Spiritual Canticle&quot; is an eclogue in which the bride, representing the soul, searches for the bridegroom, representing Jesus Christ, and is anxious at having lost him. Both are filled with joy upon reuniting. It can be seen as a free-form Spanish version of the Song of Songs at a time when vernacular translations of the Bible were forbidden. The first 31 stanzas of the poem were composed in 1578 while John was imprisoned in Toledo. After his escape it was read by the nuns at Beas, who made copies of the stanzas. Over the following years, John added further lines. Today, two versions exist: one with 39 stanzas and one with 40 with some of the stanzas ordered differently. The first redaction of the commentary on the poem was written in 1584, at the request of Madre Ana de Jesús, when she was prioress of the Discalced Carmelite nuns in Granada. A second edition, which contains more detail, was written in 1585–6.

The &quot;Dark Night&quot;, from which the phrase &quot;Dark Night of the Soul&quot; takes its name, narrates the journey of the soul from its bodily home to union with God. It happens during the &quot;dark&quot;, which represents the hardships and difficulties met in detachment from the world and reaching the light of the union with the Creator. There are several steps during the state of darkness, which are described in successive stanzas. The main idea behind the poem is the painful experience required to attain spiritual maturity and union with God. The poem was likely written in 1578 or 1579. In 1584–5, John wrote a commentary on the first two stanzas and on the first line of the third stanza.

The &quot;Ascent of Mount Carmel&quot; is a more systematic study of the ascetical endeavour of a soul seeking perfect union with God and the mystical events encountered along the way. Although it begins as a commentary on &quot;The Dark Night&quot;, after the first two stanzas of the poem, it rapidly diverts into a full treatise. It was composed some time between 1581 and 1585.

A four-stanza work, &quot;Living Flame of Love&quot;, describes a greater intimacy, as the soul responds to God&#x27;s love. It was written in a first version at Granada between 1585 and 1586, apparently in two weeks, and in a mostly identical second version at La Peñuela in 1591.

These, together with his &quot;Dichos de Luz y Amor&quot; or &quot;Sayings of Light and Love&quot; along with Teresa&#x27;s own writings, are the most important mystical works in Spanish, and have deeply influenced later spiritual writers across the world. They include: T. S. Eliot, Thérèse de Lisieux, Edith Stein (Teresa Benedicta of the Cross) and Thomas Merton. John is said to have also influenced philosophers (Jacques Maritain), theologians (Hans Urs von Balthasar), pacifists (Dorothy Day, Daniel Berrigan and Philip Berrigan) and artists (Salvador Dalí). Pope John Paul II wrote his theological dissertation on the mystical theology of John of the Cross.

=== Editions of his works ===
His writings were first published in 1618 by Diego de Salablanca. The numerical divisions in the work, still used by modern editions of the text, were introduced by Salablanca (they were not in John&#x27;s original writings) to help make the work more manageable for the reader. This edition does not contain the &quot;Spiritual Canticle&quot;, however, and also omits or adapts certain passages, perhaps for fear of falling foul of the Inquisition.

The &quot;Spiritual Canticle&quot; was first included in the 1630 edition, produced by Fray Jeronimo de San José, at Madrid. This edition was largely followed by later editors, although editions in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries gradually included a few more poems and letters.

The first French edition was published in Paris in 1622, and the first Castilian edition in 1627 in Brussels.

A critical edition of John&#x27;s works in English was published by E. Allison Peers in 1935.

== Intellectual influences ==
The influences on John&#x27;s writing are subject to an ongoing debate. It is widely acknowledged that at Salamanca university there would have existed a range of intellectual positions. In John&#x27;s time they included the influences of Thomas Aquinas, of Scotus and of Durandus. It is often assumed that John would have absorbed the thought of Aquinas, to explain the scholastic framework of his writings.

However, the belief that John was taught at both the Carmelite College of San Andrès and at the University of Salamanca has been challenged. Bezares calls into question whether John even studied theology at the University of Salamanca. The philosophy courses John probably took in logic, natural and moral philosophy, can be reconstructed, but Bezares argues that John in fact abandoned his studies at Salamanca in 1568 to join Teresa, rather than graduating. In the first biography of John, published in 1628, it is claimed, on the basis of information from John&#x27;s fellow students, that he in 1567 made a special study of mystical writers, in particular of Pseudo-Dionysius and Pope Gregory I. There is little consensus from John&#x27;s early years or potential influences.

=== Scripture ===
John was influenced heavily by the Bible. Scriptural images are common in both his poems and prose. In total, there are 1,583 explicit and 115 implicit quotations from the Bible in his works. The influence of the Song of Songs on John&#x27;s &quot;Spiritual Canticle&quot; has often been noted, both in terms of the structure of the poem, with its dialogue between two lovers, the account of their difficulties in meeting each other and the &quot;offstage chorus&quot; that comments on the action, and also in terms of the imagery, for example, of pomegranates, wine cellar, turtle dove and lilies, which echoes that of the Song of Songs.

In addition, John shows at occasional points the influence of the Divine Office. This demonstrates how John, steeped in the language and rituals of the Church, drew at times on the phrases and language here.

=== Pseudo-Dionysius ===
It has rarely been disputed that the overall structure of John&#x27;s mystical theology, and his language of the union of the soul with God, is influenced by the Pseudo-Dionysian tradition. However, it has not been clear whether John might have had direct access to the writings of Pseudo-Dionysius, or whether this influence may have been mediated through various later authors.

=== Medieval mystics ===
It is widely acknowledged that John may have been influenced by the writings of other medieval mystics, though there is debate about the exact thought which may have influenced him, and about how he might have been exposed to their ideas.

The possibility of influence by the so-called &quot;Rhineland mystics&quot; such as Meister Eckhart, Johannes Tauler, Henry Suso and John of Ruysbroeck has also been mooted by many authors.

=== Secular Spanish poetry ===
A strong argument can also be made for contemporary Spanish literary influences on John. This case was first made in detail by Dámaso Alonso, who believed that as well as drawing from scripture, John was transforming non-religious, profane themes, derived from popular songs (&quot;romanceros&quot;) into religious poetry.

=== Islamic influence ===
A controversial theory on the origins of John&#x27;s mystical imagery is that he may have been influenced by Islamic sources. This was first proposed in detail by Miguel Asín Palacios and has been most recently put forward by the Puerto Rican scholar Luce López-Baralt. Arguing that John was influenced by Islamic sources on the peninsula, she traces Islamic antecedents of the images of the &quot;dark night&quot;, the &quot;solitary bird&quot; of the &quot;Spiritual Canticle&quot;, wine and mystical intoxication (the &quot;Spiritual Canticle&quot;), lamps of fire (the &quot;Living Flame&quot;). However, Peter Tyler concludes, there &quot;are sufficient Christian medieval antecedents for many of the metaphors John employs to suggest we should look for Christian sources rather than Muslim sources.&quot; As José Nieto indicates, in trying to locate a link between Spanish Christian mysticism and Islamic mysticism, it might make more sense to refer to the common Neo-Platonic tradition and mystical experiences of both, rather than seek direct influence.

== Books ==
* John of the Cross, &quot;Dark Night of the Soul&quot;, London, 2012. limovia.net 
* John of the Cross, &quot;Ascent of Mount Carmel&quot;, London, 2012. limovia.net 
* John of the Cross, &quot;Spiritual Canticle of the Soul and the Bridegroom Christ&quot;, London, 2012. limovia.net 
*&quot;The Dark Night: A Masterpiece in the Literature of Mysticism&quot; (Translated and Edited by E. Allison Peers), Doubleday, 1959. 
*&quot;The Poems of Saint John of the Cross&quot; (English Versions and Introduction by Willis Barnstone), Indiana University Press, 1968, revised 2nd ed. New Directions, 1972. 
*&quot;The Dark Night, St. John of the Cross&quot; (Translated by Mirabai Starr), Riverhead Books, New York, 2002, 
*&quot;Poems of St John of The Cross&quot; (Translated and Introduction by Kathleen Jones), Burns and Oates, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, UK, 1993, 
*&quot;The Collected Works of St John of the Cross&quot; (Eds. K. Kavanaugh and O. Rodriguez), Institute of Carmelite Studies, Washington DC, revised edition, 1991, 
* &quot;St. John of the Cross: His Prophetic Mysticism in Sixteenth-Century Spain&quot; by Cristobal Serran-Pagan

== See also ==

*A lo divino
*Book of the First Monks
*Byzantine Discalced Carmelites
*Calendar of saints (Church of England)
*Carmelite Rule of St. Albert
*Christian meditation
*Constitutions of the Carmelite Order
*List of Catholic saints
*Miguel Asín Palacios
*Saint Raphael Kalinowski, the first friar to be canonized (in 1991 by Pope John Paul II) in the Order of Discalced Carmelites since Saint John of the Cross
*Spanish Renaissance literature
*Secular Order of Discalced Carmelites
*The world, the flesh, and the devil

== References ==
== Sources ==
* 

== Further reading ==
* Howells, E. &quot;Spanish Mysticism and Religious Renewal: Ignatius of Loyola, Teresa of Ávila, and John of the Cross (16th Century, Spain)&quot;, in Julia A. Lamm, ed., &quot;Blackwell Companion to Christian Mysticism&quot;, (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012)
* Kavanaugh, K. &quot;John of the Cross: doctor of light and love&quot; (2000)
* Matthew, Iain. &quot;The Impact of God, Soundings from St John of the Cross&quot; (Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 1995)
* Payne, Stephen. &quot;John of the Cross and the Cognitive Value of Mysticism&quot; (1990)
* Stein, Edith, &quot;The Science of the Cross&quot; (translated by Josephine Koeppel, OCD &quot;The Collected Works of Edith Stein&quot;, Vol. 6, ICS Publications, 2011)
* Williams, Rowan. &quot;The wound of knowledge: Christian spirituality from the New Testament to St. John of the Cross&quot; (1990)
* Wojtyła, K. &quot;Faith According to St. John of the Cross&quot; (1981)
* &quot;St. John of the Cross: His Prophetic Mysticism in Sixteenth-Century Spain&quot; by Prof Cristobal Serran-Pagan

== External links ==

* John of the Cross on Catholic Encyclopedia
* The Metaphysics of Mysticism: The Mystical Philosophy of Saint John of the Cross Biography of Saint John of the Cross
* Works by Saint John of the Cross at Christian Classics Ethereal Library
* 
* Thomas Merton on Saint John of the Cross
* Lectio divina and Saint John of the Cross
* The Life and Miracles of St. John of the Cross, Doctor and Confessor of the Church
* Verse-translation of &quot;The Dark Night of the Soul&quot; at &quot;Poems Found in Translation&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q190388" start="0" end="21" title="John of the Cross" label="St. John of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="27" end="29" title="né" label="né"/>
<link wikidata="Q190388" start="30" end="53" title="John of the Cross" label="Juan de Yepes y Álvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q17351675" start="102" end="123" title="Priesthood in the Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="125" end="141" title="Christian mysticism" label="Christian mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135659" start="147" end="156" title="Discalced Carmelites" label="Carmelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q548320" start="157" end="162" title="friar" label="friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="172" end="180" title="Converso" label="Converso"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="225" end="244" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192499" start="279" end="300" title="Doctors of the Church" label="Doctors of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q174880" start="413" end="428" title="Teresa of Ávila" label="Teresa of Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="488" end="492" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q23988771" start="517" end="530" title="Dark Night of the Soul" label="Noche Obscura"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="567" end="575" title="Christian mysticism" label="mystical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084059" start="576" end="596" title="Christian literature" label="Christian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q238499" start="633" end="651" title="Spanish literature" label="Spanish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="660" end="669" title="canonized" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q155971" start="673" end="691" title="Pope Benedict XIII" label="Pope Benedict XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="752" end="764" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442826" start="905" end="915" title="Fontiveros" label="Fontiveros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043594" start="917" end="928" title="Old Castile" label="Old Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094510" start="943" end="956" title="New Christian" label="New Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129467" start="979" end="987" title="Converso" label="Converso"/>
<link wikidata="Q20988743" start="1018" end="1032" title="Sephardic Bnei Anusim" label="Iberian Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q814999" start="1033" end="1062" title="Conversion to Christianity" label="converts to Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15688" start="1084" end="1089" title="Ávila, Spain" label="Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q693913" start="1747" end="1763" title="Medina del Campo" label="Medina del Campo"/>
<link wikidata="Q214528" start="2067" end="2078" title="Augustinians" label="Augustinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="2155" end="2161" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="2311" end="2329" title="Ignatius of Loyola" label="Ignatius of Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q584157" start="2454" end="2464" title="religious vows" label="first vows"/>
<link wikidata="Q308963" start="2481" end="2501" title="University of Salamanca" label="Salamanca University"/>
<link wikidata="Q450246" start="2558" end="2575" title="Luis Ponce de León" label="Fray Luis de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="2606" end="2614" title="Exegesis" label="Exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="2616" end="2622" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="2628" end="2635" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="2713" end="2721" title="Holy Orders" label="ordained"/>
<link wikidata="Q220979" start="2792" end="2802" title="Carthusian" label="Carthusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q693913" start="2924" end="2940" title="Medina del Campo" label="Medina del Campo"/>
<link wikidata="Q174880" start="3033" end="3048" title="Teresa of Ávila" label="Teresa of Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q167561" start="3354" end="3368" title="Pope Eugene IV" label="Pope Eugene IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q45774" start="3469" end="3489" title="Liturgy of the Hours" label="Liturgy of the Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q210978" start="3687" end="3697" title="abstinence" label="abstinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q44602" start="3732" end="3739" title="fasting" label="fasting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3749" end="3785" title="Feast of the Cross#September 14" label="Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q954995" start="3876" end="3884" title="Compline" label="Compline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657016" start="3889" end="3894" title="Prime (liturgy)" label="Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495575" start="3971" end="3981" title="injunction" label="injunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q746833" start="4100" end="4109" title="discalced" label="discalced"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135659" start="4251" end="4271" title="Discalced Carmelites" label="Discalced Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q8356" start="4475" end="4485" title="Valladolid" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q534473" start="4848" end="4855" title="Duruelo" label="Duruelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769823" start="5136" end="5152" title="Mancera de Abajo" label="Mancera de Abajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655081" start="5255" end="5263" title="Pastrana, Spain" label="Pastrana"/>
<link wikidata="Q46940" start="5313" end="5330" title="Alcalá de Henares" label="Alcalá de Henares"/>
<link wikidata="Q830337" start="5465" end="5473" title="prior (ecclesiastical)" label="prioress"/>
<link wikidata="Q45684" start="5539" end="5557" title="spiritual director" label="spiritual director"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827718" start="5562" end="5571" title="confessor" label="confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15684" start="5750" end="5757" title="Segovia" label="Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="6044" end="6064" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="the crucified Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q335661" start="6180" end="6190" title="monstrance" label="monstrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="6248" end="6261" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q25749" start="6285" end="6318" title="Christ of Saint John of the Cross" label="Christ of Saint John of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q202030" start="6527" end="6545" title="canonical visitation" label="Canonical Visitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="6555" end="6570" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="6618" end="6627" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q625160" start="6753" end="6761" title="ecclesiastical province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907518" start="6793" end="6811" title="religious superior" label="religious superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337239" start="7339" end="7352" title="Superior general" label="Prior General"/>
<link wikidata="Q216285" start="7400" end="7415" title="General Chapter" label="General Chapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13329" start="7455" end="7463" title="Piacenza" label="Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="7664" end="7687" title="Philip II of Spain" label="King Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q157037" start="7879" end="7885" title="nuncio" label="nuncio"/>
<link wikidata="Q873741" start="7898" end="7913" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Padua" label="Bishop of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190926" start="8110" end="8126" title="Jerónimo Gracián" label="Jerónimo Gracián"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243904" start="8146" end="8166" title="University of Alcalá" label="University of Alcalá"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="9117" end="9123" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q225672" start="9699" end="9707" title="breviary" label="breviary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071431" start="9937" end="9955" title="Spiritual Canticle" label="Spiritual Canticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="10313" end="10319" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631896" start="10450" end="10469" title="Almodóvar del Campo" label="Almodóvar del Campo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635967" start="10848" end="10852" title="Beas, Spain" label="Beas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851360" start="10906" end="10918" title="Ana de Jesús" label="Ana de Jesús"/>
<link wikidata="Q488555" start="11190" end="11195" title="Baeza, Spain" label="Baeza"/>
<link wikidata="Q212071" start="11241" end="11247" title="rector (academic)" label="rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q83029" start="11564" end="11581" title="Pope Gregory XIII" label="Pope Gregory XIII"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11788" end="11816" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Ávila#Leadership" label="Juan Velázquez de las Cuevas"/>
<link wikidata="Q46940" start="11917" end="11934" title="Alcalá de Henares" label="Alcalá de Henares"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="12295" end="12302" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8851" start="12566" end="12572" title="Málaga" label="Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="12691" end="12697" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q329984" start="13528" end="13533" title="Úbeda, Spain" label="Úbeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q207092" start="13603" end="13613" title="erysipelas" label="erysipelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="15177" end="15186" title="beatification" label="beatified"/>
<link wikidata="Q155956" start="15198" end="15212" title="Pope Clement X" label="Pope Clement X"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="15222" end="15231" title="canonization" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q155971" start="15235" end="15248" title="Pope Benedict XIII" label="Benedict XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012667" start="15294" end="15316" title="General Roman Calendar" label="General Roman Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896500" start="15415" end="15421" title="octave (liturgical)" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538509" start="15429" end="15463" title="Feast of the Immaculate Conception" label="Feast of the Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="15511" end="15523" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019506" start="15612" end="15629" title="Calendar of saints (Church of England)" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019509" start="15638" end="15654" title="Calendar of saints (Episcopal Church)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="15734" end="15746" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342881" start="15784" end="15810" title="Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange" label="Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="15811" end="15813" title="Dominican Order" label="OP"/>
<link wikidata="Q246887" start="15859" end="15904" title="Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas" label="Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071431" start="16116" end="16134" title="Spiritual Canticle" label="Spiritual Canticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23988771" start="16155" end="16177" title="Dark Night of the Soul" label="Dark Night of the Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q28856" start="16261" end="16266" title="Stylistics (linguistics)" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="16282" end="16288" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072974" start="16476" end="16483" title="eclogue" label="eclogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="16521" end="16525" title="Soul (spirit)" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q51663" start="16569" end="16581" title="Christian views of Jesus" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q51670" start="16712" end="16725" title="Song of Songs" label="Song of Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="16772" end="16777" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q23988771" start="17430" end="17452" title="Dark Night of the Soul" label="Dark Night of the Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065019" start="18093" end="18115" title="Ascent of Mount Carmel" label="Ascent of Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="18225" end="18233" title="mysticism" label="mystical"/>
<link wikidata="Q736922" start="18540" end="18548" title="intimacy" label="intimacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="19020" end="19031" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q181715" start="19033" end="19051" title="Thérèse de Lisieux" label="Thérèse de Lisieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q76749" start="19053" end="19064" title="Edith Stein" label="Edith Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q335011" start="19101" end="19114" title="Thomas Merton" label="Thomas Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q45723" start="19167" end="19183" title="Jacques Maritain" label="Jacques Maritain"/>
<link wikidata="Q122976" start="19199" end="19221" title="Hans Urs von Balthasar" label="Hans Urs von Balthasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="19224" end="19233" title="pacifists" label="pacifists"/>
<link wikidata="Q150281" start="19235" end="19246" title="Dorothy Day" label="Dorothy Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160089" start="19248" end="19263" title="Daniel Berrigan" label="Daniel Berrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934260" start="19268" end="19283" title="Philip Berrigan" label="Philip Berrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="19298" end="19311" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="19314" end="19331" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889845" start="20364" end="20380" title="Edgar Allison Peers" label="E. Allison Peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="20660" end="20674" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q190089" start="20679" end="20685" title="Duns Scotus" label="Scotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266754" start="20693" end="20701" title="Durandus of Saint-Pourçain" label="Durandus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42827" start="21515" end="21529" title="Pope Gregory I" label="Pope Gregory I"/>
<link wikidata="Q51670" start="21843" end="21856" title="Song of Songs" label="Song of Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q45774" start="22336" end="22349" title="Liturgy of the Hours" label="Divine Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q312816" start="22786" end="22802" title="Pseudo-Dionysius" label="Pseudo-Dionysius"/>
<link wikidata="Q823154" start="23202" end="23219" title="Rhineland mystics" label="Rhineland mystics"/>
<link wikidata="Q76548" start="23234" end="23249" title="Meister Eckhart" label="Meister Eckhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q60281" start="23251" end="23266" title="Johannes Tauler" label="Johannes Tauler"/>
<link wikidata="Q303435" start="23268" end="23278" title="Henry Suso" label="Henry Suso"/>
<link wikidata="Q920312" start="23283" end="23301" title="John of Ruysbroeck" label="John of Ruysbroeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713951" start="23885" end="23905" title="Miguel Asín Palacios" label="Miguel Asín Palacios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="23952" end="23964" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696427" start="23973" end="23990" title="Luce López-Baralt" label="Luce López-Baralt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="25202" end="25211" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022023" start="25308" end="25324" title="Willis Barnstone" label="Willis Barnstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11130954" start="25327" end="25351" title="Indiana University Press" label="Indiana University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q27474" start="25375" end="25389" title="New Directions Publishing" label="New Directions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338215" start="25480" end="25495" title="Riverhead Books" label="Riverhead Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376760" start="25589" end="25603" title="Kathleen Jones (academic)" label="Kathleen Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000042" start="25606" end="25621" title="Burns and Oates" label="Burns and Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660938" start="25955" end="25966" title="A lo divino" label="A lo divino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943119" start="25968" end="25991" title="Book of the First Monks" label="Book of the First Monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004695" start="25993" end="26023" title="Byzantine Discalced Carmelites" label="Byzantine Discalced Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019506" start="26025" end="26063" title="Calendar of saints (Church of England)" label="Calendar of saints (Church of England)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454225" start="26065" end="26093" title="Carmelite Rule of St. Albert" label="Carmelite Rule of St. Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110342" start="26095" end="26115" title="Christian meditation" label="Christian meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164344" start="26117" end="26153" title="Constitutions of the Carmelite Order" label="Constitutions of the Carmelite Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566424" start="26155" end="26178" title="List of Catholic saints" label="List of Catholic saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713951" start="26180" end="26200" title="Miguel Asín Palacios" label="Miguel Asín Palacios"/>
<link wikidata="Q941608" start="26208" end="26226" title="Raphael Kalinowski" label="Raphael Kalinowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="26277" end="26289" title="John Paul II" label="John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573283" start="26359" end="26389" title="Spanish Renaissance literature" label="Spanish Renaissance literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076354" start="26391" end="26428" title="Secular Order of Discalced Carmelites" label="Secular Order of Discalced Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129992" start="26430" end="26465" title="The world, the flesh, and the devil" label="The world, the flesh, and the devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q76749" start="27072" end="27084" title="Edith Stein" label="Stein, Edith"/>
<link wikidata="Q49615" start="27243" end="27258" title="Rowan Williams" label="Williams, Rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="27376" end="27387" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Wojtyła, K."/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="27613" end="27634" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079189" start="27793" end="27828" title="Christian Classics Ethereal Library" label="Christian Classics Ethereal Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44584" wikidata="Q332780" url="?curid=44584" title="Robert of Ketton">
<text>Robert of Ketton, known in Latin as Rodbertus Ketenensis ( 1141–1157), was an English astronomer, translator, priest and diplomat active in Spain. He translated several works of Arabic into Latin, including the first translation of the Quran into any Western language. Between 1144 and 1157 he held an archdeaconry in the diocese of Pamplona. In the past he has been confounded with Robert of Chester (Latin &quot;Robertus Castrensis&quot;), another English translator active in Spain in the mid-twelfth century; and at least one modern scholar believes they are the same person.

Robert&#x27;s byname, &quot;Ketenensis&quot; or on one occasion &quot;de Ketene&quot;, is usually taken to refer to Ketton, a village in Rutland, a few miles from Stamford, Lincolnshire. It was probably Robert&#x27;s birthplace. This nickname was never used in official documents associated with Pamplona, where he was always simply &quot;Master Robert&quot; (&quot;magister Rodbertus&quot;), indicating that he had a master of arts degree. The identification of the translator known as Robert of Ketton and the archdeacon known as Master Robert is provided by a letter of Peter the Venerable, abbot of Cluny. In the spring or summer of 1144, when Peter sent some of Robert&#x27;s translations to Bernard of Clairvaux. In the accompanying letter he named the translator as &quot;Robert of Ketton from England, who is now archdeacon of the church of Pamplona&quot; (&quot;Roberto Ketenensi de Anglia, qui nunc Pampilonensis ecclesiae archidiaconus est&quot;).

==Translations==
Prior to 1141, Robert and Hermann of Carinthia were engaged in a project of translating Arabic texts into Latin for their own use and education. Richard Hakluyt surmised that the two men had travelled in Arabic-speaking countries. Only one product of Robert from this early collaboration is known or has survived. On Hermann&#x27;s request, Robert translated al-Kindi&#x27;s &quot;Astrological Judgements&quot;, under the Latin title &quot;Judicia&quot;. (Many later manuscripts misattribute it to the astronomer Robertus Anglicus.) In the preface to this translation, he explains that his interest is in geometry and astronomy, but that he is undertaking an astrological work for the sake of his friendship with Hermann. Their real plan, he says, is to work through Euclid&#x27;s &quot;Elements&quot; and Theodosius&#x27;s &quot;Spherics&quot; in order to be capable of understanding Ptolemy&#x27;s &quot;Almagest&quot;. All of these texts would have been available to them only in Arabic at that time.

It has been suggested that one other text that survives might be Robert&#x27;s work from his and Hermann&#x27;s private collaboration: a translation of Euclid&#x27;s &quot;Elements&quot; known as &quot;Adelard II&quot;, which is usually attributed to Adelard of Bath and sometimes to Robert of Chester. It was the most popular of several Latin translations of Euclid from the twelfth century. In his translation of Ptolemy&#x27;s &quot;Planisphere&quot; of 1143, Hermann also mentions that Robert gave him the astronomical tables of al-Battani, perhaps in translation.

In 1141, Robert and Hermann met Abbot Peter the Venerable on the banks of the Ebro, probably at Logroño, and he convinced them to translate some Islamic texts for his collection, which has become known as the Toledan Collection. For this project, Robert translated a history of the early Caliphate under the title &quot;Chronica mendosa Saracenorum&quot; (Lying Chronicle of the Saracens) and the Quran itself under the title &quot;Lex Mahumet pseudoprophete&quot; (Law of the False Prophet Muhammad). For the latter work he was assisted by a certain Muhammad. His translation is very free and he does not subdivide the text according to the suras. The entire Toledan Collection was printed by the Protestant printer Theodore Bibliander at Basel in 1543.

As late as 1143, Robert still had in mind his and Hermann&#x27;s pet project of astronomical translations, for he wrote a letter to Peter the Venerable promising &quot;a celestial gift which embraces within itself the whole of science … revealing most accurately, according to number, proportion and measure, all the celestial circles and their quantities, orders and conditions, and, finally, all the various movements of the stars, and their effects and natures.&quot;

==Ecclesiastical career==
Robert&#x27;s career in the church began after his career as a translator had ended. (Perhaps he received his benefice as a reward for his work.) He was an archdeacon at Pamplona from at least 1144—and probably shortly before that—until 1157, when he was transferred to a canonry of Tudela. His presence at Pamplona is known from documents of 1145, 1147, 1149 and 1151. He was in Barcelona on official business in 1152. He seems to have held the archdeaconry of Valdonsella, which included the town of Uncastillo. Since the Kingdom of Navarre regained its independence in 1134, this lay on the border with and was disputed by the Kingdom of Aragon. Robert served King García Ramírez of Navarre (whose grandfather, Sancho Garcés, was lord of Uncastillo) as a diplomat, even drawing up the peace treaty signed with Raymond Berengar IV, regent of Aragon, on 1 July 1149. For this effort on behalf of peace, he was commended by Pope Eugenius III.

In 1151, Robert&#x27;s bishop, Lope de Artajona, sent him as his delegate to a conference to resolve the disputed boundary between the dioceses of Pamplona and Zaragoza. Later, Robert led some of the Pamplonese clergy into rebellion against Lope. Their dispute was for a time patched up, but when Lope came into conflict with King Sancho VI, Robert joined the king&#x27;s side. It was probably through the king that he obtained the canonry in Tudela after his archdeaconry had become untenable. There is no record of him after 1157. Charles Burnett notes that &quot;Robert&#x27;s education fit him well for the roles of diplomat, royal adviser and redactor of official documents.&quot;

==See also==
*Latin translations of the 12th century

==Notes==
==References==
* Thomas E. Burman, &quot;Tafsir and Translation: Traditional Arabic Quran Exegesis and the Latin Qurans of Robert of Ketton and Mark of Toledo&quot;, &quot;Speculum&quot;, 73 (1998), pp. 703–32.
* Richard Lemay, &quot;L&#x27;authenticité de la préface de Robert de Chester à sa traduction du Morienus (1144)&quot;, &quot;Chrysopœia&quot;, 4 (1991), pp. 3–32

==External links==
*Robert of Ketton&#x27;s Qu&#x27;ran, the Latin text as edited by Theodor Bibliander (1550 revised edition)
*&quot;Spanish and Portuguese Monastic History: 600-1300&quot;
*Islamic perspective</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q332780" start="0" end="16" title="Robert of Ketton" label="Robert of Ketton"/>
<link wikidata="Q332780" start="36" end="56" title="Robert of Ketton" label="Rodbertus Ketenensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="178" end="184" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="190" end="195" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="236" end="241" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q633730" start="302" end="314" title="archdeaconry" label="archdeaconry"/>
<link wikidata="Q637071" start="322" end="341" title="diocese of Pamplona" label="diocese of Pamplona"/>
<link wikidata="Q715419" start="383" end="400" title="Robert of Chester" label="Robert of Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187666" start="697" end="703" title="Ketton" label="Ketton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23107" start="718" end="725" title="Rutland" label="Rutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000662" start="744" end="752" title="Stamford, Lincolnshire" label="Stamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23090" start="754" end="766" title="Lincolnshire" label="Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="999" end="1013" title="Master of Arts" label="master of arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q643487" start="1154" end="1173" title="Peter the Venerable" label="Peter the Venerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q845775" start="1175" end="1189" title="abbot of Cluny" label="abbot of Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q188411" start="1278" end="1298" title="Bernard of Clairvaux" label="Bernard of Clairvaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q725859" start="1584" end="1604" title="Hermann of Carinthia" label="Hermann of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185510" start="1703" end="1718" title="Richard Hakluyt" label="Richard Hakluyt"/>
<link wikidata="Q179759" start="1917" end="1925" title="al-Kindi" label="al-Kindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159675" start="2071" end="2088" title="Robertus Anglicus" label="Robertus Anglicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8747" start="2325" end="2331" title="Euclid" label="Euclid"/>
<link wikidata="Q172891" start="2339" end="2359" title="Euclid&amp;#x27;s Elements" label="&amp;quot;Elements&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266186" start="2364" end="2374" title="Theodosius of Bithynia" label="Theodosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576503" start="2388" end="2396" title="Theodosius&amp;#x27; Spherics" label="Spherics"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="2443" end="2450" title="Claudius Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155952" start="2464" end="2472" title="Almagest" label="Almagest"/>
<link wikidata="Q312372" start="2814" end="2829" title="Adelard of Bath" label="Adelard of Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344642" start="2999" end="3010" title="Planisphere" label="Planisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079" start="3096" end="3106" title="al-Battani" label="al-Battani"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965" start="3211" end="3215" title="Ebro" label="Ebro"/>
<link wikidata="Q14325" start="3229" end="3236" title="Logroño" label="Logroño"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997841" start="3342" end="3360" title="Toledan Collection" label="Toledan Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="3421" end="3430" title="Caliphate" label="Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237327" start="3565" end="3591" title="Lex Mahumet pseudoprophete" label="Lex Mahumet pseudoprophete"/>
<link wikidata="Q234262" start="3775" end="3779" title="sura" label="sura"/>
<link wikidata="Q115851" start="3850" end="3869" title="Theodore Bibliander" label="Theodore Bibliander"/>
<link wikidata="Q274410" start="4497" end="4505" title="benefice" label="benefice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104153" start="4659" end="4666" title="canonry" label="canonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q244747" start="4670" end="4676" title="Tudela, Navarre" label="Tudela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="4767" end="4776" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q583280" start="4889" end="4899" title="Uncastillo" label="Uncastillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="4911" end="4929" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Kingdom of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="5017" end="5034" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Kingdom of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q431172" start="5055" end="5080" title="García Ramírez of Navarre" label="García Ramírez of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q768955" start="5101" end="5114" title="Sancho Garcés, Lord of Uncastillo" label="Sancho Garcés"/>
<link wikidata="Q319439" start="5200" end="5219" title="Raymond Berengar IV of Barcelona" label="Raymond Berengar IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q167610" start="5316" end="5328" title="Pope Eugenius III" label="Eugenius III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5362" end="5378" title="Lope de Artajona" label="Lope de Artajona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365554" start="5491" end="5499" title="Diocese of Zaragoza" label="Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q318258" start="5662" end="5671" title="Sancho VI of Navarre" label="Sancho VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052959" start="6032" end="6070" title="Latin translations of the 12th century" label="Latin translations of the 12th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575349" start="6254" end="6262" title="Speculum (journal)" label="Speculum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44585" wikidata="Q204469" url="?curid=44585" title="Cyclotron">
<text>A cyclotron is a type of particle accelerator invented by Ernest Lawrence in 1929–1930 at the University of California, Berkeley, and patented in 1932. A cyclotron accelerates charged particles outwards from the center of a flat cylindrical vacuum chamber along a spiral path. The particles are held to a spiral trajectory by a static magnetic field and accelerated by a rapidly varying electric field. Lawrence was awarded the 1939 Nobel Prize in Physics for this invention.

The cyclotron was the first &quot;cyclical&quot; accelerator. The primary accelerators before the development of the cyclotron were electrostatic accelerators, such as the Cockcroft–Walton generator and the Van de Graaff generator. In these accelerators, particles would cross an accelerating electric field only once. Thus, the energy gained by the particles was limited by the maximum electrical potential that could be achieved across the accelerating region. This potential was in turn limited by electrostatic breakdown to a few million volts. In a cyclotron, by contrast, the particles encounter the accelerating region many times by following a spiral path, so the output energy can be many times the energy gained in a single accelerating step.

Cyclotrons were the most powerful particle accelerator technology until the 1950s, when they were surpassed by the synchrotron. Nonetheless, they are still widely used to produce particle beams for nuclear medicine and basic research. As of 2020, close to 1,500 cyclotrons were in use worldwide for the production of radionuclides for nuclear medicine. In addition, cyclotrons can be used for particle therapy, where particle beams are directly applied to patients.

== History ==


=== Origins ===
In 1927, while a student at Kiel, German physicist Max Steenbeck was the first to formulate the concept of the cyclotron, but he was discouraged from pursuing the idea further. In late 1928 and early 1929, Hungarian physicist Leo Szilárd filed patent applications in Germany for the linear accelerator, cyclotron, and betatron. In these applications, Szilárd became the first person to discuss the resonance condition for a circular accelerating apparatus. However, neither Steenbeck&#x27;s ideas nor Szilard&#x27;s patent applications were ever published and therefore did not contribute to the development of the cyclotron. Several months later, in the early summer of 1929, Ernest Lawrence independently conceived the cyclotron concept after reading a paper by Rolf Widerøe describing a drift tube accelerator. He published a paper in &quot;Science&quot; in 1930 (the first published description of the cyclotron concept), after a student of his built a crude model in April of that year. He patented the device in 1932.

To construct the first such device, Lawrence used large electromagnets recycled from obsolete arc converters provided by the Federal Telegraph Company. He was assisted by a graduate student, M. Stanley Livingston. Their first working cyclotron became operational on January 2, 1931. This machine had a diameter of , and accelerated protons to an energy up to 80 keV.

At the Radiation Laboratory on the campus of the University of California, Berkeley (now the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory), Lawrence and his collaborators went on to construct a series of cyclotrons which were the most powerful accelerators in the world at the time; a 4.8 MeV machine (1932), a 8 MeV machine (1937), and a 16 MeV machine (1939). Lawrence received the 1939 Nobel Prize in Physics for the invention and development of the cyclotron and for results obtained with it.

The first European cyclotron was constructed in 1934 in the Soviet Union by Mikhail Alekseevich Eremeev, at the Leningrad Physico-Technical Institute. It was a small design based a prototype by Lawrence, with a 28 cm diameter capable of achieving 530 keV proton energies. Research quickly refocused around the construction of a larger MeV-level cyclotron, in the physics department of the V.G. Khlopin Radium Institute in Leningrad, headed by . This instrument was first proposed in 1932 by George Gamow and and was installed and became operative in March 1937 at 100 cm (39 in) diameter and 3.2 MeV proton energies.

The first Asian cyclotron was constructed at the Riken laboratory in Tokyo, by a team including Yoshio Nishina, Sukeo Watanabe, Tameichi Yasaki, and Ryokichi Sagane. Yasaki and Sagane had been sent to Berkeley Radiation Laboratory to work with Lawrence. The device had a 26 in diameter and the first beam was produced on April 2, 1937, at 2.9 MeV deuteron energies.

=== During World War II ===
Cyclotrons played a key role in the Manhattan Project. The published 1940 discovery of neptunium and the withheld 1941 discovery of plutonium both used bombardment in the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory&#x27;s 60 in cyclotron. Furthermore Lawrence invented the calutron (California University cyclotron), which was industrially developed at the Y-12 National Security Complex from 1942. This provided the bulk of the uranium enrichment process, taking low-enriched uranium (&lt;5% uranium-235) from the S-50 and K-25 plants and electromagnetically separating isotopes up to 84.5% highly enriched uranium (HEU). This was the first production of HEU in history, and was shipped to Los Alamos and used in the Little Boy bomb dropped on Hiroshima, and its precursor Water Boiler and Dragon test reactors.

In France, Frédéric Joliot-Curie constructed a large 7 MeV cyclotron at the Collège de France in Paris, achieving the first beam in March 1939. With the Nazi occupation of Paris in June 1940 and an incoming contingent of German scientists, Joliot ceased research into uranium fission, and obtained an understanding with his German former colleague Wolfgang Gentner that no research of military use would be carried out. In 1943 Gentner was recalled for weakness, and a new German contingent attempted to operate the cyclotron. However, it is likely that Joliot, a member of French Communist Party and in fact president of the National Front resistance movement, sabotaged the cyclotron to prevent its use to the Nazi German nuclear program.

In Nazi Germany, one cyclotron was built in Heidelberg, under the supervision of Walther Bothe and Wolfgang Gentner, with support from the Heereswaffenamt. At the end of 1938, Gentner was sent to Berkeley Radiation Laboratory and worked most closely with Emilio Segrè and Donald Cooksey, returning before the start of the war. Construction was slowed by the war and completed in January 1944, but difficulties in testing made it unusable until the war&#x27;s end.

In Japan, the large Riken cyclotron was used to bombard uranium processed in their Clusius tube gaseous diffusion device. The experiment indicated that no enrichment of the uranium-235 content had occurred. Following the occupation of Japan, American forces, fearing continuation of the Japanese nuclear weapons program, dissembled the Riken laboratory&#x27;s cyclotron and dumped it in Tokyo Bay. During the disassembly, Yoshio Nishina begged otherwise, saying &quot;This is ten years of my life ... It has nothing to do with bombs.&quot; Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson later admitted the decision was a mistake.

=== Post-war ===
By the late 1930s it had become clear that there was a practical limit on the beam energy that could be achieved with the traditional cyclotron design, due to the effects of special relativity. As particles reach relativistic speeds, their effective mass increases, which causes the resonant frequency for a given magnetic field to change. To address this issue and reach higher beam energies using cyclotrons, two primary approaches were taken, synchrocyclotrons (which hold the magnetic field constant, but decrease the accelerating frequency) and isochronous cyclotrons (which hold the accelerating frequency constant, but alter the magnetic field).

Lawrence&#x27;s team built one of the first synchrocyclotrons in 1946. This machine eventually achieved a maximum beam energy of 350 MeV for protons. However, synchrocyclotrons suffer from low beam intensities (&lt; 1 μA), and must be operated in a &quot;pulsed&quot; mode, further decreasing the available total beam. As such, they were quickly overtaken in popularity by isochronous cyclotrons.

The first isochronous cyclotron (other than classified prototypes) was built by F. Heyn and K.T. Khoe in Delft, the Netherlands, in 1956. Early isochronous cyclotrons were limited to energies of ~50 MeV per nucleon, but as manufacturing and design techniques gradually improved, the construction of &quot;spiral-sector&quot; cyclotrons allowed the acceleration and control of more powerful beams. Later developments included the use of more compact and power-efficient superconducting magnets and the separation of the magnets into discrete sectors, as opposed to a single large magnet.

== Principle of operation ==
A cyclotron is essentially a linear particle accelerator wrapped in a circle. A uniform magnetic field perpendicular to the plane of particle motion causes the particles to orbit. During each orbit the particles are aceelerated by electric fields.
=== Cyclotron principle ===

In a particle accelerator, charged particles are accelerated by applying an electric field across a gap. The force on a particle crossing this gap is given by the Lorentz force law:

formula_1

where is the charge on the particle, is the electric field, is the particle velocity, and is the magnetic flux density. It is not possible to accelerate particles using only a static magnetic field, as the magnetic force always acts perpendicularly to the direction of motion, and therefore can only change the direction of the particle, not the speed.

In practice, the magnitude of an unchanging electric field which can be applied across a gap is limited by the need to avoid electrostatic breakdown. As such, modern particle accelerators use alternating (radio frequency) electric fields for acceleration. Since an alternating field across a gap only provides an acceleration in the forward direction for a portion of its cycle, particles in RF accelerators travel in bunches, rather than a continuous stream. In a linear particle accelerator, in order for a bunch to &quot;see&quot; a forward voltage every time it crosses a gap, the gaps must be placed further and further apart, in order to compensate for the increasing speed of the particle.

A cyclotron, by contrast, uses a magnetic field to bend the particle trajectories into a spiral, thus allowing the same gap to be used many times to accelerate a single bunch. As the bunch spirals outward, the increasing distance between transits of the gap is exactly balanced by the increase in speed, so a bunch will reach the gap at the same point in the RF cycle every time.

The frequency at which a particle will orbit in a perpendicular magnetic field is known as the cyclotron frequency, and depends, in the non-relativistic case, solely on the charge and mass of the particle, and the strength of the magnetic field:

formula_2

where is the (linear) frequency, is the charge of the particle, is the magnitude of the magnetic field that is perpendicular to the plane in which the particle is travelling, and is the particle mass. The property that the frequency is independent of particle velocity is what allows a single, fixed gap to be used to accelerate a particle travelling in a spiral.

=== Particle energy ===

Each time a particle crosses the accelerating gap in a cyclotron, it is given an accelerating force by the electric field across the gap, and the total particle energy gain can be calculated by multiplying the increase per crossing by the number of times the particle crosses the gap.

However, given the typically high number of revolutions, it is usually simpler to estimate the energy by combining the equation for frequency in circular motion:

formula_3

with the cyclotron frequency equation to yield:

formula_4

The kinetic energy for particles with speed is therefore given by:

formula_5

where is the radius at which the energy is to be determined. The limit on the beam energy which can be produced by a given cyclotron thus depends on the maximum radius which can be reached by the magnetic field and the accelerating structures, and on the maximum strength of the magnetic field which can be achieved.

==== K-factor ====

In the nonrelativistic approximation, the maximum kinetic energy per atomic mass for a given cyclotron is given by:

formula_6

where formula_7 is the elementary charge, formula_8 is the strength of the magnet, formula_9 is the maximum radius of the beam, formula_10 is an atomic mass unit, formula_11 is the charge of the beam particles, and formula_12 is the atomic mass of the beam particles. The value of &quot;K&quot;

formula_13

is known as the &quot;K-factor&quot;, and is used to characterize the maximum kinetic beam energy of protons (quoted in MeV). It represents the theoretical maximum energy of protons (with &quot;Q&quot; and &quot;A&quot; equal to 1) accelerated in a given machine.

=== Particle trajectory ===
While the trajectory followed by a particle in the cyclotron is conventionally referred to as a &quot;spiral&quot;, it is more accurately described as a series of arcs of constant radius. The particles&#x27; speed, and therefore orbital radius, only increases at the accelerating gaps. Away from those regions, the particle will orbit (to a first approximation) at a fixed radius.

Assuming a uniform energy gain per orbit (which is only valid in the non-relativistic case), the average orbit may be approximated by a simple spiral. If the energy gain per turn is given by , the particle energy after turns will be:
formula_14
Combining this with the non-relativistic equation for the kinetic energy of a particle in a cyclotron gives:
formula_15
This is the equation of a Fermat spiral.

=== Stability and focusing ===

As a particle bunch travels around a cyclotron, two effects tend to make its particles spread out. The first is simply the particles injected from the ion source having some initial spread of positions and velocities. This spread tends to get amplified over time, making the particles move away from the bunch center. The second is the mutual repulsion of the beam particles due to their electrostatic charges. Keeping the particles focused for acceleration requires confining the particles to the plane of acceleration (in-plane or &quot;vertical&quot; focusing), preventing them from moving inward or outward from their correct orbit (&quot;horizontal&quot; focusing), and keeping them synchronized with the accelerating RF field cycle (longitudinal focusing).

==== Transverse stability and focusing ====

The in-plane or &quot;vertical&quot; focusing is typically achieved by varying the magnetic field around the orbit, i.e. with azimuth. A cyclotron using this focusing method is thus called an azimuthally-varying field (AVF) cyclotron. The variation in field strength is provided by shaping the steel poles of the magnet into sectors which can have a shape reminiscent of a spiral and also have a larger area towards the outer edge of the cyclotron to improve the vertical focus of the particle beam. This solution for focusing the particle beam was proposed by L. H. Thomas in 1938 and almost all modern cyclotrons use azimuthally-varying fields. 

The &quot;horizontal&quot; focusing happens as a natural result of cyclotron motion. Since for identical particles travelling perpendicularly to a constant magnetic field the trajectory curvature radius is only a function of their speed, all particles with the same speed will travel in circular orbits of the same radius, and a particle with a slightly incorrect trajectory will simply travel in a circle with a slightly offset center. Relative to a particle with a centered orbit, such a particle will appear to undergo a horizontal oscillation relative to the centered particle. This oscillation is stable for particles with a small deviation from the reference energy.

==== Longitudinal stability ====

The instantaneous level of synchronization between a particle and the RF field is expressed by phase difference between the RF field and the particle. In the first harmonic mode (i.e. particles make one revolution per RF cycle) it is the difference between the instantaneous phase of the RF field and the instantaneous azimuth of the particle. Fastest acceleration is achieved when the phase difference equals 90° (modulo360°). Poor synchronization, i.e. phase difference far from this value, leads to the particle being accelerated slowly or even decelerated (outside of the 0–180° range).

As the time taken by a particle to complete an orbit depends only on particle&#x27;s type, magnetic field (which may vary with the radius), and Lorentz factor (see ), cyclotrons have no longitudinal focusing mechanism which would keep the particles synchronized to the RF field. The phase difference, that the particle had at the moment of its injection into the cyclotron, is preserved throughout the acceleration process, but errors from imperfect match between the RF field frequency and the cyclotron frequency at a given radius accumulate on top of it. Failure of the particle to be injected with phase difference within about ±20° from the optimum may make its acceleration too slow and its stay in the cyclotron too long. As a consequence, half-way through the process the phase difference escapes the 0–180° range, the acceleration turns into deceleration, and the particle fails to reach the target energy. Grouping of the particles into correctly synchronized bunches before their injection into the cyclotron thus greatly increases the injection efficiency.

=== Relativistic considerations ===

In the non-relativistic approximation, the cyclotron frequency does not depend upon the particle&#x27;s speed or the radius of the particle&#x27;s orbit. As the beam spirals outward, the rotation frequency stays constant, and the beam continues to accelerate as it travels a greater distance in the same time period. In contrast to this approximation, as particles approach the speed of light, the cyclotron frequency decreases due to the change in relativistic mass. This change is proportional to the particle&#x27;s Lorentz factor.

The relativistic mass can be written as:

formula_16

where:
* formula_17 is the particle rest mass,
* formula_18 is the relative velocity, and
* formula_19 is the Lorentz factor.

Substituting this into the equations for cyclotron frequency and angular frequency gives:

formula_20

The gyroradius for a particle moving in a static magnetic field is then given by:
formula_21

Expressing the speed in this equation in terms of frequency and radius
formula_22
yields the connection between the magnetic field strength, frequency, and radius:
formula_23

=== Approaches to relativistic cyclotrons ===

==== Synchrocyclotron ====

Since formula_24 increases as the particle reaches relativistic velocities, acceleration of relativistic particles requires modification of the cyclotron to ensure the particle crosses the gap at the same point in each RF cycle. If the frequency of the accelerating electric field is varied while the magnetic field is held constant, this leads to the &quot;synchrocyclotron&quot;. 

In this type of cyclotron, the accelerating frequency is varied as a function of particle orbit radius such that: 

formula_25

The decrease in accelerating frequency is tuned to match the increase in gamma for a constant magnetic field.

==== Isochronous cyclotron ====
If instead the magnetic field is varied with radius while the frequency of the accelerating field is held constant, this leads to the &quot;isochronous cyclotron&quot;.

formula_26

Keeping the frequency constant allows isochronous cyclotrons to operate in a continuous mode, which makes them capable of producing much greater beam current than synchrocyclotrons. On the other hand, as precise matching of the orbital frequency to the accelerating field frequency is the responsibility of the magnetic field variation with radius, the variation must be precisely tuned.

==== Fixed-field alternating gradient accelerator (FFA) ====
An approach which combines static magnetic fields (as in the synchrocyclotron) and alternating gradient focusing (as in a synchrotron) is the fixed-field alternating gradient accelerator (FFA). In an isochronous cyclotron, the magnetic field is shaped by using precisely machined steel magnet poles. This variation provides a focusing effect as the particles cross the edges of the poles. In an FFA, separate magnets with alternating directions are used to focus the beam using the principle of strong focusing. The field of the focusing and bending magnets in an FFA is not varied over time, so the beam chamber must still be wide enough to accommodate a changing beam radius within the field of the focusing magnets as the beam accelerates.

==Classifications==
===Cyclotron types===
There are a number of basic types of cyclotron:




===Beam types===

The particles for cyclotron beams are produced in ion sources of various types.




===Target types===

To make use of the cyclotron beam, it must be directed to a target.


==Usage==

=== Basic research ===

For several decades, cyclotrons were the best source of high-energy beams for nuclear physics experiments. With the advent of strong focusing synchrotrons, cyclotrons were supplanted as the accelerators capable of producing the highest energies. However, due to their compactness, and therefore lower expense compared to high energy synchrotrons, cyclotrons are still used to create beams for research where the primary consideration is not achieving the maximum possible energy. Cyclotron based nuclear physics experiments are used to measure basic properties of isotopes (particularly short lived radioactive isotopes) including half life, mass, interaction cross sections, and decay schemes.

=== Medical uses ===
==== Radioisotope production ====

Cyclotron beams can be used to bombard other atoms to produce short-lived isotopes with a variety of medical uses, including medical imaging and radiotherapy. Positron and gamma emitting isotopes, such as fluorine-18, carbon-11, and technetium-99m are used for PET and SPECT imaging. While cyclotron produced radioisotopes are widely used for diagnostic purposes, therapeutic uses are still largely in development. Proposed isotopes include astatine-211, palladium-103, rhenium-186, and bromine-77, among others.

==== Beam therapy ====

The first suggestion that energetic protons could be an effective treatment method was made by Robert R. Wilson in a paper published in 1946 while he was involved in the design of the Harvard Cyclotron Laboratory.

Beams from cyclotrons can be used in particle therapy to treat cancer. Ion beams from cyclotrons can be used, as in proton therapy, to penetrate the body and kill tumors by radiation damage, while minimizing damage to healthy tissue along their path. 

As of 2020, there were approximately 80 facilities worldwide for radiotherapy using beams of protons and heavy ions, consisting of a mixture of cyclotrons and synchrotrons. Cyclotrons are primarily used for proton beams, while synchrotrons are used to produce heavier ions.

==Advantages and limitations==

The most obvious advantage of a cyclotron over a linear accelerator is that because the same accelerating gap is used many times, it is both more space efficient and more cost efficient; particles can be brought to higher energies in less space, and with less equipment. The compactness of the cyclotron reduces other costs as well, such as foundations, radiation shielding, and the enclosing building. Cyclotrons have a single electrical driver, which saves both equipment and power costs. Furthermore, cyclotrons are able to produce a continuous beam of particles at the target, so the average power passed from a particle beam into a target is relatively high compared to the pulsed beam of a synchrotron.

However, as discussed above, a constant frequency acceleration method is only possible when the accelerated particles are approximately obeying Newton&#x27;s laws of motion. If the particles become fast enough that relativistic effects become important, the beam becomes out of phase with the oscillating electric field, and cannot receive any additional acceleration. The classical cyclotron (constant field and frequency) is therefore only capable of accelerating particles up to a few percent of the speed of light. Synchro-, isochronous, and other types of cyclotrons can overcome this limitation, with the tradeoff of increased complexity and cost.

An additional limitation of cyclotrons is due to space charge effects – the mutual repulsion of the particles in the beam. As the amount of particles (beam current) in a cyclotron beam is increased, the effects of electrostatic repulsion grow stronger until they disrupt the orbits of neighboring particles. This puts a functional limit on the beam intensity, or the &quot;number&quot; of particles which can be accelerated at one time, as distinct from their energy.

==Notable examples==
==Superconducting cyclotron examples==
A superconducting cyclotron uses superconducting magnets to achieve high magnetic field in a small diameter and with lower power requirements. These cyclotrons require a cryostat to house the magnet and cool it to superconducting temperatures. Some of these cyclotrons are being built for medical therapy. 
==Related technologies==
The spiraling of electrons in a cylindrical vacuum chamber within a transverse magnetic field is also employed in the magnetron, a device for producing high frequency radio waves (microwaves). In the magnetron, electrons are bent into a circular path by a magnetic field, and their motion is used to excite resonant cavities, producing electromagnetic radiation.

A betatron uses the &quot;change&quot; in the magnetic field to accelerate electrons in a circular path. While static magnetic fields cannot provide acceleration, as the force always acts perpendicularly to the direction of particle motion, changing fields can be used to induce an electromotive force in the same manner as in a transformer. The betatron was developed in 1940, although the idea had been proposed substantially earlier.

A synchrotron is another type of particle accelerator that uses magnets to bend particles into a circular trajectory. Unlike in a cyclotron, the particle path in a synchrotron has a fixed radius. Particles in a synchrotron pass accelerating stations at increasing frequency as they get faster. To compensate for this frequency increase, both the frequency of the applied accelerating electric field and the magnetic field must be increased in tandem, leading to the &quot;synchro&quot; portion of the name.

==In fiction==
The United States Department of War famously asked for dailies of the &quot;Superman&quot; comic strip to be pulled in April 1945 for having Superman bombarded with the radiation from a cyclotron.

In the 1984 film &quot;Ghostbusters,&quot; a miniature cyclotron forms part of the proton pack used for catching ghosts.

==See also==
* Cyclotron radiation – radiation produced by non-relativistic charged particles bent by a magnetic field
* Fast neutron therapy – a type of beam therapy that may use accelerator produced beams
* Microtron – an accelerator concept similar to the cyclotron which uses a linear accelerator type accelerating structure with a constant magnetic field.
* Radiation reaction force – a braking force on beams that are bent in a magnetic field
==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* About a neighborhood cyclotron in Anchorage, Alaska.
* An experiment done by Fred M. Niell, III his senior year of high school (1994–95) with which he won the overall grand prize in the ISEF.

==External links==

===Current facilities===
* The 88-Inch Cyclotron at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
* PSI Proton Accelerator – the highest beam current cyclotron in the world.
* The Superconducting Ring Cyclotron at the RIKEN Nishina Center for Accelerator Based Science – the highest energy cyclotron in the world
* Rutgers Cyclotron – Students at Rutgers University built a 1 MeV cyclotron as an undergraduate project, which is now used for a senior-level undergraduate and a graduate lab course.
* TRIUMF – the largest single-magnet cyclotron in the world.

===Historic cyclotrons===
* Ernest Lawrence&#x27;s Cyclotron A history of cyclotron development at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory, now Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
* National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory of the Michigan State University – Home of coupled K500 and K1200 superconducting cyclotrons; the K500, the first superconducting cyclotron, and the K1200, formerly the most powerful in the world.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q204469" start="2" end="11" title="Cyclotron" label="cyclotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="25" end="45" title="particle accelerator" label="particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q169577" start="58" end="73" title="Ernest Lawrence" label="Ernest Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="94" end="128" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q587553" start="176" end="192" title="charged particle" label="charged particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="335" end="349" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="387" end="401" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="433" end="455" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358570" start="609" end="634" title="electrostatic accelerator" label="electrostatic accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075349" start="649" end="675" title="Cockcroft–Walton generator" label="Cockcroft–Walton generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q211736" start="684" end="707" title="Van de Graaff generator" label="Van de Graaff generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="770" end="784" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q55451" start="864" end="884" title="electrical potential" label="electrical potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q422584" start="978" end="1001" title="electrical breakdown" label="electrostatic breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q689863" start="1346" end="1357" title="synchrotron" label="synchrotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q214963" start="1429" end="1445" title="nuclear medicine" label="nuclear medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="1548" end="1560" title="radionuclide" label="radionuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q38276304" start="1624" end="1640" title="particle therapy" label="particle therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q68510" start="1781" end="1794" title="Max Steenbeck" label="Max Steenbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q153238" start="1956" end="1967" title="Leo Szilárd" label="Leo Szilárd"/>
<link wikidata="Q836828" start="2013" end="2031" title="linear accelerator" label="linear accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q306395" start="2048" end="2056" title="betatron" label="betatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q709562" start="2494" end="2506" title="Rolf Widerøe" label="Rolf Widerøe"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="2574" end="2581" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q582060" start="2849" end="2863" title="Arc converter" label="arc converters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440457" start="2880" end="2905" title="Federal Telegraph Company" label="Federal Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q325496" start="2946" end="2967" title="M. Stanley Livingston" label="M. Stanley Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="3117" end="3120" title="Electronvolt" label="keV"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="3172" end="3206" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133630" start="3216" end="3253" title="Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="3505" end="3527" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3674" end="3686" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3690" end="3717" title="Mikhail Alekseevich Eremeev" label="Mikhail Alekseevich Eremeev"/>
<link wikidata="Q32637" start="3726" end="3763" title="Leningrad Physico-Technical Institute" label="Leningrad Physico-Technical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387323" start="4003" end="4032" title="V.G. Khlopin Radium Institute" label="V.G. Khlopin Radium Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="4036" end="4045" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q59478" start="4105" end="4117" title="George Gamow" label="George Gamow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153275" start="4281" end="4286" title="Riken" label="Riken"/>
<link wikidata="Q561569" start="4328" end="4342" title="Yoshio Nishina" label="Yoshio Nishina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133630" start="4433" end="4462" title="Berkeley Radiation Laboratory" label="Berkeley Radiation Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="4663" end="4680" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105" start="4714" end="4723" title="neptunium" label="neptunium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="4759" end="4768" title="plutonium" label="plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133630" start="4798" end="4827" title="Berkeley Radiation Laboratory" label="Berkeley Radiation Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q605089" start="4886" end="4894" title="calutron" label="calutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061309" start="4970" end="5000" title="Y-12 National Security Complex" label="Y-12 National Security Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="5042" end="5060" title="uranium enrichment" label="uranium enrichment"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="5077" end="5097" title="low-enriched uranium" label="low-enriched uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387043" start="5128" end="5132" title="S-50 (Manhattan Project)" label="S-50"/>
<link wikidata="Q837007" start="5137" end="5141" title="K-25" label="K-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="5205" end="5228" title="highly enriched uranium" label="highly enriched uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q181013" start="5331" end="5341" title="Little Boy" label="Little Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="5347" end="5367" title="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="dropped on Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391458" start="5387" end="5399" title="Aqueous homogeneous reactor" label="Water Boiler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5404" end="5410" title="Dragon critical assembly" label="Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q150989" start="5438" end="5459" title="Frédéric Joliot-Curie" label="Frédéric Joliot-Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q202660" start="5503" end="5520" title="Collège de France" label="Collège de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="5580" end="5604" title="Nazi occupation of Paris" label="Nazi occupation of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q96524" start="5775" end="5791" title="Wolfgang Gentner" label="Wolfgang Gentner"/>
<link wikidata="Q192821" start="6001" end="6023" title="French Communist Party" label="French Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q738249" start="6053" end="6067" title="National Front (French Resistance)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q700162" start="6139" end="6166" title="German nuclear program during World War II" label="Nazi German nuclear program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="6172" end="6184" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="6213" end="6223" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q76474" start="6250" end="6263" title="Walther Bothe" label="Walther Bothe"/>
<link wikidata="Q96524" start="6268" end="6284" title="Wolfgang Gentner" label="Wolfgang Gentner"/>
<link wikidata="Q655369" start="6308" end="6323" title="Heereswaffenamt" label="Heereswaffenamt"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="6365" end="6394" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="Berkeley Radiation Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q173028" start="6424" end="6436" title="Emilio Segrè" label="Emilio Segrè"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294188" start="6441" end="6455" title="Donald Cooksey" label="Donald Cooksey"/>
<link wikidata="Q333372" start="6717" end="6724" title="Karl Clusius" label="Clusius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138138" start="6730" end="6747" title="gaseous diffusion" label="gaseous diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q696251" start="6855" end="6874" title="occupation of Japan" label="occupation of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q712688" start="6921" end="6953" title="Japanese nuclear weapons program" label="Japanese nuclear weapons program"/>
<link wikidata="Q141017" start="7021" end="7030" title="Tokyo Bay" label="Tokyo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q723287" start="7191" end="7210" title="Robert P. Patterson" label="Robert P. Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="7446" end="7464" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142826" start="7718" end="7735" title="Synchrocyclotron" label="synchrocyclotrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q120120" start="8793" end="8816" title="superconducting magnets" label="superconducting magnets"/>
<link wikidata="Q836828" start="8970" end="8997" title="linear particle accelerator" label="linear particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q172137" start="9381" end="9398" title="Lorentz force" label="Lorentz force law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="9425" end="9431" title="electric charge" label="charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="9456" end="9470" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="9488" end="9496" title="velocity" label="velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="9509" end="9530" title="magnetic flux density" label="magnetic flux density"/>
<link wikidata="Q422584" start="9891" end="9914" title="Electrical breakdown" label="electrostatic breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="9971" end="9986" title="radio frequency" label="radio frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q836828" start="10231" end="10258" title="linear particle accelerator" label="linear particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711325" start="10440" end="10445" title="speed" label="speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194458" start="10940" end="10959" title="Cyclotron motion" label="cyclotron frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="11911" end="11920" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q715746" start="11924" end="11939" title="circular motion" label="circular motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q483261" start="12703" end="12719" title="atomic mass unit" label="atomic mass unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q907869" start="13932" end="13945" title="Fermat&amp;#x27;s spiral" label="Fermat spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q124274" start="14915" end="14922" title="azimuth" label="azimuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q93002" start="15350" end="15362" title="Llewellyn Thomas" label="L. H. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q319400" start="16561" end="16567" title="Modular arithmetic" label="modulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q599404" start="16882" end="16896" title="Lorentz factor" label="Lorentz factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="18223" end="18237" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q719048" start="18294" end="18311" title="Mass in special relativity" label="relativistic mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q599404" start="18364" end="18378" title="Lorentz factor" label="Lorentz factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097654" start="18471" end="18480" title="rest mass" label="rest mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q599404" start="18545" end="18559" title="Lorentz factor" label="Lorentz factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194458" start="18669" end="18679" title="gyroradius" label="gyroradius"/>
<link wikidata="Q689863" start="20419" end="20430" title="synchrotron" label="synchrotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419413" start="20792" end="20807" title="strong focusing" label="strong focusing"/>
<link wikidata="Q905291" start="21203" end="21213" title="ion source" label="ion source"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="21440" end="21455" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="22239" end="22254" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="22259" end="22271" title="radiotherapy" label="radiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229" start="22273" end="22281" title="Positron" label="Positron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="22286" end="22291" title="gamma radiation" label="gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031969" start="22319" end="22330" title="fluorine-18" label="fluorine-18"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22332" end="22341" title="isotopes of carbon#carbon-11" label="carbon-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373354" start="22347" end="22361" title="technetium-99m" label="technetium-99m"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="22375" end="22378" title="PET imaging" label="PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q849737" start="22383" end="22388" title="Single-photon emission computed tomography" label="SPECT"/>
<link wikidata="Q999" start="22555" end="22563" title="astatine" label="astatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089" start="22569" end="22578" title="palladium" label="palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q737" start="22584" end="22591" title="rhenium" label="rhenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q879" start="22601" end="22608" title="bromine" label="bromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q705994" start="22747" end="22763" title="Robert R. Wilson" label="Robert R. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676356" start="22836" end="22864" title="Harvard Cyclotron Laboratory" label="Harvard Cyclotron Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q38276304" start="22904" end="22920" title="particle therapy" label="particle therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="22930" end="22936" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q507667" start="22983" end="22997" title="proton therapy" label="proton therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q275459" start="23040" end="23056" title="radiation poisoning" label="radiation damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q836828" start="23476" end="23494" title="linear accelerator" label="linear accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="24281" end="24309" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="24352" end="24364" title="Special Relativity" label="relativistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669228" start="24841" end="24853" title="space charge" label="space charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q83152" start="25006" end="25029" title="Coulomb&amp;#x27;s law" label="electrostatic repulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q120120" start="25354" end="25377" title="superconducting magnets" label="superconducting magnets"/>
<link wikidata="Q909476" start="25491" end="25499" title="cryostat" label="cryostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q194154" start="25771" end="25780" title="magnetron" label="magnetron"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="25833" end="25843" title="microwaves" label="microwaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759014" start="25960" end="25977" title="microwave cavity" label="resonant cavities"/>
<link wikidata="Q306395" start="26019" end="26027" title="betatron" label="betatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q185329" start="26299" end="26318" title="electromotive force" label="electromotive force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="26346" end="26357" title="transformer" label="transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q689863" start="26457" end="26468" title="synchrotron" label="synchrotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="26982" end="27013" title="United States Department of War" label="United States Department of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q108745" start="27199" end="27211" title="Ghostbusters" label="Ghostbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110272" start="27259" end="27270" title="proton pack" label="proton pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282122" start="27313" end="27332" title="Cyclotron radiation" label="Cyclotron radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437041" start="27419" end="27439" title="Fast neutron therapy" label="Fast neutron therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415797" start="27507" end="27516" title="Microtron" label="Microtron"/>
<link wikidata="Q253011" start="27661" end="27685" title="Radiation reaction force" label="Radiation reaction force"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="27828" end="27845" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q635185" start="27980" end="27984" title="ISEF" label="ISEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133630" start="28059" end="28096" title="Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="28346" end="28364" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133630" start="28696" end="28733" title="Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q270222" start="28789" end="28814" title="Michigan State University" label="Michigan State University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44590" wikidata="Q909999" url="?curid=44590" title="Radius of gyration">
<text>The radius of gyration or gyradius of a body about the axis of rotation is defined as the radial distance to a point which would have a moment of inertia the same as the body&#x27;s actual distribution of mass, if the total mass of the body were concentrated there. The radius of gyration has dimensions of distance [L] or [M0LT0] and the SI unit is the metre (m).

==Formulation==
Mathematically the radius of gyration is the root mean square distance of the object&#x27;s parts from either its center of mass or a given axis, depending on the relevant application. It is actually the perpendicular distance from point mass to the axis of rotation. One can represent a trajectory of a moving point as a body. Then radius of gyration can be used to characterize the typical distance travelled by this point.
Suppose a body consists of formula_1 particles each of mass formula_2. Let formula_3 be their perpendicular distances from the axis of rotation. Then, the moment of inertia formula_4 of the body about the axis of rotation is
:formula_5
 
If all the masses are the same (formula_2), then the moment of inertia is formula_7.
Since formula_8 (formula_9 being the total mass of the body), 
:formula_10
From the above equations, we have 
:formula_11
Radius of gyration is the root mean square distance of particles from axis formula 
:formula_12
Therefore, the radius of gyration of a body about a given axis may also be defined as the root mean square distance of the various particles of the body from the axis of rotation. It is also known as a measure of the way in which the mass of a rotating rigid body is distributed about its axis of rotation.

==Applications in structural engineering==
In structural engineering, the two-dimensional radius of gyration is used to describe the distribution of cross sectional area in a column around its centroidal axis with the mass of the body. The radius of gyration is given by the following formula:

:formula_13

Where formula_4 is the second moment of area and formula_15 is the total cross-sectional area.

The gyration radius is useful in estimating the stiffness of a column. If the principal moments of the two-dimensional gyration tensor are not equal, the column will tend to buckle around the axis with the smaller principal moment. For example, a column with an elliptical cross-section will tend to buckle in the direction of the smaller semiaxis.

In engineering, where continuous bodies of matter are generally the objects of study, the radius of gyration is usually calculated as an integral.

==Applications in mechanics==
The radius of gyration about a given axis (formula_16) can be calculated in terms of the mass moment of inertia formula_17 around that axis, and the total mass &quot;m&quot;;

:formula_18
formula_17 is a scalar, and is not the moment of inertia tensor.
==Molecular applications==

In polymer physics, the radius of gyration is used to describe the dimensions of a polymer chain. The radius of gyration of an individual homopolymer with degree of polymerization N at a given time is defined as: 
:formula_20

where formula_21 is the mean position of the monomers.
As detailed below, the radius of gyration is also proportional to the root mean square distance between the monomers:

:formula_22

As a third method, the radius of gyration can also be computed by summing the principal moments of the gyration tensor.

Since the chain conformations of a polymer sample are quasi infinite in number and constantly change over time, the &quot;radius of gyration&quot; discussed in polymer physics must usually be understood as a mean over all polymer molecules of the sample and over time. That is, the radius of gyration which is measured as an &quot;average&quot; over time or ensemble:

:formula_23

where the angular brackets formula_24 denote the ensemble average.

An entropically governed polymer chain (i.e. in so called theta conditions) follows a random walk in three dimensions. The radius of gyration for this case is given by

:formula_25

Note that although formula_26 represents the contour length of the polymer, formula_27 is strongly dependent of polymer stiffness and can vary over orders of magnitude. formula_28 is reduced accordingly.

One reason that the radius of gyration is an interesting property is that it can be determined experimentally with static light scattering as well as with small angle neutron- and x-ray scattering. This allows theoretical polymer physicists to check their models against reality.
The hydrodynamic radius is numerically similar, and can be measured with Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS).

===Derivation of identity===
To show that the two definitions of formula_29 are identical, 
we first multiply out the summand in the first definition:

:formula_30

Carrying out the summation over the last two terms and using the definition of formula_31 gives the formula

:formula_32

On the other hand, the second definition can be calculated in the same way as follows. 
:formula_33
Thus, the two definitions are the same. 

The last transformation uses the relationship 

:formula_34

==Applications in geographical data analysis==
In data analysis, the radius of gyration is used to calculate many different statistics including the spread of geographical locations. These locations have recently been collected from social media users to investigate the typical mentions of a user. This can be useful for understanding how a certain group of users on social media use the platform.

:formula_35

==Notes==
==References==
* Grosberg AY and Khokhlov AR. (1994) &quot;Statistical Physics of Macromolecules&quot; (translated by Atanov YA), AIP Press. 
* Flory PJ. (1953) &quot;Principles of Polymer Chemistry&quot;, Cornell University, pp. 428–429 (Appendix C of Chapter X).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q909999" start="4" end="22" title="Radius of gyration" label="radius of gyration"/>
<link wikidata="Q909999" start="26" end="34" title="Radius of gyration" label="gyradius"/>
<link wikidata="Q107617" start="55" end="71" title="axis of rotation" label="axis of rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165618" start="136" end="153" title="moment of inertia" label="moment of inertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173817" start="401" end="407" title="radius" label="radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5625393" start="411" end="419" title="gyration" label="gyration"/>
<link wikidata="Q223323" start="427" end="443" title="root mean square" label="root mean square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="496" end="510" title="center of mass" label="center of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q633538" start="1703" end="1725" title="structural engineering" label="structural engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q845080" start="1806" end="1821" title="cross section (geometry)" label="cross sectional"/>
<link wikidata="Q511093" start="1850" end="1858" title="centroid" label="centroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q835065" start="1988" end="2009" title="second moment of area" label="second moment of area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5625394" start="2180" end="2195" title="gyration tensor" label="gyration tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q693104" start="2235" end="2241" title="buckling" label="buckle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="2323" end="2333" title="ellipse" label="elliptical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="2414" end="2425" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q165618" start="2678" end="2700" title="mass moment of inertia" label="mass moment of inertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289248" start="2793" end="2799" title="scalar (mathematics)" label="scalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188524" start="2834" end="2840" title="tensor" label="tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q902120" start="2873" end="2888" title="polymer physics" label="polymer physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="2953" end="2960" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453564" start="2961" end="2966" title="ideal chain" label="chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796622" start="3121" end="3125" title="mean" label="mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5625394" start="3387" end="3402" title="gyration tensor" label="gyration tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q500256" start="3421" end="3434" title="Chemical structure" label="conformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q898535" start="3763" end="3771" title="Ensemble average" label="ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q898535" start="3836" end="3852" title="ensemble average" label="ensemble average"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165583" start="4082" end="4096" title="contour length" label="contour length"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604173" start="4357" end="4380" title="static light scattering" label="static light scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165337" start="4397" end="4417" title="Small-angle neutron scattering" label="small angle neutron-"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027679" start="4422" end="4438" title="Small-angle X-ray scattering" label="x-ray scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274587" start="4526" end="4545" title="hydrodynamic radius" label="hydrodynamic radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q896108" start="4595" end="4619" title="Dynamic Light Scattering" label="Dynamic Light Scattering"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44591" wikidata="Q49201" url="?curid=44591" title="Portland, Maine">
<text>Portland ( ) is the most populous city in the U.S. state of Maine and the seat of Cumberland County. Portland&#x27;s population was 68,408 at the 2020 census. The Greater Portland metropolitan area has a population of approximately 550,000 people. Historically tied to commercial shipping, the marine economy, and light industry, Portland&#x27;s economy in the 21st century relies mostly on the service sector. The Port of Portland is the second-largest tonnage seaport in the New England area as of 2019.

The city seal depicts a phoenix rising from ashes, a reference to Portland&#x27;s recovery from four devastating fires. Portland was named after the English Isle of Portland. In turn, the city of Portland, Oregon, was named after Portland, Maine. The word &quot;Portland&quot; is derived from the Old English word &quot;Portlanda&quot;, which means &quot;land surrounding a harbor&quot;. The Greater Portland area has emerged as an important center for the creative economy, which is also bringing gentrification.

==History==


The original Algonquin-speaking Eastern Abenaki residents called the Portland peninsula Machigonne (&quot;great neck&quot;). It is also called Məkíhkanək (&quot;at the fish hook&quot;) in Penobscot.

The first European settler was Christopher Levett, an English naval captain granted in 1623 to found a settlement in Casco Bay. A member of the Council for New England and agent for Ferdinando Gorges, Levett built a stone house where he left a company of ten men, then returned to England to write a book about his voyage to bolster support for the settlement. Ultimately, the settlement was a failure and the fate of Levett&#x27;s colonists is unknown. The explorer sailed from England to the Massachusetts Bay Colony to meet John Winthrop in 1630, but never returned to Maine. Fort Levett in the harbor is named for him.

The peninsula was settled in 1632 as a fishing and trading village named Casco. When the Massachusetts Bay Colony took over Casco Bay in 1658, the town&#x27;s name changed again to Falmouth. In 1676, the village was destroyed by the Abenaki during King Philip&#x27;s War. It was rebuilt. During King William&#x27;s War, a raiding party of French and their native allies attacked and largely destroyed it again in the Battle of Fort Loyal (1690).
On October 18, 1775, Falmouth was burned in the Revolution by the Royal Navy under command of Captain Henry Mowat. Following the war, a section of Falmouth called The Neck developed as a commercial port and began to grow rapidly as a shipping center. In 1786, the citizens of Falmouth formed a separate town in Falmouth Neck and named it Portland, after the Isle of Portland off the coast of Dorset, England. Portland&#x27;s economy was greatly stressed by the Embargo Act of 1807 (prohibition of trade with the British), which ended in 1809, and the War of 1812, which ended in 1815.

In 1820, Maine was established as a state with Portland as its capital. In 1832, the capital was moved north and east to Augusta. In 1851, Maine led the nation by passing the first state law prohibiting the sale of alcohol except for &quot;medicinal, mechanical or manufacturing purposes.&quot; The law subsequently became known as the Maine Law, as eighteen other states quickly followed. The Portland Rum Riot occurred on June 2, 1855.
In 1853, upon completion of the Grand Trunk Railway to Montreal, Portland became the primary ice-free winter seaport for Canadian exports. The Portland Company, located on Fore Street, manufactured more than six hundred 19th-century steam locomotives, as well as engines for trains and boats, fire engines and other railroad transportation equipment. The Portland Company was, for a time, the city&#x27;s largest employer and many of its employees were immigrants from Canada, Ireland and Italy. Portland became a 20th-century rail hub as five additional rail lines merged into Portland Terminal Company in 1911. These rail lines also facilitated movement of returning Canadian troops from the First World War in 1919. Following nationalization of the Grand Trunk system in 1923, Canadian export traffic was diverted from Portland to Halifax, resulting in marked local economic decline. Icebreakers later enabled ships to reach Montreal in winter, drastically reducing Portland&#x27;s role as a winter port for Canada.

On June 26, 1863, a Confederate raiding party led by Captain Charles Read entered the harbor at Portland leading to the Battle of Portland Harbor, one of the northernmost battles of the Civil War. The 1866 Great Fire of Portland, Maine, on July 4, 1866, ignited during the Independence Day celebration, destroyed most of the commercial buildings in the city, half the churches and hundreds of homes. More than 10,000 people were left homeless.

By act of the Maine Legislature in 1899, Portland annexed the city of Deering, despite a vote by Deering residents rejecting the motion, thereby greatly increasing the size of the city and opening areas for development beyond the peninsula.

In 1967, the city began the controversial razing of Franklin Street to construct a limited-access highway to improve access in and out of the city for non-residents. The reconstruction of the street demolished 130 homes and businesses and caused an unknown number of families to be relocated or displaced. The construction of The Maine Mall, an indoor shopping center established in South Portland in 1971, economically depressed downtown Portland. The trend reversed when tourists and new businesses started revitalizing the old seaport, a part of which is known locally as the Old Port.

Since the 1990s, the historically industrial Bayside neighborhood has seen rapid development, including attracting a Whole Foods Market and Trader Joe&#x27;s grocery stores, as well as Baxter Academy for Technology and Science, a charter school. Other developing neighborhoods include the India Street neighborhood, near the Ocean Gateway, and Munjoy Hill, where many modern condominiums have been built. The Maine College of Art has been a revitalizing force downtown, attracting students from around the country. The historic Porteous Building on Congress Street was restored by the college. Universities operating in the city are expanding. The University of Southern Maine is improving its Portland campus with a 580-bed dormitory, student center, and an arts center. The University of New England intends to move its medical school from its Biddeford campus to its Portland campus. Northeastern University&#x27;s Roux Institute plans to build on the former B&amp;M Baked Beans factory campus in East Deering.

Portland is known as a walkable city, offering many opportunities for walking tours which feature its maritime and architectural history.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water. Portland is situated on a peninsula in Casco Bay on the Gulf of Maine and the Atlantic Ocean.

Portland borders South Portland, Westbrook and Falmouth.

===Climate===
Portland has a humid continental climate (Köppen: &quot;Dfb&quot;, closely bordering on &quot;Dfa&quot;), with cold, snowy, and often prolonged winters, and warm to hot, yet relatively short summers. The monthly average high temperature ranges from roughly in January to around in July. Daily high temperatures reach or exceed on only four days per year on average, while cold-season lows of or below are reached on 10 nights per year on average. The area can be affected by severe nor&#x27;easters during winter, with high winds and snowfall totals often measuring over a foot. Annual liquid precipitation (rain) averages and is plentiful year-round, but with a slightly drier summer. Annual frozen precipitation (snow) averages in the city. However, this number can fluctuate seasonally from as little as 30 inches to as much as 150 inches, depending on a multitude of factors. In Southern Maine, snowstorms can be intense from November through early April, while warm-season thunderstorms are somewhat less frequent than in the Midwestern, Mid-Atlantic, and Southeastern U.S. (although their frequency has increased in recent years). Direct strikes by hurricanes or tropical storms are rare, partially due to the normally cooler Atlantic waters off the Maine coast (which usually weaken tropical systems), but primarily because most tropical systems approaching or reaching 40 degrees North latitude recurve (due to the Coriolis force) and track east out to sea well south of the Portland area. Extreme temperatures range from on February 16, 1943, to on July 4, 1911, and August 2, 1975. The hardiness zones are 5b and 6a.


===Sea-level rise===
Portland is becoming increasingly affected by global warming and the rise of sea levels. The coast is one of the fastest-warming saltwater bodies, and is predicted to see an increase to about 10–17 inches by 2030, in comparison to the levels in 2000. This is a major threat to the residents and ocean life around the area. In 2022, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration issued a report that showed sea level in Portland could rise by six inches by 2050, two feet by 2060 and two to six feet by 2100.

In January 2024, Portland experienced a record-high tide of . Combined with heavy rainfall and strong winds, it caused severe flooding.

===Neighborhoods===


Portland is organized into neighborhoods generally recognized by residents, but they have no legal or political authority. In many cases, city signs identify neighborhoods or intersections (which are often called corners). Most city neighborhoods have a local association which usually maintains ongoing relations of varying degrees with the city government on issues affecting the neighborhood.

On March 8, 1899, Portland annexed the neighboring city of Deering. Deering neighborhoods now comprise the northern and eastern sections of the city before the merger. Portland&#x27;s Deering High School was formerly the public high school for Deering.

Portland&#x27;s neighborhoods include the Arts District, Bayside, Bradley&#x27;s Corner, Cliff Island, Cushing&#x27;s Island, Deering Center, Deering Highlands, Downtown, East Deering, East Bayside, East End, Eastern Cemetery, Great Diamond Island, Highlands, Kennedy Park, Libbytown, Little Diamond Island, Lunt&#x27;s Corner, Morrill&#x27;s Corner, Munjoy Hill, Nason&#x27;s Corner, North Deering, Oakdale, the Old Port, Parkside, Peaks Island, Riverton Park, Rosemont, Stroudwater, West End, and Woodfords Corner.

From the early 2000s onward, many of Portland&#x27;s neighborhoods have faced gentrification, causing many local residents to be &quot;priced out&quot; of their neighborhoods. In 2015, the &quot;Portland Press Herald&quot; published a series of articles documenting the &quot;super-tight apartment market&quot; and the trauma caused by evictions and steep jumps in monthly rent. Also in that year, city landlords raised rents by an average of 17.4%, which was the second-largest jump in the country.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 66,194 people, 30,725 households, and 13,324 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 33,836 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 85.0% White (83.6% non-Hispanic White alone), down from 96.6% in 1990, 7.1% African American, 0.5% Native American, 3.5% Asian, 1.2% from other races, and 2.7% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.0% of the population. 40.7% of the population had a bachelor&#x27;s degree or higher.

There were 30,725 households, of which 20.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 29.7% were married couples living together, 10.1% had a female householder with no husband present, 3.6% had a male householder with no wife present, and 56.6% were non-families. 40.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.07 and the average family size was 2.88.

The median age in the city was 36.7 years. 17.1% of residents were under the age of 18; 11.4% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 33.1% were from 25 to 44; 25.9% were from 45 to 64; and 12.6% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 48.8% male and 51.2% female.
===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 64,250 people, 29,714 households, and 13,549 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 31,862 housing units at an average density of .

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Portland&#x27;s immediate metropolitan area ranked 147th in the nation in 2000 with a population of 243,537, while the Portland/South Portland/Biddeford metropolitan area included 487,568 total inhabitants. This has increased to an estimated 513,102 inhabitants (and the largest metro area in Northern New England) . Much of this increase in population has been due to growth in the city&#x27;s southern and western suburbs.

The racial makeup of the city was 91.27% White, 2.59% African American, 0.47% Native American, 3.08% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 0.67% from other races, and 1.86% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.52% of the population.

The largest ancestries include: British (including Scottish, Welsh, and English) (21.2%), Irish (19.2%), French (10.8%), Italian (10.5%), and German (6.9%).

There were 29,714 households, out of which 21.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 32.1% were married couples living together, 10.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 54.4% were non-families. 40.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.08 and the average family size was 2.89.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 18.8% under the age of 18, 10.7% from 18 to 24, 36.1% from 25 to 44, 20.6% from 45 to 64, and 13.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.0 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $35,650, and the median income for a family was $48,763. Males had a median income of $31,828 versus $27,173 for females. The per capita income for the city was $22,698. About 9.7% of families and 14.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12.5% of those under age 18 and 11.9% of those age 65 or over.

Race/ethnicity composition
==Economy==
Portland has become Maine&#x27;s economic capital because the city has Maine&#x27;s largest port, largest population, and is close to Boston (105 miles to the southwest). Over the years, the local economy has shifted from fishing, manufacturing, and agriculture towards a more service-based economy. Most national bank institutions and other related financial organizations, such as Bank of America and Key Bank, base their Maine operations in Portland. Unum, Covetrus, TruChoice Federal Credit Union, M&amp;T Bank, ImmuCell Corp, and Pioneer Telephone have headquarters here, and Portland&#x27;s neighboring cities of South Portland, Westbrook and Scarborough, provide homes for other corporations including IDEXX and WEX Inc. Between 1867 and 2021, Burnham &amp; Morrill Company, maker of B&amp;M Baked Beans, had its main plant in Portland (the B&amp;M Baked Beans factory).

The city&#x27;s port is also undergoing a revival, and the first-ever container train departed from the new International Marine Terminal with fifteen containers of locally produced bottled tap water in early 2016.

In January 2020, Portland was announced to be the location of a new research institute that will focus on the application of artificial intelligence and machine learning. Northeastern University was selected by technology entrepreneur David Roux to lead the institute that will include programs that will allow graduate student research.

Portland also has a large subsidized housing industry, with several large real estate companies in the business. The city is described as one of the &quot;best places to live&quot; in the United States.

==Arts and culture==
Portland has a long history of prominence in the arts, peaking the first time in the early 19th century, when the city was &quot;a rival, and not a satellite of either Boston or New York.&quot; In that period, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow got his start as a poet and John Neal held a central position in leading American literature toward its great renaissance, having founded Maine&#x27;s first literary periodical, &quot;The Yankee&quot;, in 1828. Other notable literary or artistic figures who were contemporaries include Grenville Mellen, Nathaniel Parker Willis, Seba Smith, Elizabeth Oakes Smith, Benjamin Paul Akers, Charles Codman, Franklin Simmons, John Rollin Tilton, and Harrison Bird Brown. Since 2000, Portland has hosted a monthly First Friday Art Walk event which attracts more than 3,000 visitors.

===Sites of interest===
The Arts District, centered on Congress Street, is home to the Portland Museum of Art, Portland Stage Company, Maine Historical Society &amp; Museum, Portland Public Library, Maine College of Art, SPACE Gallery, Children&#x27;s Museum of Maine, Merrill Auditorium, the Kotzschmar Memorial Organ, and Portland Symphony Orchestra, as well as many smaller art galleries and studios.

Baxter Boulevard around Back Cove, Deering Oaks Park, the Eastern Promenade, Western Promenade, Lincoln Park and Riverton Park are all historical parks within the city. Other parks and natural spaces include Payson Park, Post Office Park, Baxter Woods, Evergreen Cemetery, Western Cemetery and the Fore River Sanctuary.

Thompson&#x27;s Point, in the Libbytown neighborhood, has been a focus of renovation and redevelopment since the 2010s. The location hosts a concert venue, ice rink, hotels, restaurants, wineries, and breweries.

===Notable buildings===

The spire of the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception has been a notable feature of the Portland skyline since its completion in 1854. In 1859, Ammi B. Young designed the Marine Hospital, the first of three local works by Supervising Architects of the U.S. Treasury Department. Although the city lost to redevelopment its 1867 Greek Revival post office, which was designed by Alfred B. Mullett of white Vermont marble and featured a Corinthian portico, Portland retains his 1868 United States Custom House on Fore Street.

Franklin Towers is a 16-story residential tower. Between 1969 and 2023, at , it was Maine&#x27;s tallest residential building. It was surpassed by 201 Federal Street, which is taller.

During the building boom of the 1980s, several new buildings rose on the peninsula, including the 1983 Charles Shipman Payson Building by Henry N. Cobb of Pei, Cobb, Freed &amp; Partners at the Portland Museum of Art complex (a component of which is the 1801 McLellan-Sweat Mansion), and the Back Bay Tower, a fifteen-story residential building completed in 1990.

477 Congress Street (known locally as the Time and Temperature Building) is situated near Monument Square in the Arts District and is a major landmark: the 14-story building features a large electronic sign on its roof that flashes time and temperature data, as well as parking-ban information in the winter. The building is home to several radio stations. The Press Herald Building, at 390 Congress Street, is strategically located across Congress Street from Portland City Hall and was built in 1923. It was expanded in 1948 for use as the newspaper&#x27;s headquarters.

The Westin Portland Harborview, completed in 1927, is a prominent hotel located downtown on High Street. Photographer Todd Webb lived in Portland during his later years and took many pictures of the city. Some of Webb&#x27;s pictures can be found at the Evans Gallery.

===Media===
The city is home to one daily newspaper, &quot;The Portland Press Herald/Maine Sunday Telegram&quot;, founded in 1862. &quot;The Press Herald&quot; is published Monday through Saturday and &quot;The Maine Sunday Telegram&quot; is published on Sundays. Both are published by MaineToday Media Inc., which also operates an entertainment website, &quot;MaineToday.com&quot; and owns papers in Augusta, Waterville, and Bath.

Other publications include &quot;The Portland Forecaster&quot;, a weekly newspaper; &quot;The Bollard&quot;, a monthly alternative magazine formerly known as &quot;Mainer&quot;; &quot;The West End News&quot;, &quot;The Munjoy Hill Observer&quot;, &quot;The Baysider&quot;, &quot;The Waterfront&quot;, &quot;Portland Magazine&quot;, and &quot;The Companion&quot;. Portland is also the home office of &quot;The Exception Magazine&quot;, an online newspaper which covers Maine.

The Portland broadcast media market is the largest one in Maine for both radio and television. Radio stations located in Portland include WFNK (Classic Hits), WJJB (Sports), WTHT (Country), WBQW (Classical), WHXR (Rock), WHOM (Adult Contemporary), WJBQ (Top 40), WCLZ (Adult Album Alternative), WBLM (Classic Rock), WYNZ (1960s–1970s Hits), and WCYY (Modern Rock). WMPG is a local non-commercial radio station run by community members and the University of Southern Maine. The Maine Public Broadcasting Network&#x27;s (MPBN) radio news operations are based in Portland.

Television stations include WCSH 6 (NBC), WMTW 8 (ABC), WGME 13 (CBS), WPFO 23 (Fox), WIPL 35 (ION), and WPXT 51 (The CW; MyNetworkTV on DT3). There is no PBS affiliate licensed to the city of Portland, but the market is served by MPBN outlets WCBB Channel 10 in Augusta and WMEA-TV Channel 26 Biddeford.
====Historical newspapers====
Newspapers formerly published in Portland include the &quot;The Pleasure Boat&quot;, &quot;Eastern Argus, Evening Express,&quot; &quot;Casco Bay Weekly&quot;,&quot;The Portland Daily Sun&quot; and &quot;The Portland Phoenix&quot;.

=== Traditions ===
==== Valentine&#x27;s Day Phantom ====
In 1976, a group of unknown individuals started the tradition of the Valentine&#x27;s Day Phantom by plastering the city with hearts on Valentine&#x27;s Day. In 1986, the U.S. Coast Guard almost intercepted a boat filled with Valentine&#x27;s Day Phantom&#x27;s after it nearly hit a Casco Bay Ferry. The boat made it to Fort Gorges and unfurled a heart banner. The banner appeared on the uninhabited island fort again in 2017. The heart flag appeared on the flag pole at Central Fire Station in 2021. One leader of the effort was publicly identified in 2023 when Kevin Farnham of Falmouth died, and his family revealed his involvement. However, the family said Farnham was not the founder. The Farnham family established a charitable foundation called Be A Kevin to help keep the tradition alive.

==== First Friday Art Walk ====
In 2000, the First Friday Art Walk was started by gallery owners in the Arts District who opened from 5 to 8 p.m. on the first Friday of each month. By 2012, the event had become so popular that gallery owners feared the event was becoming too much like a festival with street performers and vendors.

== Food and beverage ==
===Number of restaurants===
Downtown Portland, including the Arts District and the Old Port, has a high concentration of eating and drinking establishments, with many more to be found throughout the rest of the peninsula, outlying neighborhoods, and neighboring communities. The city is also home to numerous food trucks and food carts, which park on the city streets and at festivals, events and breweries. Most operate in the summer; a few operate year-round.

Notable restaurants include Fore Street, Duckfat, Becky&#x27;s Diner, and The Great Lost Bear.

===Food recognition===
Portland has developed a national reputation for the quality of its restaurants, eateries, and food culture. The city has been visited by many food shows, including Rachael Ray&#x27;s Food Network show &quot;$40 a Day&quot;, the Travel Channel&#x27;s &quot;Man v. Food&quot;, and &quot;Anthony Bourdain: No Reservations&quot;. Bon Appetit named Portland the Restaurant City of the Year in 2018.

===Beverages===
Portland is home to numerous juice bars, coffee shops, coffee roasteries, tea houses, distilleries, microbreweries and brewpubs.

Brewers include the D. L. Geary Brewing Company, Gritty McDuff&#x27;s Brewing Company, Shipyard Brewing Company, and Allagash Brewing Company. Portland&#x27;s spirits industry has also grown in recent years.

The city is known for its pure tap water. The water comes from Sebago Lake. It is piped to Portland by the Portland Water District. Sebago Lake is one of fifty surface-water supplies among 13,000 in the country that the Environmental Protection Agency says do not need filtration.

===Farmers markets===
The Portland Farmers&#x27; Market takes place Wednesdays in Monument Square, Saturdays in Deering Oaks Park (from early May to the end of November), and Saturdays at The Maine Girls Academy (from early December to the end of April).

===Vegetarian food===
The city has the state&#x27;s most vegan and vegetarian restaurants. Vegetarian-friendly restaurants number more than 200 in 2020, according to the &quot;Maine Sunday Telegram&quot;. Celebrity chef Toni Fiore first filmed the PBS cooking show &quot;Totally Vegetarian&quot; in 2002 at the cable access station in Portland. The &quot;Portland Press Herald&quot; has featured a vegan column by Avery Yale Kamila in its F&quot;ood &amp; Dining&quot; section since 2009. In 2011, the Portland Public Schools added a daily vegetarian cold lunch to its school menu choices. In 2019, the district changed to a daily hot vegan school meal option.

===Food festivals===
Portland hosts a number of food and beverage festivals, including:
*Festival of Nations, takes place in July in Deering Oaks Park and organized by group of local organizations
*Greek Festival, three-day event in June at Holy Trinity Greek Orthodox Church
*Harvest on the Harbor, multi-day event takes place in October
*Italian Street Festival &amp; Bazaar, three-day event in August outside St. Peter&#x27;s Parish commemorates the Feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary and the Feast of Saint Rocco
*Maine Brewers Festival, held multiple times a year by the Maine Brewers&#x27; Guild
*Maine VegFest, takes place in October and organized by Maine Animal Coalition since 2005; the event features all vegan food and was originally called Maine Vegetarian Food Festival
*Taste of the Nation, fundraiser for food insecurity that stopped after 2015 but happened again in 2019
*Maine Restaurant Week, takes place over twelve days in March
*Maine Seaweed Week, takes place in the spring

===Food history===
Since 1768, the Portland Farmers Market has been in operation. It was first established in the Town Hall that &quot;served 136 families on the peninsula.&quot;

Portland is where national Prohibition started. Portland mayor and temperance leader Neal Dow led Maine to ban alcohol sales in 1851. The law led to the Portland Rum Riot in 1855. In 1845, &quot;The Pleasure Boat&quot; was the earliest vegetarian publication in Maine. 

Canned corn was developed in Portland by the N. Winslow company. By 1852 the Winslow&#x27;s Patent Hermetically Sealed Green Corn was a commercial success and the company became a world leader in the canning industry. An historic B&amp;M Baked Beans canning plant built in 1913 operated on the waterfront until 2021 when it closed and production moved to the midwest. By late 2022, B&amp;M customers were reporting that the baked beans were undercooked, crunchy, and tasted different. Customers speculated that the beans were no longer being baked. Some customers were hoarding B&amp;M bean cans produced at the Portland plant.

In the early 20th century, a Little Italy neighborhood developed around India Street. The city&#x27;s Amato&#x27;s Italian delicatessen on India Street is reported to be the birthplace of the Maine Italian sandwich, called &quot;an Italian&quot; by locals, which Amato&#x27;s first served in 1902. The Village Restaurant, an Italian restaurant in the city&#x27;s East End, was in operation for 71 years, from 1936 to 2007. In 1949, Miccuci&#x27;s Grocery Co. an Italian grocery store opened on India Street and remains in business.

In the 1970s and 1980s, The Hollow Reed was a notable vegetarian restaurant on Fore Street cited for its influence on the city&#x27;s restaurant culture. In 1979, The Great Lost Bear opened on Forest Avenue and was recognized for its large selection of draft craft beers. In 1982 DiMillo&#x27;s on the Water opened in a former car ferry docked at Portland&#x27;s Long Wharf. In 1988, the Gritty McDuff&#x27;s brewpub was founded on Fore Street and is considered the first brewpub to open in Maine since Prohibition ended. In 1989, Marcy&#x27;s Diner opened on Free Street, and in 2015 it made international headlines following a spat between the then-cook-owner and a patron over the latter&#x27;s screaming child. 

In 1991, Becky&#x27;s Diner opened on Commercial Street, after it got an exception to the city&#x27;s zoning laws prohibiting non-fishery businesses on the waterfront, and has attracted famous patrons including Taylor Swift and president Bill Clinton. In 2007, the Green Elephant opened on Congress Street and received critical attention for the vegetarian menu.

In 2024, ZU Bakery located in the West End won the James Beard award for Outstanding Bakery, and Atsuko Fujimoto, owner of Norimoto Bakery, in Deering Center, won the James Beard award for Outstanding Pastry Chef or Baker.

==Sports==

The city is home to four minor league teams. The Portland Sea Dogs, the Double-A farm team of the Boston Red Sox, play at Hadlock Field. The Maine Celtics, the NBA G League affiliate of the Boston Celtics, play at the Portland Exposition Building. The Maine Mariners, ECHL affiliates of the Boston Bruins, play at Cross Insurance Arena. A USL League One soccer team was granted to Portland in 2023. The team, called Portland Hearts of Pine, will begin play by 2025.

In 2024, &quot;Sports Business Journal&quot; ranked Portland as the best minor league sports market in America.

The city is also home to Portland Rugby Football Club, the oldest continually active sports team in the city, founded in 1969. The team competes in Division II of the New England Rugby Football Union.

Other pro and semi-pro sports teams in the city include the Portland Lumberjacks, a bowling team competing in the PBA League, and Portland Rising, a women&#x27;s ultimate team competing in the Premier Ultimate League.

Previously, Portland was home of several minor league ice hockey teams: the Maine Nordiques (NAHL) from 1973 to 1977, the Maine Mariners (AHL) from 1977 to 1992, and the Portland Pirates (AHL) from 1993 to 2016. The Mariners were three-time Calder Cup winners, winning it in 1978, 1979 and 1984, while the Pirates would win the Calder Cup in 1995.

GPS Portland Phoenix soccer teams played in USL League Two from 2009 until 2020.

The Maine Mammoths of the National Arena League played in 2018 and were the first indoor football team to call Portland home. The team suspended operations after one season while it negotiated with local ownership groups, but was ultimately dissolved.

The city was previously home to an Australian rules football team, the Maine Cats. The team played in the United States Australian Football League from 2018 until it merged with the Boston Demons in 2023.

The Portland Sports Complex, located off of Park and Brighton Avenues near I-295 and Deering Oaks park, houses several of the city&#x27;s stadiums and arenas, including:
*Hadlock Field – baseball (Capacity 7,368)
*Fitzpatrick Stadium – football, soccer, lacrosse, field hockey, and outdoor track (Capacity 6,000+ seated)
*Portland Exposition Building – basketball, indoor track, concerts and trade shows (Capacity 3,000)
*Portland Ice Arena – hockey and figure skating (Capacity 400)

Cross Insurance Arena has 6,733 permanent seats following renovation in 2014.

The Portland area has eleven professional golf courses, 124 tennis courts, and 95 playgrounds. There are also over of nature trails.

Portland hosts the Maine Marathon each October.

Bayside Bowl was expanded in 2017 to 20 lanes, including a rooftop deck. It hosted the 2017 PBA League and Elias Cup.

Memorial Stadium is the home of the Deering High School sports teams and is located behind the school.

==Parks and recreation==
The city of Portland includes more than 700 acres of open space and public parks. The city and surrounding communities are linked by 70 miles of trails, both urban and wooded, maintained by the nonprofit Portland Trails. The Portland Parks Conservancy, which was established in 2019, is a nonprofit organization that raises money to support Portland&#x27;s park system. In 2021, the Portland Parks Conservancy funded the establishment of the Portland Youth Corp. The Portland Youth Corp performs work in Portland&#x27;s parks and residents between the ages of 14 and 16 can apply to participate in the paid program.

The city requires organic land care techniques be used on both public and private property. In 2018, the Portland City Council banned the use of synthetic pesticides. In 2020, the city received a $10,000 grant from Hannaford, Stonyfield Farm, and Osborn Organics to pay for soil tests and other start up costs of transitioning the heavily used Fox Field in Kennedy Park to an organic maintenance plan.

Well-known and historic parks include:
*Deering Oaks Park
*Eastern Promenade
*Western Promenade
*Baxter Boulevard
*Lincoln Park
*Congress Square Park
*Payson Park
*East End Beach
*East End Trail
*Bayside Trail
*Kennedy Park
*Riverside Municipal Golf Course
*Fort Sumner Park
*Baxter Woods
*Fore River Sanctuary
*Quarry Run Dog Park
*Riverton Trolley Park
Parks with splash pads and pools:

* Deering Oaks Ravine
* Kiwanis Pool
* Peppermint Park
* Payson Park
* Stone Street Playground

==Government==


The city has adopted a council-manager style government that is detailed in the city charter. The citizens of Portland are represented by a nine-member city council which makes policy, passes ordinances, approves appropriations, appoints the city manager and oversees the municipal government. The city council of nine members is elected by the citizens of Portland. The city has five voting districts, with each district electing a city councilor to represent their neighborhood interests for a three-year term. There are also four members of the city council who are elected at-large. The four at-large members are elected through Proportional ranked-choice voting.

From 1923 until 2011, city councilors chose one of themselves each year to serve as Mayor of Portland, a primarily ceremonial position. On November 2, 2010, Portland voters narrowly approved a measure that allowed them to elect the mayor. On November 8, 2011, former State Senator and candidate for U.S. Congress Michael F. Brennan was elected as mayor. On December 5, 2011, he was sworn in as the first citizen-elected mayor in 88 years (see Portland, Maine mayoral election, 2011). The office of mayor is a four-year position that earns a salary of 150% of the city&#x27;s median income. The current mayor is Mark Dion, who narrowly defeated city councilor Andrew Zarro after 5 ranked choice rounds in the November 2023 election.

A city manager is appointed by the city council. The city manager oversees the daily operations of the city government, appoints the heads of city departments, and prepares annual budgets. The city manager directs all city agencies and departments, and is responsible for the executing laws and policies passed by the city council. The current city manager is Danielle West.

Aside from the main city council, there is also an elected school board for the Portland Public School system. The school board is made up in the same manner of the city council, with five district members, four at-large members and one chairman. There are also three students from the local high schools elected to serve on the board. There are many other boards and committees such as the Planning Committee, Board of Appeals, and Harbor Commission, etc. These committees and boards have limited power in their respective areas of expertise. Members of boards and committees are appointed by city council members.

On November 5, 2013, Portland voters overwhelmingly approved an ordinance to legalize the possession and private use of cannabis for adults, making the city the first municipality in the Eastern United States to do so.

James E. Craig was chief of the Portland Police Department from 2009 to 2011. He would later go on to become the chief of the Cincinnati Police Department and Detroit Police Department.

In the U.S. House of Representatives, Portland is included in Maine&#x27;s 1st congressional district and is currently represented by Democrat Chellie M. Pingree.

Voter registration
==Education==


===High schools===
*Baxter Academy for Technology and Science (charter)
*Casco Bay High School (public-expeditionary)
*Cheverus High School (private)
*Deering High School (public)
*Portland Arts &amp; Technology High School (public-vocational)
*Portland High School (public)
*Waynflete School (private)

===Colleges and universities===
College expansions underway in 2022 at the University of Southern Maine to add a 580-bed dorm, at the University of New England to move the medical school from Biddeford into a new $93 million building on the Portland campus, and at the Northeastern University Roux Institute to build a campus on the site of the former B&amp;M Baked Beans factory have the potential, within two decades, to bring the total college and university students in the city to 15,000, which would be similar to the percentage of students in Boston.
*Institute for Doctoral Studies in the Visual Arts
*Maine College of Art
*Roux Institute 
*University of Maine School of Law
*University of New England
*University of Southern Maine

==Infrastructure==
===Fire department===
The Portland Fire Department (PFD) provides fire protection and emergency medical services to the city of Portland 24/7, 365. Established on March 29, 1768, the PFD is made up of over 230 paid, professional firefighters and operates out of seven fire stations, located throughout the city, in addition to those staffed by &quot;on-call&quot; firefighters on Peaks Island, Great Diamond Island, Cushing Island and Cliff Island. The Portland Fire Department also operates an Airport Division Station at 1001 Westbrook St., at the Portland International Jetport, and a Marine Division Station, located at 54 Commercial St.

===Police===
The Portland Police Department is the largest municipal police department in the state of Maine.

===Hospitals===
Maine Medical Center is the state&#x27;s only Level I trauma center and is the largest hospital in Maine. 

Mercy Hospital, a faith-based institution, is the fourth largest in the state. It completed the first phase of its new campus along the Fore River in 2008.

The formerly-independent Brighton Medical Center (once known as the Osteopathic Hospital) is now owned by Maine Medical Center and is operated as a minor care center under the names Brighton First Care and New England Rehab. In 2010, Maine Medical Center&#x27;s Hannaford Center for Safety, Innovation, and Simulation opened at the Brighton campus. The former Portland General Hospital is now home to the Barron Center nursing facility.

===Wastewater management===
One wastewater management project is named the Bedford Street Sewer Separation, with its goal to &quot;improve the water quality and health of Back Cove by reducing the amount of combined sewer overflows (CSO) that over flow during heavy rain events through the use of sewer separation and water treatment devices.&quot;

===Transportation===
====Roads====
Portland is accessible from I-95 (the Maine Turnpike), I-295, and US 1. U.S. Route 302, a major travel route and scenic highway between Maine and Vermont, has its eastern terminus in Portland. State Routes include SR 9, SR 22, SR 25, SR 26, SR 77, and SR 100. SR 25 Business goes through southwestern Portland.

====Intercity buses and trains====

Amtrak&#x27;s &quot;Downeaster&quot; service offers five daily trains connecting the city&#x27;s station with eight towns and cities to the south, ending at Boston&#x27;s North Station. Trains also go north to Freeport and Brunswick.

Concord Coach Lines bus service connects Portland to 14 other communities in Maine as well as to Boston&#x27;s South Station and Logan Airport. Both the &quot;Downeaster&quot; and the Concord Coach Lines can be found at the Portland Transportation Center on Thompsons Point Road, in the Libbytown neighborhood.

====Local bus service====
Local bus transit is provided by Greater Portland Metro with connections to Biddeford Saco Old Orchard Beach Transit.

====Airports====
Commercial air service is available at the Portland International Jetport (PWM), located in Stroudwater, west of the city&#x27;s downtown district. American, Southwest, JetBlue, Breeze Airways, Sun Country, Delta, and United Airlines service the airport. Direct flights are available to Atlanta, Baltimore, Charlotte, Chicago, Detroit, Denver, Minneapolis, Orlando, Philadelphia, New York, Newark, Raleigh-Durham, Sarasota, and Washington, D.C.

====Water transportation====
The Port of Portland is the second-largest cruise and passenger destination in the state (next to Bar Harbor) and is served by the Ocean Gateway International Marine Passenger Terminal. Ferry service is available year-round to many destinations in Casco Bay. From 2006 to 2009, Bay Ferries operated a high speed ferry called &quot;The Cat&quot; featuring a five-hour trip to Yarmouth, Nova Scotia, for summer passengers and cars. In years past the Scotia Prince Cruises trip took eleven hours. A proposal to replace the defunct Nova Scotia ferry service was rejected in 2013 by the province. From May 15, 2014, until October 2015, the cruise ship ferry Nova Star made daily trips to Yarmouth, Nova Scotia. Due to poor passenger numbers and financial problems, Nova Scotia selected Bay Ferries, the prior operator of &quot;The Cat&quot;, to operate the service starting in 2016, citing the company&#x27;s experience and industry relationships. Nova Star officials pledged a smooth transition to the new operator. The Nova Star was later ordered seized by federal marshals for nonpayment of bills.

Bay Ferries announced on March 24, 2016, the charter of the former Hawaii Superferry boat &quot;HST-2&quot; from the US Navy for the Portland-Yarmouth service for two years. Bay Ferries signed a ten-year deal with Nova Scotia to run the ferry route, which will take about five and a half hours each way. They stated that the boat would be renamed &quot;The Cat&quot; and that service would begin around June 15, after refitting in South Carolina. There is still a dispute as to whether the ferry will be permitted to carry trucks, desired by Nova Scotia businesses but opposed by the City of Portland.

The Casco Bay Lines operate several passenger ferries with dozens of trips every day year-round to the major populated islands of Casco Bay. The service to Peaks Island also provides an auto ferry for most of its schedule.

==Notable people==
==Sister cities==
Portland&#x27;s sister cities are:
* Arkhangelsk, Russia
* Cap-Haïtien, Haiti
* Garissa Township, Kenya
* Mytilene, Greece
* Shinagawa (Tokyo), Japan

==See also==

*Mayor of Portland, Maine
*USS &quot;Portland&quot; (LSD-37)

==Notes==
==References==
;General
*History of Portland from 1632 to 1864 by Wm. Willis (1865)
*History of Portland, Maine (1886)

;Specific
==Further reading==
*John F. Bauman. &quot;Gateway to Vacationland: The Making of Portland Maine&quot; (University of Massachusetts Press: 2012) 285 pages; Explores the socio-economic, political and cultural history of Portland emphasizing the evolution of the city&#x27;s built environment after the fire of 1866.
* Chen, Xiangming, ed. &quot;Confronting Urban Legacy: Rediscovering Hartford and New England&#x27;s Forgotten Cities&quot; (2015) excerpt
*Michael C. Connolly. &quot;Seated by the Sea: The Maritime History of Portland, Maine, and Its Irish Longshoremen&quot; (University Press of Florida; 2010) 280 pages; Focuses on the years 1880 to 1923 in a study of how an influx of Irish immigrant workers transformed the city&#x27;s waterfront.

==External links==

*Portland&#x27;s Downtown District
*Greater Portland Casco Bay Convention and Visitors Bureau
*Old USGS maps of Portland Area.
*1876 Panoramic Birdseye View of Portland by Warner at LOC.
*Guide to the Western Promenade, Portland, Maine, Portlandlandmarks.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="0" end="8" title="Portland, Maine" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q107611061" start="20" end="38" title="List of municipalities in Maine" label="most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="46" end="56" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="60" end="65" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="74" end="78" title="county seat" label="seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q497788" start="82" end="99" title="Cumberland County, Maine" label="Cumberland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232092" start="163" end="179" title="Portland metropolitan area, Maine" label="Greater Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231236" start="415" end="431" title="Port of Portland (Maine)" label="Port of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="477" end="488" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q48444" start="531" end="538" title="Phoenix (mythology)" label="phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q774215" start="664" end="680" title="Isle of Portland" label="Isle of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="703" end="719" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="804" end="815" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q969040" start="964" end="980" title="creative economy" label="creative economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="1005" end="1019" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q318806" start="1076" end="1083" title="Abenaki" label="Abenaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112731" start="1267" end="1285" title="Christopher Levett" label="Christopher Levett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048261" start="1353" end="1362" title="Casco Bay" label="Casco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6351314" start="1380" end="1403" title="Plymouth Council for New England" label="Council for New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443946" start="1418" end="1435" title="Ferdinando Gorges" label="Ferdinando Gorges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="1730" end="1754" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q720766" start="1763" end="1776" title="John Winthrop" label="John Winthrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471510" start="1815" end="1826" title="Fort Levett" label="Fort Levett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863530" start="1864" end="1873" title="List of peninsulas" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="2108" end="2130" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070342" start="2155" end="2178" title="King William&amp;#x27;s War" label="King William&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871051" start="2277" end="2297" title="Battle of Fort Loyal" label="Battle of Fort Loyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q45334" start="2327" end="2346" title="Burning of Falmouth" label="Falmouth was burned"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="2354" end="2364" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="2372" end="2382" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159605" start="2408" end="2419" title="Henry Mowat" label="Henry Mowat"/>
<link wikidata="Q774215" start="2664" end="2680" title="Isle of Portland" label="Isle of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="2698" end="2704" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686420" start="2767" end="2786" title="Embargo Act of 1807" label="Embargo Act of 1807"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="2857" end="2868" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q28206" start="3013" end="3020" title="Augusta, Maine" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736591" start="3228" end="3237" title="Maine law" label="Maine Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232033" start="3286" end="3303" title="Portland Rum Riot" label="Portland Rum Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645718" start="3362" end="3381" title="Grand Trunk Railway" label="Grand Trunk Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="3385" end="3393" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231907" start="3473" end="3489" title="Portland Company" label="Portland Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q123592340" start="3502" end="3513" title="Fore Street (Portland, Maine)" label="Fore Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q93301" start="3569" end="3579" title="locomotive" label="locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q336764" start="3857" end="3865" title="junction (rail)" label="rail hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105177" start="3908" end="3933" title="Portland Terminal Company" label="Portland Terminal Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4024" end="4039" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="4164" end="4171" title="Halifax, Nova Scotia" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q14978" start="4217" end="4227" title="Icebreaker" label="Icebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="4370" end="4381" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889677" start="4470" end="4495" title="Battle of Portland Harbor" label="Battle of Portland Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="4536" end="4545" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555174" start="4551" end="4585" title="1866 Great Fire of Portland, Maine" label="1866 Great Fire of Portland, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="4623" end="4639" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749841" start="4809" end="4826" title="Maine Legislature" label="Maine Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250955" start="4865" end="4872" title="Deering, Maine" label="Deering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491870" start="5089" end="5104" title="Franklin Street (Portland, Maine)" label="Franklin Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875255" start="5120" end="5142" title="Limited-access road" label="limited-access highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749665" start="5363" end="5377" title="The Maine Mall" label="The Maine Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000166" start="5420" end="5434" title="South Portland, Maine" label="South Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109136" start="5616" end="5624" title="Old Port of Portland, Maine" label="Old Port"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5672" end="5679" title="Neighborhoods in Portland, Maine#Bayside" label="Bayside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809448" start="5744" end="5762" title="Whole Foods Market" label="Whole Foods Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q688825" start="5767" end="5784" title="Trader Joe&amp;#x27;s" label="Trader Joe&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q24040130" start="5812" end="5853" title="Baxter Academy for Technology and Science" label="Baxter Academy for Technology and Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q12241709" start="5857" end="5871" title="charter school" label="charter school"/>
<link wikidata="Q125553914" start="5916" end="5928" title="India Street" label="India Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328296" start="5971" end="5982" title="Munjoy Hill" label="Munjoy Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695342" start="6036" end="6056" title="Maine College of Art" label="Maine College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231568" start="6155" end="6172" title="Porteous (store)" label="Porteous Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160823" start="6176" end="6191" title="Congress Street (Portland, Maine)" label="Congress Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244049" start="6275" end="6303" title="University of Southern Maine" label="University of Southern Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215036" start="6403" end="6428" title="University of New England (United States)" label="University of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q856938" start="6473" end="6482" title="Biddeford" label="Biddeford"/>
<link wikidata="Q37548" start="6514" end="6537" title="Northeastern University" label="Northeastern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q121811824" start="6545" end="6559" title="Roux Institute" label="Roux Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q116232111" start="6589" end="6616" title="B&amp;amp;M Baked Beans factory" label="B&amp;amp;M Baked Beans factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12695722" start="6712" end="6724" title="walking tour" label="walking tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="6813" end="6840" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q876470" start="6960" end="6973" title="Gulf of Maine" label="Gulf of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000166" start="7016" end="7030" title="South Portland, Maine" label="South Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q663724" start="7032" end="7041" title="Westbrook, Maine" label="Westbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323206" start="7046" end="7054" title="Falmouth, Maine" label="Falmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="7086" end="7111" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="7113" end="7119" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001587" start="7553" end="7568" title="nor&amp;#x27;easter" label="nor&amp;#x27;easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="8667" end="8682" title="hardiness zones" label="hardiness zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="8767" end="8781" title="Climate change" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="9057" end="9104" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q124795479" start="9253" end="9292" title="2024 Portland flood" label="Portland experienced a record-high tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250964" start="9976" end="9995" title="Deering High School" label="Deering High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801463" start="10084" end="10101" title="Arts District, Portland, Maine" label="the Arts District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988111" start="10217" end="10229" title="East Deering" label="East Deering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330050" start="10255" end="10271" title="Eastern Cemetery" label="Eastern Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599059" start="10273" end="10293" title="Great Diamond Island, Maine" label="Great Diamond Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389668" start="10306" end="10318" title="Kennedy Park (Portland, Maine)" label="Kennedy Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q122571908" start="10320" end="10329" title="Libbytown" label="Libbytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649779" start="10331" end="10352" title="Little Diamond Island" label="Little Diamond Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328296" start="10397" end="10408" title="Munjoy Hill" label="Munjoy Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988111" start="10431" end="10444" title="North Deering" label="North Deering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157897" start="10479" end="10491" title="Peaks Island, Maine" label="Peaks Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985058" start="10531" end="10539" title="West End (Portland, Maine)" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q122588769" start="10545" end="10561" title="Woodfords Corner" label="Woodfords Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="10642" end="10656" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232009" start="10759" end="10780" title="Portland Press Herald" label="Portland Press Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="11110" end="11116" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="11217" end="11235" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11341" end="11346" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11411" end="11427" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11434" end="11449" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11456" end="11461" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11473" end="11484" title="Race (U.S. Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11519" end="11527" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11531" end="11537" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="11751" end="11766" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13126" end="13131" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13139" end="13155" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13163" end="13178" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13186" end="13191" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13199" end="13215" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13228" end="13239" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13275" end="13283" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13287" end="13293" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="13442" end="13448" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="14529" end="14541" title="poverty threshold" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="14887" end="14900" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q112730899" start="14933" end="14954" title="service economy" label="service-based economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="15039" end="15054" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740314" start="15059" end="15067" title="KeyBank" label="Key Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q143435" start="15110" end="15114" title="Unum" label="Unum"/>
<link wikidata="Q109285785" start="15116" end="15124" title="Covetrus" label="Covetrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977310" start="15126" end="15156" title="TruChoice Federal Credit Union" label="TruChoice Federal Credit Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272257" start="15158" end="15170" title="M&amp;amp;T Bank" label="M&amp;amp;T Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196800" start="15191" end="15208" title="Pioneer Telephone" label="Pioneer Telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076311" start="15305" end="15316" title="Scarborough, Maine" label="Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758392" start="15365" end="15370" title="Idexx Laboratories" label="IDEXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038212" start="15375" end="15382" title="WEX Inc." label="WEX Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q116232111" start="15504" end="15531" title="B&amp;amp;M Baked Beans factory" label="B&amp;amp;M Baked Beans factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234623" start="15605" end="15620" title="container train" label="container train"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843574" start="15986" end="15996" title="David Roux" label="David Roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q152513" start="16525" end="16551" title="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow" label="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345564" start="16580" end="16589" title="John Neal" label="John Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q466665" start="16656" end="16673" title="American Renaissance (literature)" label="great renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q107324969" start="16736" end="16746" title="The Yankee" label="The Yankee"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887183" start="16838" end="16854" title="Grenville Mellen" label="Grenville Mellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q971493" start="16856" end="16879" title="Nathaniel Parker Willis" label="Nathaniel Parker Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007988" start="16881" end="16891" title="Seba Smith" label="Seba Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363282" start="16893" end="16914" title="Elizabeth Oakes Smith" label="Elizabeth Oakes Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q955998" start="16916" end="16935" title="Benjamin Paul Akers" label="Benjamin Paul Akers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958750" start="16937" end="16951" title="Charles Codman" label="Charles Codman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491827" start="16953" end="16969" title="Franklin Simmons" label="Franklin Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062744" start="16971" end="16989" title="John Rollin Tilton" label="John Rollin Tilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5665524" start="16995" end="17014" title="Harrison Bird Brown" label="Harrison Bird Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105170" start="17215" end="17237" title="Portland Museum of Art" label="Portland Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232043" start="17239" end="17261" title="Portland Stage Company" label="Portland Stage Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736375" start="17263" end="17300" title="Maine Historical Society" label="Maine Historical Society &amp;amp; Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232012" start="17302" end="17325" title="Portland Public Library" label="Portland Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695342" start="17327" end="17347" title="Maine College of Art" label="Maine College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098174" start="17364" end="17395" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Museum of Maine" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Museum of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820160" start="17397" end="17415" title="Merrill Auditorium" label="Merrill Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434407" start="17421" end="17446" title="Kotzschmar Memorial Organ" label="Kotzschmar Memorial Organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373266" start="17452" end="17479" title="Portland Symphony Orchestra" label="Portland Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767366" start="17533" end="17549" title="Baxter Boulevard" label="Baxter Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839079" start="17557" end="17566" title="Back Cove, Portland, Maine" label="Back Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250967" start="17568" end="17585" title="Deering Oaks" label="Deering Oaks Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330385" start="17591" end="17608" title="Eastern Promenade" label="Eastern Promenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988189" start="17610" end="17627" title="Western Promenade" label="Western Promenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550921" start="17629" end="17641" title="Lincoln Park (Portland, Maine)" label="Lincoln Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156907" start="17741" end="17752" title="Payson Park" label="Payson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873867" start="17772" end="17784" title="Baxter Woods" label="Baxter Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417188" start="17786" end="17804" title="Evergreen Cemetery (Portland, Maine)" label="Evergreen Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987702" start="17806" end="17822" title="Western Cemetery (Portland, Maine)" label="Western Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468137" start="17831" end="17851" title="Fore River Sanctuary" label="Fore River Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q117462008" start="17854" end="17875" title="Thompson&amp;#x27;s Point, Maine" label="Thompson&amp;#x27;s Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052449" start="18109" end="18147" title="Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception (Portland, Maine)" label="Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747234" start="18238" end="18251" title="Ammi B. Young" label="Ammi B. Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073809" start="18265" end="18280" title="United States Marine Hospital (Portland, Maine)" label="Marine Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079418" start="18316" end="18370" title="Office of the Supervising Architect" label="Supervising Architects of the U.S. Treasury Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="18421" end="18434" title="Greek Revival architecture" label="Greek Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722268" start="18470" end="18487" title="Alfred B. Mullett" label="Alfred B. Mullett"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="18497" end="18504" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="18505" end="18511" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="18527" end="18537" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q185600" start="18538" end="18545" title="portico" label="portico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889711" start="18573" end="18599" title="United States Custom House (Portland, Maine)" label="United States Custom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q123592340" start="18603" end="18614" title="Fore Street (Portland, Maine)" label="Fore Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4283171" start="18617" end="18632" title="Franklin Towers" label="Franklin Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q125867375" start="18764" end="18782" title="201 Federal Street" label="201 Federal Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082493" start="18905" end="18936" title="Charles Shipman Payson Building" label="Charles Shipman Payson Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726216" start="18940" end="18953" title="Henry N. Cobb" label="Henry N. Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623279" start="18957" end="18988" title="Pei Cobb Freed &amp;amp; Partners" label="Pei, Cobb, Freed &amp;amp; Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105170" start="18996" end="19018" title="Portland Museum of Art" label="Portland Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715250" start="19061" end="19083" title="McLellan-Sweat Mansion" label="McLellan-Sweat Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805254" start="19209" end="19238" title="Time and Temperature Building" label="Time and Temperature Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906848" start="19257" end="19272" title="Monument Square (Portland, Maine)" label="Monument Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342287" start="19437" end="19448" title="Parking mandates" label="parking-ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q85794417" start="19528" end="19549" title="Press Herald Building" label="Press Herald Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160823" start="19607" end="19622" title="Congress Street (Portland, Maine)" label="Congress Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231900" start="19628" end="19646" title="Portland City Hall (Maine)" label="Portland City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330737" start="19745" end="19771" title="Westin Portland Harborview" label="Westin Portland Harborview"/>
<link wikidata="Q125293531" start="19833" end="19844" title="High Street (Portland, Maine)" label="High Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530288" start="19859" end="19868" title="Todd Webb" label="Todd Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232009" start="20070" end="20117" title="Portland Press Herald" label="The Portland Press Herald/Maine Sunday Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734764" start="20477" end="20500" title="The Forecaster" label="The Portland Forecaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719050" start="20534" end="20545" title="The Bollard" label="The Bollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231975" start="20751" end="20768" title="Portland Magazine" label="Portland Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732744" start="20849" end="20871" title="The Exception Magazine" label="The Exception Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270014" start="20943" end="20955" title="media market" label="media market"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="20993" end="20998" title="radio station" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949419" start="21058" end="21062" title="WFNK" label="WFNK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717688" start="21079" end="21083" title="The Big JAB" label="WJJB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956183" start="21094" end="21098" title="WTHT" label="WTHT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946957" start="21110" end="21114" title="WBACH" label="WBQW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950504" start="21128" end="21132" title="WHXR" label="WHXR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950328" start="21141" end="21145" title="WHOM" label="WHOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="21147" end="21165" title="Adult contemporary music" label="Adult Contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951097" start="21168" end="21172" title="WJBQ" label="WJBQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="21174" end="21180" title="Top 40" label="Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947907" start="21183" end="21187" title="WCLZ" label="WCLZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947267" start="21215" end="21219" title="WBLM" label="WBLM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958111" start="21236" end="21240" title="WYNZ" label="WYNZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948238" start="21265" end="21269" title="WCYY" label="WCYY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037693" start="21271" end="21282" title="Modern rock" label="Modern Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953004" start="21285" end="21289" title="WMPG" label="WMPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244049" start="21363" end="21391" title="University of Southern Maine" label="University of Southern Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736418" start="21397" end="21430" title="Maine Public Broadcasting Network" label="Maine Public Broadcasting Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948087" start="21519" end="21525" title="WCSH" label="WCSH 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="21527" end="21530" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953108" start="21533" end="21539" title="WMTW (TV)" label="WMTW 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="21541" end="21544" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509872" start="21547" end="21554" title="WGME-TV" label="WGME 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="21556" end="21559" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954254" start="21562" end="21569" title="WPFO" label="WPFO 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="21571" end="21574" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954378" start="21577" end="21584" title="WIPL" label="WIPL 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q210500" start="21586" end="21589" title="Ion Television" label="ION"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954570" start="21596" end="21603" title="WPXT" label="WPXT 51"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="21605" end="21611" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148579" start="21613" end="21624" title="MyNetworkTV" label="MyNetworkTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="21646" end="21649" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q28206" start="21754" end="21761" title="Augusta, Maine" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q856938" start="21785" end="21794" title="Biddeford, Maine" label="Biddeford"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376910" start="21886" end="21903" title="Eastern Argus" label="The Pleasure Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376910" start="21917" end="21930" title="Eastern Argus" label="Eastern Argus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416602" start="21932" end="21947" title="Evening Express (Portland)" label="Evening Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q115801636" start="21961" end="21977" title="Casco Bay Weekly" label="Casco Bay Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757814" start="21990" end="22012" title="The Portland Daily Sun" label="The Portland Daily Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756161" start="22023" end="22055" title="Portland Phoenix" label="&amp;quot;The Portland Phoenix&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="22287" end="22303" title="U.S. Coast Guard" label="U.S. Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471234" start="22437" end="22448" title="Fort Gorges" label="Fort Gorges"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801463" start="23019" end="23032" title="Arts District (Portland, Maine)" label="Arts District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468142" start="23764" end="23775" title="Fore Street (restaurant)" label="Fore Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311518" start="23777" end="23784" title="Duckfat" label="Duckfat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878797" start="23786" end="23804" title="Becky&amp;#x27;s Diner" label="Becky&amp;#x27;s Diner"/>
<link wikidata="Q114315735" start="23810" end="23829" title="The Great Lost Bear" label="The Great Lost Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q257943" start="24020" end="24031" title="Rachael Ray" label="Rachael Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435969" start="24039" end="24051" title="Food Network" label="Food Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540356" start="24063" end="24072" title="$40 a Day" label="$40 a Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317589" start="24084" end="24098" title="Travel Channel" label="Travel Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521006" start="24112" end="24123" title="Man v. Food" label="Man v. Food"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24141" end="24174" title="Anthony Bourdain: No Reservations" label="Anthony Bourdain: No Reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940946" start="24182" end="24193" title="Bon Appetit" label="Bon Appetit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487333" start="24367" end="24381" title="microbrewery" label="microbreweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487333" start="24386" end="24393" title="Microbrewery" label="brewpub"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203709" start="24417" end="24444" title="D. L. Geary Brewing Company" label="D. L. Geary Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609724" start="24446" end="24482" title="Gritty McDuff&amp;#x27;s Brewing Company" label="Gritty McDuff&amp;#x27;s Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498156" start="24484" end="24508" title="Shipyard Brewing Company" label="Shipyard Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730281" start="24514" end="24538" title="Allagash Brewing Company" label="Allagash Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781818" start="24669" end="24680" title="Sebago Lake" label="Sebago Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="24826" end="24857" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231920" start="24914" end="24943" title="Portland Farmers&amp;#x27; Market (Maine)" label="Portland Farmers&amp;#x27; Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129746" start="25076" end="25099" title="The Maine Girls&amp;#x27; Academy" label="The Maine Girls Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q84598874" start="25364" end="25374" title="Toni Fiore" label="Toni Fiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q89840562" start="25558" end="25575" title="Avery Yale Kamila" label="Avery Yale Kamila"/>
<link wikidata="Q85852394" start="25779" end="25796" title="vegan school meal" label="vegan school meal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231920" start="26855" end="26878" title="Portland Farmers&amp;#x27; Market (Maine)" label="Portland Farmers Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="27027" end="27038" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757485" start="27195" end="27212" title="The Pleasure Boat" label="The Pleasure Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q61729985" start="27929" end="27941" title="Little Italy" label="Little Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740614" start="28002" end="28014" title="Amato&amp;#x27;s" label="Amato&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004038" start="28092" end="28114" title="Maine Italian sandwich" label="Maine Italian sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q110239776" start="28198" end="28220" title="The Village Restaurant" label="The Village Restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28332" end="28358" title="Miccuci&amp;#x27;s Grocery Co." label="Miccuci&amp;#x27;s Grocery Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q97358080" start="28457" end="28472" title="The Hollow Reed" label="The Hollow Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q114315735" start="28596" end="28615" title="The Great Lost Bear" label="The Great Lost Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q125912297" start="28626" end="28639" title="Forest Avenue" label="Forest Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q122767012" start="28713" end="28740" title="DiMillo&amp;#x27;s On the Water" label="DiMillo&amp;#x27;s on the Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q122761116" start="28796" end="28806" title="Long Wharf (Portland, Maine)" label="Long Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609724" start="28821" end="28841" title="Gritty McDuff&amp;#x27;s Brewing Company" label="Gritty McDuff&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="28936" end="28947" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407693" start="28964" end="28982" title="Marcy&amp;#x27;s Diner" label="Marcy&amp;#x27;s Diner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878797" start="29159" end="29177" title="Becky&amp;#x27;s Diner" label="Becky&amp;#x27;s Diner"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="29361" end="29373" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="29388" end="29400" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379907" start="29415" end="29429" title="Green Elephant Vegetarian Bistro" label="Green Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q125635532" start="29523" end="29532" title="ZU Bakery" label="ZU Bakery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129536" start="29565" end="29576" title="James Beard Foundation Award" label="James Beard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29637" end="29653" title="Norimoto Bakery," label="Norimoto Bakery,"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054218" start="29799" end="29816" title="Portland Sea Dogs" label="Portland Sea Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880336" start="29822" end="29830" title="Double-A (baseball)" label="Double-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q31532" start="29831" end="29840" title="farm team" label="farm team"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="29848" end="29862" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638002" start="29872" end="29885" title="Hadlock Field" label="Hadlock Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q935157" start="29891" end="29904" title="Maine Celtics" label="Maine Celtics"/>
<link wikidata="Q842793" start="29910" end="29922" title="NBA G League" label="NBA G League"/>
<link wikidata="Q131371" start="29940" end="29954" title="Boston Celtics" label="Boston Celtics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231919" start="29968" end="29996" title="Portland Exposition Building" label="Portland Exposition Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q30645477" start="30002" end="30016" title="Maine Mariners (ECHL)" label="Maine Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="30018" end="30022" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="30041" end="30054" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q145530" start="30064" end="30085" title="Cross Insurance Arena" label="Cross Insurance Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q30636616" start="30089" end="30103" title="USL League One" label="USL League One"/>
<link wikidata="Q125895266" start="30166" end="30189" title="Portland Hearts of Pine" label="Portland Hearts of Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977307" start="30232" end="30255" title="Sports Business Journal" label="Sports Business Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232030" start="30355" end="30383" title="Portland Rugby Football Club (Maine)" label="Portland Rugby Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007366" start="30497" end="30529" title="New England Rugby Football Union" label="New England Rugby Football Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386189" start="30646" end="30656" title="PBA League" label="PBA League"/>
<link wikidata="Q96419192" start="30662" end="30677" title="Portland Rising" label="Portland Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q244700" start="30694" end="30702" title="Ultimate frisbee" label="ultimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q65051532" start="30725" end="30748" title="Premier Ultimate League" label="Premier Ultimate League"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="30805" end="30815" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538640" start="30827" end="30842" title="Maine Nordiques" label="Maine Nordiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000391" start="30844" end="30848" title="North American Hockey League (1973–77)" label="NAHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q739899" start="30873" end="30887" title="Maine Mariners (AHL)" label="Maine Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="30889" end="30892" title="American Hockey League" label="AHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543744" start="30921" end="30937" title="Portland Pirates" label="Portland Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q577288" start="30992" end="31002" title="Calder Cup" label="Calder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514337" start="31100" end="31120" title="GPS Portland Phoenix" label="GPS Portland Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q976491" start="31144" end="31158" title="USL League Two" label="USL League Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q48843720" start="31186" end="31200" title="Maine Mammoths" label="Maine Mammoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129137" start="31208" end="31229" title="National Arena League" label="National Arena League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358545" start="31264" end="31279" title="Indoor American football" label="indoor football"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="31470" end="31495" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian rules football"/>
<link wikidata="Q60787149" start="31506" end="31516" title="Maine Cats" label="Maine Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550733" start="31541" end="31581" title="United States Australian Football League" label="United States Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952926" start="31617" end="31630" title="Boston Demons" label="Boston Demons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436480" start="31716" end="31721" title="Interstate 295 (Maine)" label="I-295"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250967" start="31726" end="31738" title="Deering Oaks" label="Deering Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638002" start="31812" end="31825" title="Hadlock Field" label="Hadlock Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455675" start="31855" end="31874" title="Fitzpatrick Stadium" label="Fitzpatrick Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231919" start="31963" end="31991" title="Portland Exposition Building" label="Portland Exposition Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="32247" end="32258" title="golf course" label="golf course"/>
<link wikidata="Q11875349" start="32287" end="32297" title="playground" label="playground"/>
<link wikidata="Q628179" start="32330" end="32335" title="trail" label="trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018163" start="32358" end="32372" title="Maine Marathon" label="Maine Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815517" start="32507" end="32523" title="Memorial Stadium (Maine)" label="Memorial Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146716" start="33271" end="33288" title="Organic lawn management" label="organic land care"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648760" start="33468" end="33477" title="Hannaford Brothers Company" label="Hannaford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499743" start="33479" end="33494" title="Stonyfield Farm" label="Stonyfield Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250967" start="33696" end="33713" title="Deering Oaks" label="Deering Oaks Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330385" start="33715" end="33732" title="Eastern Promenade" label="Eastern Promenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988189" start="33734" end="33751" title="Western Promenade" label="Western Promenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767366" start="33753" end="33769" title="Baxter Boulevard" label="Baxter Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550921" start="33771" end="33783" title="Lincoln Park (Portland, Maine)" label="Lincoln Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q49479780" start="33785" end="33805" title="Congress Square Park" label="Congress Square Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156907" start="33807" end="33818" title="Payson Park" label="Payson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328296" start="33820" end="33834" title="East End Beach" label="East End Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389668" start="33867" end="33879" title="Kennedy Park (Portland, Maine)" label="Kennedy Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338546" start="33881" end="33912" title="Riverside Municipal Golf Course" label="Riverside Municipal Golf Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q22059405" start="33914" end="33930" title="Fort Sumner (Maine)" label="Fort Sumner Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873867" start="33932" end="33944" title="Baxter Woods" label="Baxter Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468137" start="33946" end="33966" title="Fore River Sanctuary" label="Fore River Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34048" end="34067" title="Deering Oaks#Deering Oaks Ravine" label="Deering Oaks Ravine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156907" start="34103" end="34114" title="Payson Park" label="Payson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="34182" end="34214" title="council-manager government" label="council-manager style government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231848" start="34311" end="34323" title="Portland, Maine City Council" label="city council"/>
<link wikidata="Q708492" start="34597" end="34606" title="councillor" label="councilor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="34736" end="34744" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="34792" end="34825" title="Single transferable voting" label="Proportional ranked-choice voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q109326345" start="34912" end="34929" title="Mayor of Portland, Maine" label="Mayor of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830157" start="35141" end="35159" title="Michael F. Brennan" label="Michael F. Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231849" start="35271" end="35309" title="Portland, Maine mayoral election, 2011" label="Portland, Maine mayoral election, 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q17402858" start="35439" end="35448" title="Mark Dion (politician)" label="Mark Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q696776" start="35563" end="35575" title="city manager" label="city manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232016" start="36017" end="36046" title="Portland Public Schools (Maine)" label="Portland Public School system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="36674" end="36682" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29033911" start="36774" end="36788" title="James Craig (police chief)" label="James E. Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972711" start="36900" end="36928" title="Cincinnati Police Department" label="Cincinnati Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024788" start="36933" end="36958" title="Detroit Police Department" label="Detroit Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="36968" end="36997" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736276" start="37023" end="37062" title="Maine&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district" label="Maine&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="37095" end="37103" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q457243" start="37104" end="37122" title="Chellie Pingree" label="Chellie M. Pingree"/>
<link wikidata="Q24040130" start="37180" end="37221" title="Baxter Academy for Technology and Science" label="Baxter Academy for Technology and Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048262" start="37233" end="37254" title="Casco Bay High School" label="Casco Bay High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094331" start="37279" end="37299" title="Cheverus High School" label="Cheverus High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250964" start="37311" end="37330" title="Deering High School" label="Deering High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q96399816" start="37341" end="37383" title="Portland Arts &amp;amp; Technology High School" label="Portland Arts &amp;amp; Technology High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231948" start="37405" end="37425" title="Portland High School, Portland, Maine" label="Portland High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976833" start="37436" end="37452" title="Waynflete School" label="Waynflete School"/>
<link wikidata="Q116232111" start="37816" end="37843" title="B&amp;amp;M Baked Beans factory" label="B&amp;amp;M Baked Beans factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263394" start="38023" end="38072" title="Institute for Doctoral Studies in the Visual Arts" label="Institute for Doctoral Studies in the Visual Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695342" start="38074" end="38094" title="Maine College of Art" label="Maine College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q121811824" start="38096" end="38110" title="Roux Institute" label="Roux Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895653" start="38113" end="38146" title="University of Maine School of Law" label="University of Maine School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215036" start="38148" end="38173" title="University of New England (United States)" label="University of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244049" start="38175" end="38203" title="University of Southern Maine" label="University of Southern Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41399" start="38290" end="38305" title="fire protection" label="fire protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q860447" start="38310" end="38336" title="emergency medical services" label="emergency medical services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157897" start="38604" end="38616" title="Peaks Island, Maine" label="Peaks Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599059" start="38618" end="38638" title="Great Diamond Island, Maine" label="Great Diamond Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196194" start="38640" end="38654" title="Cushing Island, Maine" label="Cushing Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132637" start="38659" end="38671" title="Cliff Island, Maine" label="Cliff Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432470" start="38774" end="38804" title="Portland International Jetport" label="Portland International Jetport"/>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="38884" end="38910" title="Portland Maine Police Department" label="Portland Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736406" start="38994" end="39014" title="Maine Medical Center" label="Maine Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473971" start="39048" end="39061" title="trauma center" label="trauma center"/>
<link wikidata="Q15253100" start="39102" end="39116" title="Mercy Hospital (Portland, Maine)" label="Mercy Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468134" start="39238" end="39248" title="Fore River (Maine)" label="Fore River"/>
<link wikidata="Q361472" start="39904" end="39927" title="combined sewer overflow" label="combined sewer overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058719" start="40015" end="40030" title="water treatment" label="water treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436475" start="40110" end="40114" title="Interstate 95 in Maine" label="I-95"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436475" start="40120" end="40134" title="Maine Turnpike" label="Maine Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436480" start="40137" end="40142" title="Interstate 295 (Maine)" label="I-295"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436487" start="40148" end="40152" title="U.S. Route 1 in Maine" label="US 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411062" start="40154" end="40168" title="U.S. Route 302" label="U.S. Route 302"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="40228" end="40235" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436254" start="40296" end="40300" title="Maine State Route 9" label="SR 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436279" start="40302" end="40307" title="Maine State Route 22" label="SR 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436281" start="40309" end="40314" title="Maine State Route 25" label="SR 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436288" start="40316" end="40321" title="Maine State Route 26" label="SR 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436315" start="40323" end="40328" title="Maine State Route 77" label="SR 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436338" start="40334" end="40340" title="Maine State Route 100" label="SR 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436281" start="40342" end="40356" title="Maine State Route 25 Business" label="SR 25 Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="40430" end="40436" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q657613" start="40450" end="40460" title="Downeaster (train)" label="Downeaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232062" start="40527" end="40534" title="Portland Transportation Center" label="station"/>
<link wikidata="Q54454" start="40601" end="40614" title="North Station" label="North Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453617" start="40640" end="40648" title="Freeport, Maine" label="Freeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q518466" start="40653" end="40662" title="Brunswick, Maine" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158782" start="40665" end="40684" title="Concord Coach Lines" label="Concord Coach Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q54453" start="40776" end="40789" title="South Station" label="South Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q671475" start="40794" end="40807" title="Logan International Airport" label="Logan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232062" start="40889" end="40919" title="Portland Transportation Center" label="Portland Transportation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600725" start="41036" end="41058" title="Greater Portland Metro Bus" label="Greater Portland Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904035" start="41079" end="41119" title="Biddeford Saco Old Orchard Beach Transit" label="Biddeford Saco Old Orchard Beach Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432470" start="41182" end="41212" title="Portland International Jetport" label="Portland International Jetport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231236" start="41618" end="41634" title="Port of Portland (Maine)" label="Port of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672375" start="41712" end="41722" title="Bar Harbor, Maine" label="Bar Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076000" start="41745" end="41798" title="Ocean Gateway International Marine Passenger Terminal" label="Ocean Gateway International Marine Passenger Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048261" start="41862" end="41871" title="Casco Bay" label="Casco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q812067" start="41892" end="41903" title="Bay Ferries" label="Bay Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040341" start="41945" end="41952" title="HSC The Cat" label="The Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q864688" start="41989" end="41997" title="Yarmouth, Nova Scotia" label="Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12068537" start="42062" end="42083" title="Scotia Prince Cruises" label="Scotia Prince Cruises"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001044" start="42267" end="42276" title="MV Nova Star" label="Nova Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684421" start="42778" end="42795" title="Hawaii Superferry" label="Hawaii Superferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q56839" start="42807" end="42812" title="HST-2" label="HST-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="42828" end="42835" title="US Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048264" start="43318" end="43333" title="Casco Bay Lines" label="Casco Bay Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157897" start="43470" end="43482" title="Peaks Island" label="Peaks Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="43591" end="43604" title="Sister city" label="sister cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851" start="43612" end="43623" title="Arkhangelsk" label="Arkhangelsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q216835" start="43634" end="43645" title="Cap-Haïtien" label="Cap-Haïtien"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085899" start="43655" end="43671" title="Garissa Township Constituency" label="Garissa Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q189059" start="43681" end="43689" title="Mytilene" label="Mytilene"/>
<link wikidata="Q233495" start="43700" end="43717" title="Shinagawa" label="Shinagawa (Tokyo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q109326345" start="43741" end="43765" title="Mayor of Portland, Maine" label="Mayor of Portland, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873037" start="43767" end="43800" title="USS Portland (LSD-37)" label="USS &amp;quot;Portland&amp;quot; (LSD-37)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="44635" end="44644" title="immigrant" label="immigrant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44593" wikidata="Q196672" url="?curid=44593" title="Rib">
<text>In vertebrate anatomy, ribs () are the long curved bones which form the rib cage, part of the axial skeleton. In most tetrapods, ribs surround the thoracic cavity, enabling the lungs to expand and thus facilitate breathing by expanding the thoracic cavity. They serve to protect the lungs, heart, and other vital organs of the thorax. In some animals, especially snakes, ribs may provide support and protection for the entire body.

==Human anatomy==
===Rib details===
Human ribs are flat bones that form part of the rib cage to help protect internal organs. Humans usually have 24 ribs, in 12 pairs. 1 in 500 people have an extra rib known as a cervical rib. People may have a cervical rib on the right, left or both sides. All are attached at the back to the thoracic vertebrae and are numbered from 1 to 12 according to the vertebrae to which they attach. The first rib is attached to thoracic vertebra 1 (T1). At the front of the body, most of the ribs are joined by costal cartilage to the sternum. Ribs connect to vertebrae at the costovertebral joints.

The parts of a rib includes the head, neck, body (or &quot;shaft&quot;), tubercle, and angle. 

The head of the rib lies next to a vertebra. The ribs connect to the vertebrae with two costovertebral joints, one on the head and one on the neck. The head of the rib has a superior and an inferior articulating region, separated by a crest. These articulate with the superior and inferior costal facets on the connecting vertebrae. The crest gives attachment to the intra-articulate ligament that joins the rib to the vertebra of the same number, at the intervertebral disc. Another ligament, the radiate ligament joins the head of the rib to both the body of the upper vertebra and to the body of the lower vertebra. The smaller middle part of the ligament connects to the intervertebral disc. This plane joint is known as the articulation of the head of the rib.

The other costovertebral joint is that between the tubercle on the neck and the transverse process of the corresponding thoracic vertebra, known as the costotransverse joint. The superior costotransverse ligament attaches from the non-articular facet of the tubercle to the transverse process of the vertebra.

The neck of the rib is a flattened part that extends laterally from the head. The neck is about 3 cm long. Its anterior surface is flat and smooth, whilst its posterior is perforated by numerous foramina and its surface rough, to give attachment to the ligament of the neck. Its upper border presents a rough crest (&quot;crista colli costae&quot;) for the attachment of the anterior costotransverse ligament; its lower border is rounded. 

A tubercle of rib on the posterior surface of the neck of the rib, has two facets (surfaces) one articulating and one non-articulating. The articular facet, is small and oval and is the lower and more medial of the two, and connects to the transverse costal facet on the thoracic vertebra of the same rib number. The transverse costal facet is on the end of the transverse process of the lower of the two vertebrae to which the head is connected. The non-articular portion is a rough elevation and affords attachment to the ligament of the tubercle. The tubercle is much more prominent in the upper ribs than in the lower ribs.
===Rib cage===
The first seven sets of ribs, known as &quot;true ribs&quot;, are attached to the sternum by the costal cartilages. The first rib is unique and easier to distinguish than other ribs. It is a short, flat, C-shaped bone, and attaches to the manubrium. The vertebral attachment can be found just below the neck at the first thoracic vertebra, and the majority of this bone can be found above the level of the clavicle. Ribs 2 through 7 then become longer and less curved as they progress downwards. The following five sets are known as &quot;false ribs&quot;, three of these sharing a common cartilaginous connection to the sternum, while the last two (eleventh and twelfth ribs) are termed floating ribs. They are attached to the vertebrae only, and not to the sternum or cartilage coming off of the sternum. 

In general, human ribs increase in length from ribs 1 through 7 and decrease in length again through rib 12. Along with this change in size, the ribs become progressively oblique (slanted) from ribs 1 through 9, then less slanted through rib 12. 

The rib cage is separated from the lower abdomen by the thoracic diaphragm which controls breathing. When the diaphragm contracts, the thoracic cavity is expanded, reducing intra-thoracic pressure and drawing air into the lungs. This happens through one of two actions (or a mix of the two): when the lower ribs the diaphragm connects to are stabilized by muscles and the central tendon is mobile, when the muscle contracts the central tendon is drawn down, compressing the cavity underneath and expanding the thoracic cavity downward. When the central tendon is stabilized and the lower ribs are mobile, a contraction of the diaphragm elevates the ribs, which works in conjunction with other muscles to expand the thoracic indent upward.

==Development==
Early in the developing embryo, somites form and soon subdivide into three mesodermal components – the myotome, dermatome, and the sclerotome. The vertebrae and ribs develop from the sclerotomes.

During the fourth week (fertilization age) &quot;costal processes&quot; have formed on the vertebral bodies. These processes are small, lateral protrusions of mesenchyme that develop in association with the vertebral arches. During the fifth week the costal processes on the thoracic vertebrae become longer to form the ribs. In the sixth week, the costovertebral joints begin to develop and separate the ribs from the vertebrae. The first seven pairs of ribs, the true ribs join at the front to the sternal bars. By the fetal stage the sternal bars have completely fused.

The ribs begin as cartilage that later ossifies – a process called endochondral ossification. Primary ossification centers are located near the angle of each rib, and ossification continues in the direction away from the head and neck. During adolescence secondary ossification centers are formed in the tubercles and heads of the ribs.

==Other animals==
In jawed fish, there are often two sets of ribs attached to the vertebral column. One set, the dorsal ribs, are found in the dividing septum between the upper and lower parts of the main muscle segments, projecting roughly sideways from the vertebral column. The second set, the ventral ribs arise from the vertebral column just below the dorsal ribs, and enclose the lower body, often joining at the tips. Not all species possess both types of rib, with the dorsal ribs being most commonly absent. Sharks, for example, have no ventral ribs, and only very short dorsal ribs. In some teleosts, there may be additional rib-like bones within the muscle mass.

Tetrapods, however, only ever have a single set of ribs which are probably homologous with the dorsal ribs of fishes. In the earlier choanates, every vertebra bore a pair of ribs, although those on the thoracic vertebrae are typically the longest. The sacral ribs were stout and short, since they formed part of the pelvis, connecting the backbone to the hip bones.

In most true tetrapods, many of these early ribs have been lost, and in living amphibians and reptiles, there is great variation in rib structure and number. For example, turtles have only eight pairs of ribs, which are developed into a bony or cartilaginous carapace and plastron, while snakes have numerous ribs running along the full length of their trunk. Frogs typically have no ribs, aside from a sacral pair, which form part of the pelvis.

In birds, ribs are present as distinct bones only on the thoracic region, although small fused ribs are present on the cervical vertebrae. The thoracic ribs of birds possess a wide projection to the rear; this uncinate process is an attachment for the shoulder muscles. 
Usually dogs have 26 ribs.
Mammals usually also only have distinct ribs on the thoracic vertebra, although fixed cervical ribs are also present in monotremes. In therian mammals, the cervical and lumbar ribs are found only as tiny remnants fused to the vertebrae, where they are referred to as transverse processes. In general, the structure and number of the true ribs in humans is similar to that in other mammals. Unlike reptiles, caudal ribs are never found in mammals.

==Ribs as food==

Ribs as food are widely used from many animals. The ribs are the less meaty part of the meat chop and they are often cooked as part of a slab; five or more is known as a &quot;rack&quot;, as in a rack of lamb. Short ribs are ribs of beef either served singly or several as a &quot;plate&quot;. A rib steak from beef is a popular choice used in many cuisines. Pork ribs, including spare ribs are popular in European and Asian cuisine.

==Animated images==
==See also==

* Anatomical terms of location
* Bone terminology
* Rib fracture
* Rib removal

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="3" end="13" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="14" end="21" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q196672" start="23" end="27" title="Rib" label="ribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="51" end="55" title="bone" label="bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576226" start="72" end="80" title="rib cage" label="rib cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377526" start="94" end="108" title="axial skeleton" label="axial skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19159" start="118" end="126" title="tetrapod" label="tetrapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q994554" start="147" end="162" title="thoracic cavity" label="thoracic cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9530" start="213" end="222" title="breathing" label="breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="283" end="287" title="lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="290" end="295" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q712378" start="307" end="318" title="vital organ" label="vital organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="363" end="368" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q928150" start="484" end="493" title="flat bone" label="flat bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576226" start="517" end="525" title="rib cage" label="rib cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q964519" start="646" end="658" title="cervical rib" label="cervical rib"/>
<link wikidata="Q578786" start="761" end="779" title="thoracic vertebrae" label="thoracic vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357062" start="971" end="987" title="costal cartilage" label="costal cartilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8481" start="995" end="1002" title="sternum" label="sternum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624368" start="1037" end="1058" title="costovertebral joints" label="costovertebral joints"/>
<link wikidata="Q971379" start="1425" end="1433" title="superior costal facet" label="superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003242" start="1438" end="1459" title="inferior costal facet" label="inferior costal facet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058287" start="1524" end="1549" title="intra-articular ligament of head of rib" label="intra-articulate ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q502781" start="1612" end="1631" title="intervertebral disc" label="intervertebral disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q39888" start="1641" end="1649" title="ligament" label="ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280322" start="1655" end="1671" title="radiate ligament of head of rib" label="radiate ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201013" start="1858" end="1869" title="plane joint" label="plane joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800963" start="1886" end="1921" title="articulation of head of rib" label="articulation of the head of the rib"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476958" start="2076" end="2097" title="costotransverse joint" label="costotransverse joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643597" start="2103" end="2136" title="superior costotransverse ligament" label="superior costotransverse ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175184" start="2619" end="2643" title="costotransverse ligament" label="costotransverse ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q572915" start="2916" end="2939" title="transverse costal facet" label="transverse costal facet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576226" start="3364" end="3373" title="true ribs" label="true ribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8481" start="3401" end="3408" title="sternum" label="sternum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357062" start="3416" end="3432" title="costal cartilage" label="costal cartilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q9633" start="3622" end="3626" title="neck" label="neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q16343" start="3725" end="3733" title="clavicle" label="clavicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576226" start="3858" end="3868" title="false ribs" label="false ribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576226" start="4007" end="4019" title="floating rib" label="floating rib"/>
<link wikidata="Q180323" start="4047" end="4056" title="vertebrae" label="vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q9654" start="4432" end="4450" title="thoracic diaphragm" label="thoracic diaphragm"/>
<link wikidata="Q964797" start="5141" end="5162" title="human embryogenesis" label="the developing embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427600" start="5164" end="5170" title="somite" label="somite"/>
<link wikidata="Q323438" start="5207" end="5215" title="mesoderm" label="mesoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933100" start="5235" end="5242" title="myotome" label="myotome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427600" start="5244" end="5253" title="Somite" label="dermatome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427600" start="5263" end="5273" title="sclerotome" label="sclerotome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666904" start="5353" end="5370" title="Human fertilisation" label="fertilization age"/>
<link wikidata="Q32838" start="5488" end="5498" title="mesenchyme" label="mesenchyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q8481" start="5829" end="5836" title="sternum" label="sternal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="5850" end="5855" title="fetus" label="fetal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121544" start="5942" end="5950" title="ossification" label="ossifies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312710" start="5970" end="5995" title="endochondral ossification" label="endochondral ossification"/>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="6146" end="6157" title="adolescence" label="adolescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q26214" start="6262" end="6272" title="jawed fish" label="jawed fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="6758" end="6763" title="Shark" label="Shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q204861" start="6842" end="6849" title="teleost" label="teleost"/>
<link wikidata="Q19159" start="6916" end="6924" title="Tetrapod" label="Tetrapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q224180" start="6991" end="7001" title="homology (biology)" label="homologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209254" start="7049" end="7058" title="tetrapodomorph" label="choanates"/>
<link wikidata="Q578786" start="7118" end="7135" title="thoracic vertebra" label="thoracic vertebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q233316" start="7168" end="7179" title="sacral vertebrae" label="sacral ribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q713102" start="7232" end="7238" title="pelvis" label="pelvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356933" start="7271" end="7279" title="hip bone" label="hip bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="7362" end="7371" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="7377" end="7384" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q223044" start="7454" end="7460" title="turtle" label="turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q666115" start="7542" end="7550" title="carapace" label="carapace"/>
<link wikidata="Q13486671" start="7555" end="7563" title="plastron" label="plastron"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="7643" end="7647" title="Frog" label="Frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q900457" start="7850" end="7867" title="cervical vertebra" label="cervical vertebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q21790" start="8149" end="8158" title="monotreme" label="monotreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q130942" start="8164" end="8170" title="theria" label="theria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131319751" start="8436" end="8442" title="caudal vertebrae" label="caudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322430" start="8495" end="8507" title="Ribs (food)" label="Ribs as food"/>
<link wikidata="Q33691" start="8583" end="8592" title="meat chop" label="meat chop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279779" start="8691" end="8703" title="rack of lamb" label="rack of lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502086" start="8705" end="8715" title="Short ribs" label="Short ribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335923" start="8791" end="8800" title="rib steak" label="rib steak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778821" start="8844" end="8851" title="cuisine" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526944" start="8854" end="8862" title="Pork rib" label="Pork rib"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967823" start="8875" end="8885" title="spare ribs" label="spare ribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q579316" start="8901" end="8909" title="European cuisine" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q728206" start="8914" end="8927" title="Asian cuisine" label="Asian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="8966" end="8994" title="Anatomical terms of location" label="Anatomical terms of location"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8997" end="9013" title="Bone#Terminology" label="Bone terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974017" start="9016" end="9028" title="Rib fracture" label="Rib fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998440" start="9031" end="9042" title="Rib removal" label="Rib removal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44594" wikidata="Q772011" url="?curid=44594" title="Sea butterfly">
<text>The Thecosomata (collective/plural: &quot;thecosomes&quot;, meaning &quot;case/shell-body&quot;), or sea butterflies, are a taxonomic suborder of small, pelagic, free-swimming sea snails known as holoplanktonic opisthobranch gastropod mollusks, in the order Pteropoda (also included within the informal group Opisthobranchia). Most pteropods have some form of calcified shell, although it is often very light, even translucent.

The sea butterflies include some of the world&#x27;s most abundant gastropod species; as their large numbers are an essential part of the ocean food chain, they are a significant contributor to the oceanic carbon cycle. 

==Morphology==
Unlike other sea snails, or even land snails, sea butterflies float and swim freely through the ocean, traveling along with the currents. This has led to a number of evolutionary adaptations in their bodies, including complete or near-complete loss of the shell and the gill in several families. Their gastropodal foot has also taken the form of two wing-like lobes, or &quot;parapodia&quot;, which propel the animal through the sea by slow flapping movements.
Most thecosomes have some form of calcified shell, although often very light.
They are rather difficult to see, since their shell, if present, is mostly transparent, fragile, and usually tiny (less than 1 cm in length). Although their shell may be so fine as to be transparent, it is nevertheless calcareous, and an important part of the oceanic calcium cycle.
Their shells are bilaterally symmetric and can vary widely in shape, ranging from coiled or needle-like to triangular or globular.

The shell is present in all life cycle stages of the Cavolinioidea (euthecosomata). In the Cymbulioidea (pseudothecosomata), adult Peraclididae also bear shells; the Cymbuliidae shed their larval shells and develop a cartilaginous &quot;pseudoconch&quot; in adulthood. Only the Desmopteridae lack any rigid covering when mature.

== Behavior and distribution ==
=== Swimming kinematics ===
Molluscan pteropods develop their feet into a pair of wing-like parapodia in the growing phase. These &#x27;wings&#x27; are highly flexible, as the orientation of the muscles is different, and they have a hydrostatic skeleton filled with a pressurized fluid. Thus, the high bending-angle supports the parapodia to diminish the drag forces generated by the classic &quot;clap-and-fling&quot; maneuver; additionally, it aids in carrying the extra weight of a shell and ascending the water column for the diel vertical migration.

The power-stroke for &quot;L. helicina&quot; starts with a sharp rotation of it is body accompanied by an increase in swimming speed; it then rotates its shell in the opposite direction to initiate the recovery-stroke and swims upward, with a speed less than the power phase. There is a drop in overall speed between power and recovery strokes, which develop a sawtooth trajectory in the sagittal plane. The hyper-pitch of the round shell of &quot;L. helicina&quot; diminishes the rotational drag and the moment of inertia; the extreme shell rotation also assists in raising the wingtips at the end of each stroke to create a figure-eight pattern, common for flying insects. In contrast, flying insects and shell-less pteropods encounter higher resistance forces that limit the body rotation. 

Sea butterflies range from the tropics to the poles.
They are &quot;holoplanktonic&quot;—they spend all their lives floating amongst plankton, rather than remaining planktonic during their larval stage. Thus, thecosomans are most common in the top of the ocean—in terms of diversity, species richness, and abundance—and become scarcer with increased depth.

Occasionally, thecosomans swarm in large numbers, and can sometimes be found washed ashore in flotsam, especially along the coastline of eastern Australia.

=== Diurnal vertical migration ===
Thecosomata beat their wing-like parapodia to &quot;fly&quot; through the water.
When descending to deeper water, they hold their wings up.

They migrate vertically from day to night, so the community structure changes on a 24 hour cycle; during the day many organisms take refuge at water depths in excess of 100 m.

===Feeding===
Little is documented of the dietary habits or behaviour of sea butterflies, yet they are known to have a peculiar way of feeding. Being generally herbivorous, and mostly passive plankton-feeders, they live their lives according to the currents and find food by floating ventral-side up; some may more actively forage, at times. They ensnare planktonic food by entangling it in a mucous web measuring up to 5 cm wide—many times larger than their own bodies. If disturbed, they simply abandon the web and flap slowly away.

Each day, they embark on a regular diel vertical migration through the water column in their pursuit of planktonic prey. At night, they forage at the surface and return to deeper waters by the morning.

== Fossil record ==
Geologically-speaking, Thecosomata is a rather young group, being known from the Late Paleocene of the Cenozoic Era.
The group is known within the fossil record from shells of those groups within the clade that mineralized. These carbonate shells are a major contributor to the oceanic carbon cycle, making up as much as 12% of global carbonate flux. However, the low stability of their aragonitic shells means that few end up being preserved within sediments as viable fossils; rather, they are mostly deposited in shallow, tropical seas.

==Importance in the food chain==
These creatures, which range from lentil- to orange-sized, are eaten by various marine species, including a wide variety of fish that are, in turn, consumed by penguins and polar bears. The sea butterflies form the sole food source of their relatives, the Gymnosomata. They are also consumed by sea birds, whales, and commercially important fish. However, if sea butterflies are consumed in large quantities fish can get &quot;black gut&quot;, which makes them unsellable.

==Taxonomy==
Along with its sister group, the sea angels (Gymnosomata), the sea butterflies (Thecosomata) are included in the order Pteropoda.
The validity of the pteropod order is not universally accepted; it fell out of favour for a number of years, but recent molecular evidence suggests that the taxon should be revived. 
Although most Thecosomata have some form of calcified shell, mature Gymnosomata have none.

=== Ponder &amp; Lindberg ===
Order Thecosomata 
* Infraorder Euthecosomata
** Superfamily Limacinoidea
*** Family Limacinidae 
** Superfamily Cavolinioidea
*** Family Cavoliniidae 
*** Family Cliidae
*** Family Creseidae
*** Family Cuvierinidae
*** Family Praecuvierinidae
* Infraorder Pseudothecosomata
** Superfamily Peraclidoidea
*** Family Peraclidae 
** Superfamily Cymbulioidea
*** Family Cymbuliidae 
*** Family Desmopteridae 

=== Bouchet &amp; Rocroi ===
In the new taxonomy of Bouchet &amp; Rocroi (2005) Thecosomata is treated differently :

Clade Thecosomata : 
*Superfamily Cavolinioidea ( = Euthecosomata)
**Family Cavoliniidae 
***Subfamily Cavoliinae (formerly Hyalaeidae )
***Subfamily Clioinae (formerly Cleodoridae - &quot;nomen oblitum&quot;)
***Subfamily Cuvierininae (formerly : Cuvieriidae (nom. inv.); Tripteridae )
***Subfamily Creseinae 
**Family Limacinidae (formerly : Spirialidae ; Spiratellidae )
** † Family Sphaerocinidae 
*Superfamily Cymbulioidea ( = Pseudothecosomata)
**Family Cymbuliidae 
***Subfamily Cymbuliinae 
***Subfamily Glebinae 
**Family Desmopteridae 
**Family Peraclidae (formerly Procymbuliidae 

Bouchet &amp; Rocroi (2005) move the family Limacinidae into the superfamily Cavolinioidea, making redundant the superfamily Limacinoidea erected for it in Ponder &amp; Lindberg&#x27;s taxonomy. The families Creseidae and Cuvierinidae are demoted to subfamilies of Cavoliniidae (Creseinae and Cuvierininae). The infraorder Pseudothecosomata becomes the superfamily Cymbulioidea. The family Peraclididae is included in the superfamily Cymbulioidea as the family Peraclidae, making the superfamily Peraclidoidea redundant.

==See also==
* Ocean acidification
* &quot;Clione antarctica&quot;

==Footnotes==
==References==

==Sources==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q772011" start="4" end="15" title="Sea butterfly" label="Thecosomata"/>
<link wikidata="Q772011" start="101" end="116" title="Sea butterfly" label="sea butterflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="124" end="133" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="134" end="142" title="suborder (biology)" label="suborder"/>
<link wikidata="Q191468" start="153" end="160" title="pelagic" label="pelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q381180" start="176" end="185" title="sea snail" label="sea snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496443" start="196" end="208" title="holoplankton" label="holoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q752186" start="211" end="224" title="opisthobranch" label="opisthobranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867740" start="225" end="234" title="gastropod" label="gastropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="235" end="242" title="mollusk" label="mollusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="252" end="257" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031983" start="258" end="267" title="Pteropoda" label="Pteropoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q752186" start="309" end="324" title="Opisthobranchia" label="Opisthobranchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003497" start="370" end="375" title="gastropod shell" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995776" start="627" end="647" title="oceanic carbon cycle" label="oceanic carbon cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q381180" start="679" end="689" title="Sea snail" label="sea snails"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484264" start="699" end="710" title="Land snail" label="land snails"/>
<link wikidata="Q129558" start="794" end="802" title="Ocean current" label="currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="845" end="856" title="Adaptation" label="adaptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q132390" start="936" end="940" title="gill" label="gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867740" start="968" end="977" title="gastropod" label="gastropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755097" start="1042" end="1051" title="parapodia" label="parapodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003497" start="1171" end="1176" title="gastropod shell" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005941" start="1424" end="1434" title="calcareous" label="calcareous"/>
<link wikidata="Q60743164" start="1473" end="1486" title="calcium cycle" label="calcium cycle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1505" end="1526" title="symmetry (biology)#Bilateral symmetry" label="bilaterally symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055196" start="1673" end="1686" title="Cavolinioidea" label="Cavolinioidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199516" start="1711" end="1723" title="Cymbulioidea" label="Cymbulioidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202653" start="1786" end="1797" title="Cymbuliidae" label="Cymbuliidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264832" start="1898" end="1911" title="Desmopteridae" label="Desmopteridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640354" start="2215" end="2235" title="hydrostatic skeleton" label="hydrostatic skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="2337" end="2348" title="Drag (physics)" label="drag forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425266" start="2380" end="2394" title="Insect flight" label="clap-and-fling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788240" start="2512" end="2535" title="diel vertical migration" label="diel vertical migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742397" start="2899" end="2907" title="Sawtooth wave" label="sawtooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211994" start="2926" end="2940" title="sagittal plane" label="sagittal plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q122508" start="3053" end="3060" title="inertia" label="inertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22708" start="3197" end="3211" title="Pterygota" label="flying insects"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496443" start="3401" end="3413" title="holoplankton" label="holoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="3466" end="3474" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="3522" end="3527" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275063" start="3785" end="3792" title="flotsam" label="flotsam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330629" start="3828" end="3845" title="eastern Australia" label="eastern Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788240" start="4029" end="4047" title="migrate vertically" label="migrate vertically"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="4361" end="4372" title="Herbivore" label="herbivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="4393" end="4401" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="4485" end="4492" title="ventral" label="ventral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649349" start="4594" end="4600" title="mucus" label="mucous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788240" start="4772" end="4795" title="diel vertical migration" label="diel vertical migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q76252" start="5046" end="5055" title="Paleocene" label="Paleocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q102416" start="5063" end="5071" title="Cenozoic" label="Cenozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23775" start="5347" end="5357" title="aragonitic" label="aragonitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131226" start="5568" end="5574" title="lentil" label="lentil"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147" start="5694" end="5701" title="penguin" label="penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="5707" end="5717" title="polar bear" label="polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315611" start="5790" end="5801" title="Gymnosomata" label="Gymnosomata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315611" start="6066" end="6077" title="Gymnosomata" label="Gymnosomata"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="6134" end="6139" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031983" start="6140" end="6149" title="Pteropoda" label="Pteropoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031983" start="6171" end="6179" title="pteropod" label="pteropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003497" start="6388" end="6393" title="gastropod shell" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5414457" start="6488" end="6501" title="Euthecosomata" label="Euthecosomata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548856" start="6517" end="6529" title="Limacinoidea" label="Limacinoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548854" start="6541" end="6552" title="Limacinidae" label="Limacinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055196" start="6569" end="6582" title="Cavolinioidea" label="Cavolinioidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203064" start="6594" end="6606" title="Cavoliniidae" label="Cavoliniidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133370" start="6619" end="6626" title="Cliidae" label="Cliidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18713366" start="6638" end="6647" title="Creseidae" label="Creseidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18684017" start="6659" end="6671" title="Cuvierinidae" label="Cuvierinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237511" start="6683" end="6699" title="Praecuvierinidae" label="Praecuvierinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199516" start="6713" end="6730" title="Pseudothecosomata" label="Pseudothecosomata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6746" end="6759" title="Peraclidoidea" label="Peraclidoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166860" start="6771" end="6781" title="Peraclidae" label="Peraclidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199516" start="6798" end="6810" title="Cymbulioidea" label="Cymbulioidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202653" start="6822" end="6833" title="Cymbuliidae" label="Cymbuliidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264832" start="6846" end="6859" title="Desmopteridae" label="Desmopteridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355751" start="6902" end="6934" title="Taxonomy of the Gastropoda (Bouchet &amp;amp; Rocroi, 2005)" label="taxonomy of Bouchet &amp;amp; Rocroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q855711" start="8110" end="8129" title="Ocean acidification" label="Ocean acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140314" start="8138" end="8155" title="Clione antarctica" label="Clione antarctica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44596" wikidata="Q624990" url="?curid=44596" title="Positronium">
<text>Positronium (Ps) is a system consisting of an electron and its anti-particle, a positron, bound together into an exotic atom, specifically an onium. Unlike hydrogen, the system has no protons. The system is unstable: the two particles annihilate each other to predominantly produce two or three gamma-rays, depending on the relative spin states. The energy levels of the two particles are similar to that of the hydrogen atom (which is a bound state of a proton and an electron). However, because of the reduced mass, the frequencies of the spectral lines are less than half of those for the corresponding hydrogen lines.

==States==

The mass of positronium is 1.022 MeV, which is twice the electron mass minus the binding energy of a few eV. The lowest energy orbital state of positronium is 1S, and like with hydrogen, it has a hyperfine structure arising from the relative orientations of the spins of the electron and the positron.

The &quot;singlet&quot; state, , with antiparallel spins (&quot;S&quot; = 0, &quot;Ms&quot; = 0) is known as &quot;para&quot;-positronium (&quot;p&quot;-Ps). It has a mean lifetime of and decays preferentially into two gamma rays with energy of each (in the center-of-mass frame). &quot;Para&quot;-positronium can decay into any even number of photons (2, 4, 6, ...), but the probability quickly decreases with the number: the branching ratio for decay into 4 photons is .

&quot;Para-&quot;positronium lifetime in vacuum is approximately
formula_1

The &quot;triplet&quot; states, 3S1, with parallel spins (&quot;S&quot; = 1, &quot;Ms&quot; = −1, 0, 1) are known as &quot;ortho&quot;-positronium (&quot;o&quot;-Ps), and have an energy that is approximately 0.001 eV higher than the singlet. These states have a mean lifetime of , and the leading decay is three gammas. Other modes of decay are negligible; for instance, the five-photons mode has branching ratio of ≈.

&quot;Ortho&quot;-positronium lifetime in vacuum can be calculated approximately as:
formula_2

However more accurate calculations with corrections to O(α2) yield a value of −1 for the decay rate, corresponding to a lifetime of .

Positronium in the 2S state is metastable having a lifetime of against annihilation. The positronium created in such an excited state will quickly cascade down to the ground state, where annihilation will occur more quickly.

=== Measurements ===
Measurements of these lifetimes and energy levels have been used in precision tests of quantum electrodynamics, confirming quantum electrodynamics (QED) predictions to high precision.

Annihilation can proceed via a number of channels, each producing gamma rays with total energy of (sum of the electron and positron mass-energy), usually 2 or 3, with up to 5 gamma ray photons recorded from a single annihilation.

The annihilation into a neutrino–antineutrino pair is also possible, but the probability is predicted to be negligible. The branching ratio for &quot;o&quot;-Ps decay for this channel is (electron neutrino–antineutrino pair) and (for other flavour) in predictions based on the Standard Model, but it can be increased by non-standard neutrino properties, like relatively high magnetic moment. The experimental upper limits on branching ratio for this decay (as well as for a decay into any &quot;invisible&quot; particles) are &lt; for &quot;p&quot;-Ps and &lt; for &quot;o&quot;-Ps.

== Energy levels ==
While precise calculation of positronium energy levels uses the Bethe–Salpeter equation or the Breit equation, the similarity between positronium and hydrogen allows a rough estimate. In this approximation, the energy levels are different because of a different effective mass, &quot;μ&quot;, in the energy equation (see electron energy levels for a derivation):
formula_3
where:

* is the charge magnitude of the electron (same as the positron),
* is the Planck constant,
* is the electric constant (otherwise known as the permittivity of free space),
* is the reduced mass: formula_4 where and are, respectively, the mass of the electron and the positron (which are &quot;the same&quot; by definition as antiparticles).

Thus, for positronium, its reduced mass only differs from the electron by a factor of 2. This causes the energy levels to also roughly be half of what they are for the hydrogen atom.

So finally, the energy levels of positronium are given by
formula_5

The lowest energy level of positronium () is . The next level is . The negative sign is a convention that implies a bound state. Positronium can also be considered by a particular form of the two-body Dirac equation; Two particles with a Coulomb interaction can be exactly separated in the (relativistic) center-of-momentum frame and the resulting ground-state energy has been obtained very accurately using finite element methods of Janine Shertzer. Their results lead to the discovery of anomalous states.
The Dirac equation whose Hamiltonian comprises two Dirac particles and a static Coulomb potential is not relativistically invariant. But if one adds the (or , where is the fine-structure constant) terms, where , then the result is relativistically invariant. Only the leading term is included. The contribution is the Breit term; workers rarely go to because at one has the Lamb shift, which requires quantum electrodynamics.

== Formation and decay in materials ==
After a radioactive atom in a material undergoes a β+ decay (positron emission), the resulting high-energy positron slows down by colliding with atoms, and eventually annihilates with one of the many electrons in the material. It may however first form positronium before the annihilation event. The understanding of this process is of some importance in positron emission tomography. Approximately:
* ~60% of positrons will directly annihilate with an electron without forming positronium. The annihilation usually results in two gamma rays. In most cases this direct annihilation occurs only after the positron has lost its excess kinetic energy and has thermalized with the material.
* ~10% of positrons form &quot;para&quot;-positronium, which then promptly (in ~0.12 ns) decays, usually into two gamma rays.
* ~30% of positrons form &quot;ortho&quot;-positronium but then annihilate within a few nanoseconds by &#x27;picking off&#x27; another nearby electron with opposing spin. This usually produces two gamma rays. During this time, the very lightweight positronium atom exhibits a strong zero-point motion, that exerts a pressure and is able to push out a tiny nanometer-sized bubble in the medium.
* Only ~0.5% of positrons form &quot;ortho&quot;-positronium that self-decays (usually into &quot;three&quot; gamma rays). This natural decay rate of &quot;ortho&quot;-positronium is relatively slow (~140 ns decay lifetime), compared to the aforementioned pick-off process, which is why the three-gamma decay rarely occurs.

== History ==

The Croatian physicist Stjepan Mohorovičić predicted the existence of positronium in a 1934 article published in &quot;Astronomische Nachrichten&quot;, in which he called it the &quot;electrum&quot;. Other sources incorrectly credit Carl Anderson as having predicted its existence in 1932 while at Caltech. It was experimentally discovered by Martin Deutsch at MIT in 1951 and became known as positronium. Many subsequent experiments have precisely measured its properties and verified predictions of quantum electrodynamics. 

A discrepancy known as the ortho-positronium lifetime puzzle persisted for some time, but was resolved with further calculations and measurements. Measurements were in error because of the lifetime measurement of unthermalised positronium, which was produced at only a small rate. This had yielded lifetimes that were too long. Also calculations using relativistic quantum electrodynamics are difficult, so they had been done to only the first order. Corrections that involved higher orders were then calculated in a non-relativistic quantum electrodynamics.

In 2024, the AEgIS collaboration at CERN was the first to cool positronium by laser light, leaving it available for experimental use. The substance was brought to using laser cooling. 

== Exotic compounds ==

Molecular bonding was predicted for positronium. Molecules of positronium hydride (PsH) can be made. Positronium can also form a cyanide and can form bonds with halogens or lithium.

The first observation of di-positronium () molecules—molecules consisting of two positronium atoms—was reported on 12 September 2007 by David Cassidy and Allen Mills from University of California, Riverside.

Unlike muonium, positronium does not have a nucleus analogue, because the electron and the positron have equal masses. Consequently, while muonium tends to behave like a light isotope of hydrogen, positronium shows large differences in size, polarisability, and binding energy from hydrogen.

== Natural occurrence ==

The events in the early universe leading to baryon asymmetry predate the formation of atoms (including exotic varieties such as positronium) by around a third of a million years, so no positronium atoms occurred then.

Likewise, the naturally occurring positrons in the present day result from high-energy interactions such as in cosmic ray–atmosphere interactions, and so are too hot (thermally energetic) to form electrical bonds before annihilation.

== See also ==
* Breit equation
* Antiprotonic helium
* Di-positronium
* Exciton — solid-state analog
* Protonium
* Quantum electrodynamics
* Two-body Dirac equations
* Quarkonium

== References ==
== External links ==
* The annihilation of positronium - The Feynman Lectures on Physics
* The Search for Positronium
* Obituary of Martin Deutsch, discoverer of Positronium</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q624990" start="0" end="11" title="Positronium" label="Positronium"/>
<link wikidata="Q624990" start="13" end="15" title="Positronium" label="Ps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="46" end="54" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q83197" start="63" end="76" title="antimatter" label="anti-particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229" start="80" end="88" title="positron" label="positron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068126" start="113" end="124" title="exotic atom" label="exotic atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q279525" start="142" end="147" title="onium" label="onium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="184" end="190" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="295" end="304" title="gamma-ray" label="gamma-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q669532" start="350" end="362" title="energy level" label="energy level"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643508" start="412" end="425" title="hydrogen atom" label="hydrogen atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="455" end="461" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="522" end="533" title="frequency" label="frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="541" end="554" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413102" start="831" end="850" title="hyperfine structure" label="hyperfine structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296863" start="942" end="967" title="Singlet state" label="&amp;quot;singlet&amp;quot; state"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="976" end="988" title="Antiparallel vectors" label="antiparallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="989" end="993" title="Spin (physics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879445" start="996" end="1009" title="spin quantum number" label="&amp;quot;S&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639491" start="1196" end="1216" title="center-of-mass frame" label="center-of-mass frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q370559" start="1365" end="1380" title="branching ratio" label="branching ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036629" start="1492" end="1517" title="Triplet state" label="&amp;quot;triplet&amp;quot; state"/>
<link wikidata="Q53875" start="1530" end="1538" title="Parallel (geometry)" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="2059" end="2060" title="Big O notation" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q849516" start="2170" end="2180" title="metastable" label="metastable"/>
<link wikidata="Q188721" start="2210" end="2222" title="annihilation" label="annihilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239550" start="2454" end="2496" title="precision tests of quantum electrodynamics" label="precision tests of quantum electrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q234881" start="2509" end="2532" title="quantum electrodynamics" label="quantum electrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="2637" end="2647" title="gamma rays" label="gamma rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="2826" end="2834" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q619699" start="2990" end="3007" title="electron neutrino" label="electron neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q242657" start="3177" end="3192" title="magnetic moment" label="magnetic moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q288509" start="3470" end="3493" title="Bethe–Salpeter equation" label="Bethe–Salpeter equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163318" start="3501" end="3515" title="Breit equation" label="Breit equation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3727" end="3749" title="Bohr model#Electron energy levels" label="electron energy levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101" start="3796" end="3812" title="Elementary charge" label="charge magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="3862" end="3877" title="Planck constant" label="Planck constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158" start="3888" end="3905" title="electric constant" label="electric constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q550046" start="3968" end="3980" title="reduced mass" label="reduced mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q908049" start="4498" end="4509" title="bound state" label="bound state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858689" start="4574" end="4597" title="Two-body Dirac equations" label="two-body Dirac equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83152" start="4620" end="4639" title="Coulomb&amp;#x27;s law" label="Coulomb interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639491" start="4687" end="4711" title="center-of-momentum frame" label="center-of-momentum frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q220184" start="4790" end="4811" title="finite element method" label="finite element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q104015126" start="4816" end="4831" title="Janine Shertzer" label="Janine Shertzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5997" start="5062" end="5085" title="fine-structure constant" label="fine-structure constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="5407" end="5415" title="beta decay" label="β+ decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="5711" end="5739" title="positron emission tomography" label="positron emission tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077932" start="6926" end="6945" title="Stjepan Mohorovičić" label="Stjepan Mohorovičić"/>
<link wikidata="Q697945" start="7022" end="7047" title="Astronomische Nachrichten" label="Astronomische Nachrichten"/>
<link wikidata="Q169366" start="7136" end="7149" title="Carl David Anderson" label="Carl Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="7201" end="7208" title="Caltech" label="Caltech"/>
<link wikidata="Q215226" start="7246" end="7260" title="Martin Deutsch" label="Martin Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="7264" end="7267" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q108167108" start="8004" end="8009" title="AEgIS experiment" label="AEgIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="8027" end="8031" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q163117" start="8160" end="8173" title="laser cooling" label="laser cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419386" start="8263" end="8282" title="positronium hydride" label="positronium hydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633462" start="8409" end="8423" title="di-positronium" label="di-positronium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="8427" end="8435" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075148" start="8555" end="8590" title="University of California, Riverside" label="University of California, Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196336" start="8600" end="8607" title="muonium" label="muonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q21946200" start="8916" end="8922" title="timeline of the early universe" label="events"/>
<link wikidata="Q809677" start="8956" end="8972" title="baryon asymmetry" label="baryon asymmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373825" start="8981" end="9003" title="recombination (cosmology)" label="the formation of atoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="9242" end="9252" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q188721" start="9351" end="9363" title="annihilation" label="annihilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163318" start="9383" end="9397" title="Breit equation" label="Breit equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3723095" start="9400" end="9419" title="Antiprotonic helium" label="Antiprotonic helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633462" start="9422" end="9436" title="Di-positronium" label="Di-positronium"/>
<link wikidata="Q858289" start="9439" end="9446" title="Exciton" label="Exciton"/>
<link wikidata="Q936991" start="9470" end="9479" title="Protonium" label="Protonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q234881" start="9482" end="9505" title="Quantum electrodynamics" label="Quantum electrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858689" start="9508" end="9532" title="Two-body Dirac equations" label="Two-body Dirac equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540413" start="9535" end="9545" title="Quarkonium" label="Quarkonium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44597" wikidata="Q3997444" url="?curid=44597" title="National parks of Scotland">
<text>The national parks of Scotland () are managed areas of outstanding landscape where some forms of development are restricted to preserve the landscape and natural environment. At present, Scotland has two national parks: Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park, created in 2002, and the Cairngorms National Park, created in 2003.

Unlike the national parks of many other countries, the national parks of Scotland are not areas of uninhabited land owned by the state. The majority of the land is in the ownership of private landowners (including conservation bodies such as the National Trust for Scotland), and people continue to live and work in the parks. Although the landscapes often appear &quot;wild&quot; in character, the land is not wilderness, as it has been worked by humans for thousands of years. Like their English and Welsh counterparts the national parks of Scotland are effectively &quot;managed landscapes&quot;, and are classified as IUCN Category V Protected Landscapes because of this. National parks are only one of a number of designations used to protect and conserve the landscape and natural environment of Scotland. Public access to all land in Scotland is governed by the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003, which grants the public the freedom to roam on most land (and water) for activities such as walking, camping, cycling, canoeing, swimming and climbing; this right applies to land regardless of ownership or whether or not it is in a national park, providing it is exercised responsibly (as defined by the Scottish Outdoor Access Code).

==History==

The concept of national parks was first proposed in the United States in the 1860s, where national parks were established to protect wilderness areas such as Yosemite. Scottish-born John Muir was early advocate for the preservation of wilderness in the United States, and is acknowledged as a leading figure in the formation of national parks in the US, as well as the conservation movement at large. Many other countries have since gone on to form national parks on the basis of setting aside areas of wilderness. Scotland however, lacks any such areas, as thousands of years of human activity have altered the landscape. Human settlement and activity, including agriculture, historical deforestation, overgrazing by sheep and deer, and extensive 20th century afforestation with introduced tree species (particularly conifers) have resulted in landscapes which are semi-natural.

Nonetheless, the idea that areas of wild or remote character should be designated to protect the environment and encourage public access grew in popularity throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In 1931 a commission headed by Christopher Addison proposed the creation of a national park in the Cairngorms, alongside proposals for parks in England and Wales. Following the Second World War, the Labour government passed the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949, which led to the creation of 10 national parks in England and Wales between 1951 and 1957. No parks were created in Scotland, however a committee, chaired by Sir Douglas Ramsay, was established to consider the issue of national parks in Scotland. The report, published in 1945, proposed national parks in five areas: Loch Lomond &amp; the Trossachs, the Cairngorms, Glen Coe-Ben Nevis-Black Mount, Wester Ross and Glen Strathfarrar-Glen Affric-Glen Cannich. The government designated these areas as &quot;National Park Direction Areas&quot;, giving powers for planning decisions taken by local authorities to be reviewed by central government, however the areas were not given full national park status. In 1981 the direction areas were replaced by national scenic areas, of which there are now 40. Although the national scenic area designation provided a degree of additional protection via the planning process, there are no bodies equivalent to a national park authority, and whilst local authorities can produce a management strategy for each one, only the three national scenic areas within Dumfries and Galloway have current management strategies.

A 1974 report by the Countryside Commission for Scotland (CCS) entitled &quot;A Park System for Scotland&quot; did not explicitly recommend that national parks be established in Scotland, noting only that the issue would “no doubt continue to be debated”. A further CCS report into protection of the landscape of Scotland, &quot;The Mountain Areas of Scotland - Conservation and Management&quot;, was published in 1990. It recommended that four areas were under such pressure that they ought to be designated as national parks, each with an independent planning board, in order to retain their heritage value. The four areas identified were similar to those proposed by the Ramsay Committee: Loch Lomond &amp; the Trossachs, the Cairngorms, Glen Coe-Ben Nevis-Black Mount and Wester Ross, although Wester Ross was not considered to require a dedicated planning body.

Despite this long history of recommendations that national parks be established in Scotland, no action was taken until the establishment of the Scottish Parliament in 1999. The two current parks were designated as such under the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000, which was one of the first pieces of legislation to be passed by the Parliament. Since the original creation of the first two national parks, no further parks have been created, although the Cairngorms National Park was extended in 2010 to include the highland portion of Perthshire.

===Proposals for additional parks===
In June 2005, the Scottish Executive announced their intention to create Scotland&#x27;s first coastal and marine national park. Five possible locations for this were considered, however no marine park has been established as of 2023.
*Solway Firth
*Argyll Islands and Coast
*Ardnamurchan, Small Isles and South Skye Coast
*North Skye Coast and Wester Ross
*North Uist, Sound of Harris, Harris and South Lewis

In 2011 the Scottish Government rejected a proposal to create a national park on the Isle of Harris. In 2013 the Scottish Campaign for National Parks proposed the seven areas listed below as suitable for national park status, however no further parks were subsequently designated.

*Harris
*Wester Ross
*Glen Affric
*Mull and the Small Isles – to be a marine park
*Ben Nevis, Glen Coe and the Black Mount
*Galloway
*Cheviot Hills

The power sharing arrangement agreed between the Scottish National Party and the Scottish Greens following the 2021 Scottish Parliament election committed the government to designate at least one additional national park by 2026. Areas that wish to be consider for national park status have been invited to submit applications between October 2023 and February 2024. As of October 2023, councils and local groups from the following areas are considering applications:

*Galloway
*Scottish Borders
*Tay Forest
*Ben Nevis and Lochaber
*Eilean a&#x27; Cheo (Skye and Raasay)
*Affric to Alladale
*Glen Affric
*Lammermuir Hills
*Largo Bay
*Loch Awe

In July 2024 the Scottish government announced that Galloway was to be designated as the country&#x27;s third national park.

==Organisation==

Each national park in Scotland is administered by a national park authority. Under the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000, national parks in Scotland have four aims:
#To conserve and enhance the natural and cultural heritage of the area
#To promote sustainable use of the natural resources of the area
#To promote understanding and enjoyment (including enjoyment in the form of recreation) of the special qualities of the area by the public
#To promote sustainable economic and social development of the area&#x27;s communities

The first two of these aims are identical to those included in the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 legislation that governs national parks in England and Wales, however the Scottish national parks have two additional aims (3 and 4 above). The general purpose of the national park authority, as defined in the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000, is to ensure that these aims are &quot;collectively achieved ...in a coordinated way&quot;. Although the four aims have equal status, in accordance with the Sandford Principle, the first aim (conservation and enhancement of the natural and cultural heritage) is to be given greater weight when it appears to the park authority that there is irreconcilable conflict with the other aims.

A key function of the authority relates to planning permission: in this respect the two current Scottish parks differ. The Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park is a full planning authority, exercising powers that would otherwise be exercised by the local authority, whilst the Cairngorms National Park has the power to &quot;call in&quot; planning decisions from the local authority where they are considered to conflict with the aims of the park. National park authorities are also required to take the responsibility for managing access to the countryside that elsewhere falls to local authorities.

Aside from the planning and access function, national parks authorities have considerable flexibility as to how the four aims are achieved. They can, for example, acquire land, make byelaws and management agreements, provide grants, offer advice, and undertake or commission research.

The national park authority is run by a board, consisting of members elected by the community living with the park, members from the local authorities with areas in the park, and members appointed by the Scottish government. The Cairngorms National Park board has 19 members, whilst the Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park board has 17 members (see below).

== List of Scottish national parks ==

==See also==
*Conservation in the United Kingdom
*National parks of England and Wales
*National nature reserve (Scotland)
*National Scenic Area (Scotland)

==References==
==External links==
* Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park
* Cairngorms National Park</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3997444" start="4" end="30" title="National parks of Scotland" label="national parks of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q107425" start="67" end="76" title="landscape" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="154" end="173" title="natural environment" label="natural environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="204" end="218" title="national parks" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q116661" start="220" end="263" title="Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park" label="Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025953" start="290" end="314" title="Cairngorms National Park" label="Cairngorms National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q599997" start="580" end="607" title="National Trust for Scotland" label="National Trust for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q911871" start="745" end="755" title="wilderness area" label="wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="956" end="960" title="IUCN" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q47519865" start="1043" end="1065" title="Protected areas of Scotland" label="number of designations"/>
<link wikidata="Q28970282" start="1203" end="1234" title="Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003" label="Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q688646" start="1264" end="1279" title="freedom to roam" label="freedom to roam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="1328" end="1335" title="hiking" label="walking"/>
<link wikidata="Q455550" start="1337" end="1344" title="camping" label="camping"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="1346" end="1353" title="cycling" label="cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q20856109" start="1355" end="1363" title="canoeing" label="canoeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388" start="1365" end="1373" title="swimming" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q22857" start="1378" end="1386" title="climbing" label="climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063587" start="1540" end="1568" title="Scottish Outdoor Access Code" label="Scottish Outdoor Access Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870040" start="1619" end="1654" title="History of the National Park Service" label="first proposed in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="1675" end="1688" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q911871" start="1718" end="1728" title="wilderness" label="wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q180402" start="1743" end="1751" title="Yosemite National Park" label="Yosemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q379580" start="1767" end="1776" title="John Muir" label="John Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="2249" end="2260" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="2273" end="2286" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q334487" start="2288" end="2299" title="overgrazing" label="overgrazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="2303" end="2308" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="2313" end="2317" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384419" start="2346" end="2359" title="afforestation" label="afforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="2365" end="2375" title="Exotic species" label="introduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="2403" end="2410" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q334088" start="2710" end="2729" title="Christopher Addison, 1st Viscount Addison" label="Christopher Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2856" end="2872" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7724649" start="2878" end="2895" title="Attlee ministry" label="Labour government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967542" start="2907" end="2960" title="National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949" label="National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978246" start="3711" end="3732" title="National Scenic Area (Scotland)" label="national scenic areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336962" start="3912" end="3935" title="national park authority" label="national park authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="3948" end="3965" title="Subdivisions of Scotland" label="local authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q126514" start="4058" end="4079" title="Dumfries and Galloway" label="Dumfries and Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q101004326" start="4138" end="4173" title="Countryside Commission for Scotland" label="Countryside Commission for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427950" start="5108" end="5121" title="Scotland Act 1998" label="establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="5129" end="5148" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974754" start="5214" end="5248" title="National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000" label="National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247411" start="5522" end="5532" title="Perthshire" label="Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="5590" end="5608" title="Scottish Executive" label="Scottish Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="5667" end="5672" title="coast" label="coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185274" start="5679" end="5699" title="marine national park" label="marine national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q195413" start="5808" end="5820" title="Solway Firth" label="Solway Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q652539" start="5822" end="5828" title="Argyll" label="Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q639680" start="5848" end="5860" title="Ardnamurchan" label="Ardnamurchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194144" start="5862" end="5873" title="Small Isles" label="Small Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="5884" end="5888" title="Isle of Skye" label="Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="5902" end="5906" title="Isle of Skye" label="Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250844" start="5917" end="5928" title="Wester Ross" label="Wester Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q662158" start="5930" end="5940" title="North Uist" label="North Uist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564767" start="5942" end="5957" title="Sound of Harris" label="Sound of Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122196" start="5959" end="5965" title="Harris, Scotland" label="Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453423" start="5976" end="5981" title="Isle of Lewis" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122196" start="6266" end="6272" title="Harris, Scotland" label="Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250844" start="6274" end="6285" title="Wester Ross" label="Wester Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140082" start="6287" end="6298" title="Glen Affric" label="Glen Affric"/>
<link wikidata="Q111444" start="6300" end="6304" title="Isle of Mull" label="Mull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194144" start="6313" end="6324" title="Small Isles" label="Small Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q104674" start="6348" end="6357" title="Ben Nevis" label="Ben Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q92671" start="6359" end="6367" title="Glen Coe" label="Glen Coe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921321" start="6376" end="6387" title="Black Mount" label="Black Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342092" start="6389" end="6397" title="Galloway" label="Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q383335" start="6399" end="6412" title="Cheviot Hills" label="Cheviot Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q108470797" start="6418" end="6443" title="Scottish National Party–Scottish Greens agreement" label="power sharing arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="6463" end="6486" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256956" start="6495" end="6510" title="Scottish Greens" label="Scottish Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q24969168" start="6525" end="6558" title="2021 Scottish Parliament election" label="2021 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q211113" start="6894" end="6910" title="Scottish Borders" label="Scottish Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q31844884" start="6912" end="6922" title="Tay Forest Park" label="Tay Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q104674" start="6924" end="6933" title="Ben Nevis" label="Ben Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181006" start="6938" end="6946" title="Lochaber" label="Lochaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="6969" end="6973" title="Isle of Skye" label="Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q969065" start="6978" end="6984" title="Raasay" label="Raasay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140082" start="6987" end="6993" title="Glen Affric" label="Affric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730268" start="6997" end="7005" title="Alladale Estate" label="Alladale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140082" start="7007" end="7018" title="Glen Affric" label="Glen Affric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216412" start="7020" end="7036" title="Lammermuir Hills" label="Lammermuir Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489274" start="7038" end="7047" title="Largo Bay" label="Largo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368230" start="7049" end="7057" title="Loch Awe" label="Loch Awe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336962" start="7255" end="7278" title="national park authority" label="national park authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974754" start="7290" end="7324" title="National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000" label="National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="7452" end="7467" title="sustainable use" label="sustainable use"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="7475" end="7492" title="natural resources" label="natural resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="7656" end="7676" title="sustainable economic development" label="sustainable economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967542" start="7799" end="7852" title="National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949" label="National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416215" start="8256" end="8274" title="Sandford Principle" label="Sandford Principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q969045" start="8742" end="8757" title="local government in Scotland" label="local authority"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9514" end="9531" title="Subdivisions of Scotland#Council areas" label="local authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162977" start="9800" end="9834" title="Conservation in the United Kingdom" label="Conservation in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q354009" start="9836" end="9871" title="National parks of England and Wales" label="National parks of England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970117" start="9873" end="9907" title="National nature reserve (Scotland)" label="National nature reserve (Scotland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978246" start="9909" end="9940" title="National Scenic Area (Scotland)" label="National Scenic Area (Scotland)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44599" wikidata="Q170448" url="?curid=44599" title="Chalcedony">
<text>Chalcedony ( or ) is a cryptocrystalline form of silica, composed of very fine intergrowths of quartz and moganite. These are both silica minerals, but they differ in that quartz has a trigonal crystal structure, while moganite is monoclinic. Chalcedony&#x27;s standard chemical structure (based on the chemical structure of quartz) is SiO2 (silicon dioxide).

Chalcedony has a waxy luster, and may be semitransparent or translucent. It can assume a wide range of colors, but those most commonly seen are white to gray, grayish-blue or a shade of brown ranging from pale to nearly black. The color of chalcedony sold commercially is often enhanced by dyeing or heating.

The name &quot;chalcedony&quot; comes from the Latin (alternatively spelled ) and is probably derived from the town of Chalcedon in Turkey. The name appears in Pliny the Elder&#x27;s as a term for a translucent kind of jaspis. Another reference to a gem by the name of () is found in the Book of Revelation (21:19); however, it is a &quot;hapax legomenon&quot;, found nowhere else in the Bible, so it is hard to tell whether the precious gem mentioned in Revelation is the same as the mineral known by this name today. The term &quot;plasma&quot; is sometimes used to refer to green translucent chalcedony.

== Varieties ==

Chalcedony occurs in a wide range of varieties. Many semi-precious gemstones are in fact forms of chalcedony. The more notable varieties of chalcedony are as follows:

===Agate===

Agate is a fibrous, banded variety of chalcedony that occurs in a variety of colors and patterns. Iris agate shows exceptional iridescence when light (especially pinpointed light) is shone through the stone. Landscape agate is chalcedony with a number of different mineral impurities making the stone resemble landscapes.
===Carnelian===

Carnelian (also spelled cornelian) is a clear-to-translucent reddish-brown variety of chalcedony. Its hue may vary from a pale orange to an intense almost-black coloration. Similar to carnelian is sard, which is brown rather than red.
===Chrysoprase===

Chrysoprase (also spelled chrysophrase) is a green variety of chalcedony, which has been colored by nickel oxide. (The darker varieties of chrysoprase are also referred to as prase. However, the term prase is also used to describe green quartz and to a certain extent is a color-descriptor, rather than a rigorously defined mineral variety.)

Blue-colored chalcedony is sometimes referred to as &quot;blue chrysoprase&quot; if the color is sufficiently rich, though it derives its color from the presence of copper and is largely unrelated to nickel-bearing chrysoprase.

=== Fire agate ===
Fire agate is a variety of chalcedony with inclusions of goethite or limonite causing an iridescent effect. It can display a wide range of iridescent colors including red, orange, yellow, green, blue, and purple. 

===Heliotrope===

Heliotrope is a green variety of chalcedony, containing red inclusions of iron oxide that resemble drops of blood, giving heliotrope its alternative name of bloodstone. In a similar variety known as plasma, the spots are yellow instead.
===Moss agate===

Moss agate contains green filament-like inclusions, giving it the superficial appearance of moss or blue cheese. There is also tree agate which is similar to moss agate except it is solid white with green filaments whereas moss agate usually has a transparent background, so the &quot;moss&quot; appears in 3D. It is not a true form of agate, as it lacks agate&#x27;s defining feature of concentric banding.
===Chrome chalcedony===

Chrome chalcedony is a green variety of chalcedony, which is colored by chromium compounds. It is also known as &quot;mtorolite&quot; when found in Zimbabwe and &quot;chiquitanita&quot; when found in Bolivia.
===Onyx===

Onyx is a variant of agate with black and white banding. Similarly, agate with brown, orange, red and white banding is known as sardonyx.
===Chalcedony ice-blue===

In Greenland, white to greyish chalcedony is known from volcanic strata of the Paleocene, in the Disko-Nuussuaq area (West Greenland) and from the Scoresby Sound area (East Greenland). A light blue variety of chalcedony is known from Illorsuit, formed in the volcanic rocks along the southern coast of the island. Because of its bluish, ice-like colour, it has the local name chalcedony &quot;ice-blue&quot;.

== History ==

Chalcedony was used in tool making as early as 32,000 BP in Central Australia where archaeological studies at sites in the Cleland Hills uncovered flakes from stone brought in from quarries many kilometres away. Pre-contact uses described in the twentieth century included ceremonial stone knives.

Chalcedony was used for green and yellow color in prehistoric cave paintings, for example at the Bhimbetka rock shelters. The chalcedony was ground to powder form then mixed with water and animal fat or tree resin or gum.

In the Bronze Age chalcedony was in use in the Mediterranean region; for example, on Minoan Crete at the Palace of Knossos, chalcedony seals have been recovered dating to circa 1800 BC. People living along the Central Asian trade routes used various forms of chalcedony, including carnelian, to carve intaglios, ring bezels (the upper faceted portion of a gem projecting from the ring setting), and beads that show strong Greco-Roman influence.

Fine examples of first century objects made from chalcedony, possibly Kushan, were found in recent years at Tillya-tepe in north-western Afghanistan. Hot wax would not stick to it so it was often used to make seal impressions.
The term &quot;chalcedony&quot; is derived from the name of the ancient Greek town Chalkedon in Asia Minor, in modern English usually spelled Chalcedon, today the Kadıköy district of Istanbul.
According to tradition, at least three varieties of chalcedony were used in the Jewish High Priest&#x27;s Breastplate. (Jewish tradition states that Moses&#x27; brother Aaron wore the Breastplate, with inscribed gems representing the twelve tribes of Israel.) The Breastplate supposedly included &quot;jasper&quot;, &quot;chrysoprase&quot; and &quot;sardonyx&quot;, and there is some debate as to whether other &quot;agates&quot; were also used.

In the 19th century, Idar-Oberstein, Germany, became the world&#x27;s largest chalcedony processing center, working mostly on agates. Most of these agates were from Latin America, in particular Brazil. Originally the agate carving industry around Idar and Oberstein was driven by local deposits that were mined in the 15th century. Several factors contributed to the re-emergence of Idar-Oberstein as agate center of the world: ships brought agate nodules back as ballast, thus providing extremely cheap transport. In addition, cheap labor and a superior knowledge of chemistry allowed them to dye the agates in any color with processes that were kept secret. Each mill in Idar-Oberstein had four or five grindstones. These were of red sandstone, obtained from Zweibrücken; and two men ordinarily worked together at the same stone.

== Geochemistry==
===Structure===
Chalcedony was once thought to be a fibrous variety of cryptocrystalline quartz. More recently however, it has been shown to also contain a monoclinic polymorph of quartz, known as moganite. The fraction, by mass, of moganite within a typical chalcedony sample may vary from less than 5% to over 20%. The existence of moganite was once regarded as dubious, but it is now officially recognised by the International Mineralogical Association.

===Solubility===
Chalcedony is more soluble than quartz under low-temperature conditions, despite the two minerals being chemically identical. Possible reasons include the existence of the moganite component, defects caused by Brazil twinning, and small crystal size.

====Solubility of quartz and chalcedony in pure water====
This table gives equilibrium concentrations of total dissolved silicon as calculated by &quot;PHREEQC&quot; (PH REdox EQuilibrium (in C language, USGS)) using the llnl.dat database.

== See also ==

* List of minerals
* Moganite

==References==
==External links==
*Mindat: mineralogical data Chalcedony
*USGS: US Chalcedony locations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q170448" start="0" end="10" title="Chalcedony" label="Chalcedony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351908" start="23" end="40" title="cryptocrystalline" label="cryptocrystalline"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="49" end="55" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="95" end="101" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q415243" start="106" end="114" title="moganite" label="moganite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="138" end="145" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q663314" start="185" end="193" title="trigonal" label="trigonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q624543" start="231" end="241" title="monoclinic" label="monoclinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q500256" start="270" end="288" title="chemical structure" label="chemical structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="342" end="357" title="silicon dioxide" label="silicon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q337381" start="790" end="799" title="Chalcedon" label="Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="803" end="809" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="831" end="846" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q201175" start="890" end="896" title="jaspis" label="jaspis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="959" end="977" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q168417" start="1010" end="1025" title="hapax legomenon" label="hapax legomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="1100" end="1112" title="precious gem" label="precious gem"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="1363" end="1371" title="gemstone" label="gemstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q123314" start="1477" end="1482" title="Agate" label="Agate"/>
<link wikidata="Q957208" start="1604" end="1615" title="iridescence" label="iridescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q324369" start="1816" end="1825" title="Carnelian" label="Carnelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q324369" start="2013" end="2017" title="carnelian" label="sard"/>
<link wikidata="Q429960" start="2070" end="2081" title="Chrysoprase" label="Chrysoprase"/>
<link wikidata="Q411221" start="2170" end="2182" title="Nickel(II) oxide" label="nickel oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="2307" end="2313" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="2578" end="2584" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129757" start="2661" end="2671" title="Fire agate" label="Fire agate"/>
<link wikidata="Q430174" start="2894" end="2904" title="Heliotrope (mineral)" label="Heliotrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q721849" start="2968" end="2978" title="iron oxide" label="iron oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="3002" end="3007" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413388" start="3149" end="3159" title="Moss agate" label="Moss agate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="3241" end="3245" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q746471" start="3249" end="3260" title="blue cheese" label="blue cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113788" start="3582" end="3599" title="Chrome chalcedony" label="Chrome chalcedony"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="3654" end="3662" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="3730" end="3738" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="3782" end="3789" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180884" start="3803" end="3807" title="Onyx" label="Onyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q180884" start="3931" end="3939" title="sardonyx" label="sardonyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="3971" end="3980" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q76252" start="4047" end="4056" title="Paleocene" label="Paleocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336616" start="4202" end="4211" title="Illorsuit" label="Illorsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q18103669" start="4453" end="4470" title="Central Australia" label="Central Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q331603" start="4789" end="4812" title="Bhimbetka rock shelters" label="Bhimbetka rock shelters"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="4922" end="4932" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="4962" end="4975" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="5000" end="5006" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="5007" end="5012" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q173527" start="5030" end="5037" title="Knossos" label="Knossos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868926" start="5050" end="5054" title="Minoan seal-stones" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="5097" end="5099" title="Before Christ" label="BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="5125" end="5137" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q324369" start="5196" end="5205" title="carnelian" label="carnelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501187" start="5216" end="5225" title="Intaglio (jewellery)" label="intaglios"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="5431" end="5437" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144126" start="5469" end="5480" title="Tillya-tepe" label="Tillya-tepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="5498" end="5509" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="5570" end="5574" title="Seal (device)" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="5684" end="5694" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q337381" start="5730" end="5739" title="Chalcedon" label="Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q932886" start="5751" end="5758" title="Kadıköy" label="Kadıköy"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="5771" end="5779" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q16119" start="6249" end="6263" title="Idar-Oberstein" label="Idar-Oberstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="7168" end="7174" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q624543" start="7235" end="7245" title="monoclinic" label="monoclinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q415243" start="7276" end="7284" title="moganite" label="moganite"/>
<link wikidata="Q268771" start="7495" end="7534" title="International Mineralogical Association" label="International Mineralogical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="7573" end="7580" title="soluble" label="soluble"/>
<link wikidata="Q109856" start="7764" end="7779" title="Crystal twinning" label="Brazil twinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q243479" start="8065" end="8081" title="List of minerals" label="List of minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q415243" start="8084" end="8092" title="Moganite" label="Moganite"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44600" wikidata="Q324369" url="?curid=44600" title="Carnelian">
<text>Carnelian (also spelled cornelian) is a brownish-red mineral commonly used as a semiprecious stone. Similar to carnelian is sard, which is generally harder and darker; the difference is not rigidly defined, and the two names are often used interchangeably. Both carnelian and sard are varieties of the silica mineral chalcedony colored by impurities of iron oxide. The color can vary greatly, ranging from pale orange to an intense almost-black coloration. Significant localities include Yanacodo (Peru); Ratnapura (Sri Lanka); and Thailand. It has been found in Indonesia, Brazil, India, Russia (Siberia), and Germany. In the United States, the official State Gem of Maryland is also a variety of carnelian called Patuxent River stone.
==History==
The red variety of chalcedony has been known to be used as beads since the Early Neolithic in Bulgaria. The first faceted (with constant 16+16=32 facets on each side of the bead) carnelian beads are described from the Varna Chalcolithic necropolis (middle of the 5th millennium BC). The bow drill was used to drill holes into carnelian in Mehrgarh in the 4th–5th millennium BC.
Carnelian was recovered from Bronze Age Minoan layers at Knossos on Crete in a form that demonstrated its use in decorative arts; this use dates to approximately 1800 BC. Carnelian was used widely during Roman times to make engraved gems for signet or seal rings for imprinting a seal with wax on correspondence or other important documents, as hot wax does not stick to carnelian. Sard was used for Assyrian cylinder seals, Egyptian and Phoenician scarabs, and early Greek and Etruscan gems. The Hebrew &quot;odem&quot; (also translated as &quot;sardius&quot;), was the first stone in the High Priest&#x27;s breastplate, a red stone, probably sard but perhaps red jasper. In Revelation 4:3, the One seated on the heavenly throne seen in the vision of John the apostle is said to &quot;look like jasper and (&quot;sardius&quot; transliterated).&quot; And likewise it is in Revelation 21:20 as one of the precious stones in the foundations of the wall of the heavenly city.
There is a Neo-Assyrian seal made of carnelian in the Western Asiatic Seals collection of the British Museum that shows Ishtar-Gula as a star goddess. She is holding a ring of royal authority and is seated on a throne. She is shown with the spade of Marduk (his symbol), Sibbiti (seven) gods, the stylus of Nabu and a worshiper. An 8th century BC carnelian seal from the collection of the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford shows Ishtar-Gula with her dog facing the spade of Marduk and his red dragon.

==Etymology==
Although now the more common term, &quot;carnelian&quot; is a 16th-century corruption of the 14th-century word &quot;cornelian&quot; (and its associated orthographies corneline and cornalyn). Cornelian, cognate with similar words in several Romance languages, comes from the Mediaeval Latin , itself derived from the Latin word &#x27;, the cornel cherry, whose translucent red fruits resemble the stone. The Oxford English Dictionary calls &quot;carnelian&quot; a perversion of &quot;cornelian,&quot; by subsequent analogy with the Latin word &#x27; (&quot;flesh&quot;). According to Pliny the Elder, sard derived its name from the city of Sardis in Lydia from which it came, and according to others, may ultimately be related to the Persian word &quot;&quot; (&quot;sered&quot;, &quot;yellowish-red&quot;). Another possible derivation is from the Greek &quot;σάρξ&quot; (&quot;sarx&quot;, &quot;flesh&quot;); compare the surer etymology of &quot;onyx&quot;, which comes from Greek &quot;ὄνυξ&quot; (&quot;onyx&quot;, &quot;claw, fingernail&quot;), presumably because onyx with flesh-colored and white bands can resemble a fingernail.

==Distinction between carnelian and sard==

The names carnelian and sard are often used interchangeably, but they can also be used to describe distinct subvarieties. The general differences are as follows:

All of these properties vary across a continuum, so the boundary between carnelian and sard is inherently blurry.

==See also==
* Carnelian (color)
* List of minerals

==References==
==Further reading==
* Allchin, B. 1979. &quot;The agate and carnelian industry of Western India and Pakistan&quot;. – In: &quot;South Asian Archaeology&quot; 1975. E. J. Brill, Leiden, 91–105.
* Beck, H. C. 1933. &quot;Etched carnelian beads&quot;. – &quot;The Antiquaries Journal&quot;, 13, 4, 384–398.
* Bellina, B. 2003. &quot;Beads, social change and interaction between India and South-east Asia&quot;. – &quot;Antiquity&quot;, 77, 296, 285–297. 
* Brunet, O. 2009. &quot;Bronze and Iron Age carnelian bead production in the UAE and Armenia: new perspectives&quot;. – &quot;Proceedings of the Seminar for Arabian Studies&quot;, 39, 57–68. 
* Carter, A. K., L. Dussubieux. 2016. &quot;Geologic provenience analysis of agate and carnelian beads using laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS): A case study from Iron Age Cambodia and Thailand&quot;. – &quot;J. Archeol. Sci.: Reports&quot;, 6, 321–331.
* Cornaline de l&#x27;Inde. &quot;Des pratiques techniques de Cambay aux techno-systèmes de l&#x27;Indus&quot; (Ed. J.-C. Roux). 2000. Éditions de la Maison des sciences de l&#x27;homme, Paris, 558 pp.
* Glover, I. 2001. &quot;Cornaline de l&#x27;Inde. Des pratiques techniques de Cambay aux techno-systèmes de l&#x27;Indus (sous la direction de V. Roux). – &quot;Bulletin de l&#x27;École française d&#x27;Extrême-Orient&quot;, 88, 376–381.
* Inizan, M.-L. 1999. &quot;La cornaline de l’Indus à la Mésopotamie, production et circulation: la voie du Golfe au IIIe millénaire&quot;. – In: &quot;Cornaline et pierres précieuses. De Sumer à l&#x27;Islam&quot; (Ed. by F. Tallon), Musée du Louvre, Paris, 127–140.
* Insoll, T., D. A. Polya, K. Bhan, D. Irving, K. Jarvis. 2004. &quot;Towards an understanding of the carnelian bead trade from Western India to sub-Saharan Africa: the application of UV-LA-ICP-MS to carnelian from Gujarat, India, and West Africa&quot;. – &quot;J. Archaeol. Sci.&quot;, 31, 8, 1161–1173. 
* Mackay, E. 1933. &quot;Decorated carnelian beads&quot;. – &quot;Man&quot;, 33, Sept., 143–146.
* Theunissen, R. 2007. &quot;The agate and carnelian ornaments&quot;. – In: &quot;The Excavations of Noen U-Loke and Non Muang Kao&quot; (Eds. C. Higham, A. Kijngam, S. Talbot). The Thai Fine Arts Department, Bangkok, 359–377.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q324369" start="0" end="9" title="Carnelian" label="Carnelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q324369" start="24" end="33" title="Carnelian" label="cornelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="53" end="60" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="80" end="98" title="gemstone" label="semiprecious stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q324369" start="124" end="128" title="Carnelian" label="sard"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="302" end="308" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q170448" start="317" end="327" title="chalcedony" label="chalcedony"/>
<link wikidata="Q419170" start="353" end="363" title="Iron(III) oxide" label="iron oxide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="488" end="496" title="Yanacodo" label="Yanacodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="498" end="502" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q508753" start="505" end="514" title="Ratnapura" label="Ratnapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="516" end="525" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="532" end="540" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="563" end="572" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="574" end="580" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="582" end="587" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="589" end="595" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="597" end="604" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="611" end="618" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="627" end="640" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="668" end="676" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148783" start="715" end="735" title="Patuxent River stone" label="Patuxent River stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="973" end="985" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115364" start="1036" end="1045" title="bow drill" label="bow drill"/>
<link wikidata="Q242148" start="1088" end="1096" title="Mehrgarh" label="Mehrgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1156" end="1166" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="1167" end="1173" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q173527" start="1184" end="1191" title="Knossos" label="Knossos"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="1195" end="1200" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="1294" end="1296" title="Before the Common Era" label="BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501187" start="1351" end="1364" title="engraved gems" label="engraved gems"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="1379" end="1388" title="seal ring" label="seal ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="1527" end="1534" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123756" start="1536" end="1549" title="cylinder seal" label="cylinder seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1552" end="1560" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="1565" end="1574" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442735" start="1576" end="1583" title="Scarab (artifact)" label="scarabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1595" end="1600" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="1624" end="1630" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497830" start="1717" end="1747" title="Hoshen" label="High Priest&amp;#x27;s breastplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q201175" start="1792" end="1798" title="jasper" label="jasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q16159178" start="1803" end="1817" title="Revelation 4" label="Revelation 4:3"/>
<link wikidata="Q44015" start="1879" end="1895" title="John the apostle" label="John the apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="2111" end="2123" title="Neo-Assyrian" label="Neo-Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="2194" end="2208" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="2220" end="2226" title="Ishtar" label="Ishtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028642" start="2227" end="2231" title="Gula (goddess)" label="Gula"/>
<link wikidata="Q190123" start="2350" end="2356" title="Marduk" label="Marduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q392239" start="2407" end="2411" title="Nabu" label="Nabu"/>
<link wikidata="Q636400" start="2489" end="2505" title="Ashmolean Museum" label="Ashmolean Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="2850" end="2867" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="2884" end="2899" title="Mediaeval Latin" label="Mediaeval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2926" end="2931" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q158642" start="2949" end="2962" title="European Cornel" label="cornel cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="3017" end="3042" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="3193" end="3208" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q232615" start="3249" end="3255" title="Sardis" label="Sardis"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="3259" end="3264" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="3343" end="3350" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180884" start="3556" end="3560" title="onyx" label="onyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043987" start="4082" end="4099" title="Carnelian (color)" label="Carnelian (color)"/>
<link wikidata="Q243479" start="4102" end="4118" title="List of minerals" label="List of minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966693" start="4157" end="4167" title="Bridget Allchin" label="Allchin, B"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44603" wikidata="Q171917" url="?curid=44603" title="Calcite">
<text>Calcite is a carbonate mineral and the most stable polymorph of calcium carbonate (CaCO3). It is a very common mineral, particularly as a component of limestone. Calcite defines hardness 3 on the Mohs scale of mineral hardness, based on scratch hardness comparison. Large calcite crystals are used in optical equipment, and limestone composed mostly of calcite has numerous uses.

Other polymorphs of calcium carbonate are the minerals aragonite and vaterite. Aragonite will change to calcite over timescales of days or less at temperatures exceeding 300 °C, and vaterite is even less stable.

== Etymology ==
Calcite is derived from the German , a term from the 19th century that came from the Latin word for lime, (genitive ) with the suffix &quot;-ite&quot; used to name minerals. It is thus a doublet of the word &quot;&quot;.

When applied by archaeologists and stone trade professionals, the term alabaster is used not just as in geology and mineralogy, where it is reserved for a variety of gypsum; but also for a similar-looking, translucent variety of fine-grained banded deposit of calcite.

== Unit cell and Miller indices ==

In publications, two different sets of Miller indices are used to describe directions in hexagonal and rhombohedral crystals, including calcite crystals: three Miller indices in the formula_1 directions, or four Bravais–Miller indices in the formula_2 directions, where formula_3 is redundant but useful in visualizing permutation symmetries.

To add to the complications, there are also two definitions of unit cell for calcite. One, an older &quot;morphological&quot; unit cell, was inferred by measuring angles between faces of crystals, typically with a goniometer, and looking for the smallest numbers that fit. Later, a &quot;structural&quot; unit cell was determined using X-ray crystallography. The morphological unit cell is rhombohedral, having approximate dimensions and , while the structural unit cell is hexagonal (i.e. a rhombic prism), having approximate dimensions and . For the same orientation, must be multiplied by 4 to convert from morphological to structural units. As an example, calcite cleavage is given as &quot;perfect on {1 0 1}&quot; in morphological coordinates and &quot;perfect on {1 0 4}&quot; in structural units. In formula_4 indices, these are {1 0 1} and {1 0 4}, respectively. Twinning, cleavage and crystal forms are often given in morphological units.

== Properties ==
The diagnostic properties of calcite include a defining Mohs hardness of 3, a specific gravity of 2.71 and, in crystalline varieties, a vitreous luster. Color is white or none, though shades of gray, red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet, brown, or even black can occur when the mineral is charged with impurities.

=== Crystal habits ===
Calcite has numerous habits, representing combinations of over 1000 crystallographic forms. Most common are scalenohedra, with faces in the hexagonal directions (morphological unit cell) or {2 1 4} directions (structural unit cell); and rhombohedral, with faces in the or directions (the most common cleavage plane). Habits include acute to obtuse rhombohedra, tabular habits, prisms, or various scalenohedra. Calcite exhibits several twinning types that add to the observed habits. It may occur as fibrous, granular, lamellar, or compact. A fibrous, efflorescent habit is known as &quot;lublinite&quot;. Cleavage is usually in three directions parallel to the rhombohedron form. Its fracture is conchoidal, but difficult to obtain.

Scalenohedral faces are chiral and come in pairs with mirror-image symmetry; their growth can be influenced by interaction with chiral biomolecules such as L- and D-amino acids. Rhombohedral faces are not chiral.

=== Optical ===

Calcite is transparent to opaque and may occasionally show phosphorescence or fluorescence. A transparent variety called &quot;Iceland spar&quot; is used for optical purposes. Acute scalenohedral crystals are sometimes referred to as &quot;dogtooth spar&quot; while the rhombohedral form is sometimes referred to as &quot;nailhead spar&quot;. The rhombohedral form may also have been the &quot;sunstone&quot; whose use by Viking navigators is mentioned in the Icelandic Sagas.

Single calcite crystals display an optical property called birefringence (double refraction). This strong birefringence causes objects viewed through a clear piece of calcite to appear doubled. The birefringent effect (using calcite) was first described by the Danish scientist Rasmus Bartholin in 1669. At a wavelength of about 590 nm, calcite has ordinary and extraordinary refractive indices of 1.658 and 1.486, respectively. Between 190 and 1700 nm, the ordinary refractive index varies roughly between 1.9 and 1.5, while the extraordinary refractive index varies between 1.6 and 1.4.

=== Thermoluminescence ===

Calcite has thermoluminescent properties mainly due to manganese divalent (). An experiment was conducted by adding activators such as ions of Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Ag, Pb, and Bi to the calcite samples to observe whether they emitted heat or light. The results showed that adding ions (, , , , , , , , ) did not react. However, a reaction occurred when both manganese and lead ions were present in calcite. By changing the temperature and observing the glow curve peaks, it was found that and acted as activators in the calcite lattice, but was much less efficient than .

Measuring mineral thermoluminescence experiments usually use x-rays or gamma-rays to activate the sample and record the changes in glowing curves at a temperature of 700–7500 K. Mineral thermoluminescence can form various glow curves of crystals under different conditions, such as temperature changes, because impurity ions or other crystal defects present in minerals supply luminescence centers and trapping levels. Observing these curve changes also can help infer geological correlation and age determination.

=== Chemical ===
Calcite, like most carbonates, dissolves in acids by the following reaction

The carbon dioxide released by this reaction produces a characteristic effervescence when a calcite sample is treated with an acid.

Due to its acidity, carbon dioxide has a slight solubilizing effect on calcite. The overall reaction is

If the amount of dissolved carbon dioxide drops, the reaction reverses to precipitate calcite. As a result, calcite can be either dissolved by groundwater or precipitated by groundwater, depending on such factors as the water temperature, pH, and dissolved ion concentrations. When conditions are right for precipitation, calcite forms mineral coatings that cement rock grains together and can fill fractures. When conditions are right for dissolution, the removal of calcite can dramatically increase the porosity and permeability of the rock, and if it continues for a long period of time, may result in the formation of caves. Continued dissolution of calcium carbonate-rich formations can lead to the expansion and eventual collapse of cave systems, resulting in various forms of karst topography.

Calcite exhibits an unusual characteristic called retrograde solubility: it is less soluble in water as the temperature increases. Calcite is also more soluble at higher pressures.

Pure calcite has the composition . However, the calcite in limestone often contains a few percent of magnesium. Calcite in limestone is divided into low-magnesium and high-magnesium calcite, with the dividing line placed at a composition of 4% magnesium. High-magnesium calcite retains the calcite mineral structure, which is distinct from that of dolomite, . Calcite can also contain small quantities of iron and manganese. Manganese may be responsible for the fluorescence of impure calcite, as may traces of organic compounds.

== Distribution ==
Calcite is found all over the world, and its leading global distribution is as follows:

=== United States ===

Calcite is found in many different areas in the United States. One of the best examples is the Calcite Quarry in Michigan. The Calcite Quarry is the largest carbonate mine in the world and has been in use for more than 85 years. Large quantities of calcite can be mined from these sizeable open pit mines.

=== Canada ===

Calcite can also be found throughout Canada, such as in Thorold Quarry and Madawaska Mine, Ontario, Canada.

=== Mexico ===

Abundant calcite is mined in the Santa Eulalia mining district, Chihuahua, Mexico.

=== Iceland ===

Large quantities of calcite in Iceland are concentrated in the Helgustadir mine. The mine was once the primary mining location of &quot;Iceland spar.&quot; However, it currently serves as a nature reserve, and calcite mining will not be allowed.

=== England ===

Calcite is found in parts of England, such as Alston Moor, Egremont, and Frizington, Cumbria.

=== Germany ===

St. Andreasberg, Harz Mountains, and Freiberg, Saxony can find calcite.

== Use and applications ==

Ancient Egyptians carved many items out of calcite, relating it to their goddess Bast, whose name contributed to the term alabaster because of the close association. Many other cultures have used the material for similar carved objects and applications.

A transparent variety of calcite known as Iceland spar may have been used by Vikings for navigating on cloudy days. A very pure crystal of calcite can split a beam of sunlight into dual images, as the polarized light deviates slightly from the main beam. By observing the sky through the crystal and then rotating it so that the two images are of equal brightness, the rings of polarized light that surround the sun can be seen even under overcast skies. Identifying the sun&#x27;s location would give seafarers a reference point for navigating on their lengthy sea voyages.

In World War II, high-grade optical calcite was used for gun sights, specifically in bomb sights and anti-aircraft weaponry. It was used as a polarizer (in Nicol prisms) before the invention of Polaroid plates and still finds use in optical instruments. Also, experiments have been conducted to use calcite for a cloak of invisibility.

Microbiologically precipitated calcite has a wide range of applications, such as soil remediation, soil stabilization and concrete repair. It also can be used for tailings management and is designed to promote sustainable development in the mining industry.

Calcite can help synthesize precipitated calcium carbonate (PCC) (mainly used in the paper industry) and increase carbonation. Furthermore, due to its particular crystal habit, such as rhombohedron, hexagonal prism, etc., it promotes the production of PCC with specific shapes and particle sizes.

Calcite, obtained from an 80 kg sample of Carrara marble, is used as the IAEA-603 isotopic standard in mass spectrometry for the calibration of δ18O and δ13C.

Calcite can be formed naturally or synthesized. However, artificial calcite is the preferred material to be used as a scaffold in bone tissue engineering due to its controllable and repeatable properties.

Calcite can be used to alleviate water pollution caused by the excessive growth of cyanobacteria. Lakes and rivers can lead to cyanobacteria blooms due to eutrophication, which pollutes water resources. Phosphorus (P) is the leading cause of excessive growth of cyanobacteria. As an active capping material, calcite can help reduce P release from sediments into the water, thus inhibiting cyanobacteria overgrowth.

== Natural occurrence ==
Calcite is a common constituent of sedimentary rocks, limestone in particular, much of which is formed from the shells of dead marine organisms. Approximately 10% of sedimentary rock is limestone. It is the primary mineral in metamorphic marble. It also occurs in deposits from hot springs as a vein mineral; in caverns as stalactites and stalagmites; and in volcanic or mantle-derived rocks such as carbonatites, kimberlites, or rarely in peridotites.

Cacti contain Ca-oxalate biominerals. Their death releases these biominerals into the environment, which subsequently transform to calcite via a monohydrocalcite intermediate, sequestering carbon.

Calcite is often the primary constituent of the shells of marine organisms, such as plankton (such as coccoliths and planktic foraminifera), the hard parts of red algae, some sponges, brachiopods, echinoderms, some serpulids, most bryozoa, and parts of the shells of some bivalves (such as oysters and rudists). Calcite is found in spectacular form in the Snowy River Cave of New Mexico as mentioned above, where microorganisms are credited with natural formations. Trilobites, which became extinct a quarter billion years ago, had unique compound eyes that used clear calcite crystals to form the lenses. It also forms a substantial part of birds&#x27; eggshells, and the δC of the diet is reflected in the δC of the calcite of the shell.

The largest documented single crystal of calcite originated from Iceland, measured and and weighed about 250 tons. Classic samples have been produced at Madawaska Mine, near Bancroft, Ontario.

Bedding parallel veins of fibrous calcite, often referred to in quarrying parlance as &quot;beef&quot;, occur in dark organic rich mudstones and shales, these veins are formed by increasing fluid pressure during diagenesis.

== Formation processes ==

Calcite formation can proceed by several pathways, from the classical terrace ledge kink model to the crystallization of poorly ordered precursor phases like amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC) via an Ostwald ripening process, or via the agglomeration of nanocrystals.

The crystallization of ACC can occur in two stages. First, the ACC nanoparticles rapidly dehydrate and crystallize to form individual particles of vaterite. Second, the vaterite transforms to calcite via a dissolution and reprecipitation mechanism, with the reaction rate controlled by the surface area of a calcite crystal. The second stage of the reaction is approximately 10 times slower.

However, crystallization of calcite has been observed to be dependent on the starting pH and concentration of magnesium in solution. A neutral starting pH during mixing promotes the direct transformation of ACC into calcite without a vaterite intermediate. But when ACC forms in a solution with a basic initial pH, the transformation to calcite occurs via metastable vaterite, following the pathway outlined above. Magnesium has a noteworthy effect on both the stability of ACC and its transformation to crystalline CaCO3, resulting in the formation of calcite directly from ACC, as this ion destabilizes the structure of vaterite.

Epitaxial overgrowths of calcite precipitated on weathered cleavage surfaces have morphologies that vary with the type of weathering the substrate experienced: growth on physically weathered surfaces has a shingled morphology due to Volmer-Weber growth, growth on chemically weathered surfaces has characteristics of Stranski-Krastanov growth, and growth on pristine cleavage surfaces has characteristics of Frank - van der Merwe growth. These differences are apparently due to the influence of surface roughness on layer coalescence dynamics.

Calcite may form in the subsurface in response to microorganism activity, such as sulfate-dependent anaerobic oxidation of methane, where methane is oxidized and sulfate is reduced, leading to precipitation of calcite and pyrite from the produced bicarbonate and sulfide. These processes can be traced by the specific carbon isotope composition of the calcites, which are extremely depleted in the 13C isotope, by as much as −125 per mil PDB (δ13C).

== In Earth history ==
Calcite seas existed in Earth&#x27;s history when the primary inorganic precipitate of calcium carbonate in marine waters was low-magnesium calcite (lmc), as opposed to the aragonite and high-magnesium calcite (hmc) precipitated today. Calcite seas alternated with aragonite seas over the Phanerozoic, being most prominent in the Ordovician and Jurassic periods. Lineages evolved to use whichever morph of calcium carbonate was favourable in the ocean at the time they became mineralised, and retained this mineralogy for the remainder of their evolutionary history. Petrographic evidence for these calcite sea conditions consists of calcitic ooids, lmc cements, hardgrounds, and rapid early seafloor aragonite dissolution. The evolution of marine organisms with calcium carbonate shells may have been affected by the calcite and aragonite sea cycle.

Calcite is one of the minerals that has been shown to catalyze an important biological reaction, the formose reaction, and may have had a role in the origin of life. Interaction of its chiral surfaces (see Form) with aspartic acid molecules results in a slight bias in chirality; this is one possible mechanism for the origin of homochirality in living cells.

== Climate change ==
Climate change is exacerbating ocean acidification, possibly leading to lower natural calcite production. The oceans absorb large amounts of from fossil fuel emissions into the air. The total amount of artificial absorbed by the oceans is calculated to be 118 ± 19 Gt C. If a large amount of dissolves in the sea, it will cause the acidity of the seawater to increase, thereby affecting the pH value of the ocean. Calcifying organisms in the sea, such as molluscs foraminifera, crustaceans, echinoderms and corals, are susceptible to pH changes. Meanwhile, these calcifying organisms are also an essential source of calcite. As ocean acidification causes pH to drop, carbonate ion concentrations will decline, potentially reducing natural calcite production.
== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Carbonate rock
* Ikaite, CaCO3·6H2O
* List of minerals
* Lysocline
* Manganoan calcite, (Ca,Mn)CO3
* Monohydrocalcite, CaCO3·H2O
* Nitratine
* Ocean acidification
* Ulexite
* Dolomitization

== References ==
== Further reading ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="0" end="7" title="Calcite" label="Calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073138" start="13" end="30" title="Carbonate minerals" label="carbonate mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q907364" start="51" end="60" title="Polymorphism (materials science)" label="polymorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="64" end="81" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="151" end="160" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41472" start="196" end="226" title="Mohs scale of mineral hardness" label="Mohs scale of mineral hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125523" start="237" end="244" title="Scratch hardness" label="scratch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656273" start="245" end="264" title="hardness comparison" label="hardness comparison"/>
<link wikidata="Q23775" start="436" end="445" title="aragonite" label="aragonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q421362" start="450" end="458" title="vaterite" label="vaterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q250423" start="710" end="714" title="Lime (material)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210061" start="797" end="804" title="Doublet (linguistics)" label="doublet"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="848" end="862" title="archaeology" label="archaeologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q143447" start="903" end="912" title="alabaster" label="alabaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="998" end="1004" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q487623" start="1038" end="1049" title="Transparency and translucency" label="translucent"/>
<link wikidata="Q849699" start="1177" end="1191" title="Miller indices" label="Miller indices"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1350" end="1372" title="Miller index#Case of hexagonal and rhombohedral structures" label="Bravais–Miller indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412905" start="1457" end="1479" title="Permutation group" label="permutation symmetries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11878049" start="1545" end="1554" title="unit cell" label="unit cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126161" start="1696" end="1706" title="goniometer" label="goniometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q826582" start="1818" end="1839" title="X-ray crystallography" label="X-ray crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q854916" start="1872" end="1884" title="Rhombohedron" label="rhombohedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q663314" start="1956" end="1965" title="Hexagonal crystal family" label="hexagonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41159" start="1974" end="1981" title="Rhombus" label="rhombic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180544" start="1982" end="1987" title="Prism (geometry)" label="prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q107400" start="2150" end="2158" title="Cleavage (crystal)" label="cleavage"/>
<link wikidata="Q109856" start="2354" end="2362" title="Crystal twinning" label="Twinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q505892" start="2377" end="2390" title="Crystal habit" label="crystal forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q41472" start="2505" end="2518" title="Mohs hardness" label="Mohs hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q11027905" start="2527" end="2543" title="specific gravity" label="specific gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998326" start="2594" end="2600" title="Lustre (mineralogy)" label="luster"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="2859" end="2880" title="crystallographic form" label="crystallographic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076140" start="2899" end="2911" title="scalenohedron" label="scalenohedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q180544" start="3168" end="3174" title="Prism (geometry)" label="prisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076140" start="3187" end="3199" title="scalenohedron" label="scalenohedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q109856" start="3226" end="3234" title="crystal twinning" label="twinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747476" start="3487" end="3497" title="Conchoidal fracture" label="conchoidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734365" start="3549" end="3555" title="chiral" label="chiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="3690" end="3700" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q487623" start="3767" end="3778" title="transparency and translucency" label="transparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q691914" start="3782" end="3788" title="opacity (optics)" label="opaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q192275" start="3815" end="3830" title="phosphorescence" label="phosphorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="3834" end="3846" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q974568" start="3883" end="3895" title="Iceland spar" label="Iceland spar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076140" start="3938" end="3951" title="bipyramid" label="scalenohedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q854916" start="4026" end="4038" title="rhombohedron" label="rhombohedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895983" start="4150" end="4158" title="sunstone (medieval)" label="sunstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="4178" end="4184" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q300" start="4216" end="4231" title="Sagas of Icelanders" label="Icelandic Sagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q108779" start="4293" end="4306" title="birefringence" label="birefringence"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="4495" end="4501" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q504352" start="4512" end="4528" title="Rasmus Bartholin" label="Rasmus Bartholin"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="4610" end="4628" title="refractive index" label="refractive indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q36194" start="4864" end="4881" title="Thermoluminescence" label="thermoluminescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q739398" start="6406" end="6415" title="solvation" label="dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="6434" end="6445" title="precipitate" label="precipitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="6515" end="6517" title="acidity" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="6533" end="6536" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q622669" start="6782" end="6790" title="porosity" label="porosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q256699" start="6795" end="6807" title="Permeability (fluid)" label="permeability"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="6899" end="6903" title="cave" label="cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="7060" end="7076" title="Karst" label="karst topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="7362" end="7371" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q167741" start="7609" end="7617" title="Dolomite (mineral)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="7666" end="7670" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="7675" end="7684" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837602" start="8018" end="8032" title="Michigan Limestone and Chemical Company" label="Calcite Quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q10519564" start="8535" end="8551" title="Helgustadir mine" label="Helgustadir mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q129106" start="9030" end="9034" title="Bastet" label="Bast"/>
<link wikidata="Q143447" start="9071" end="9080" title="alabaster" label="alabaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q974568" start="9246" end="9258" title="Iceland spar" label="Iceland spar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="9281" end="9288" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343878" start="9936" end="9947" title="Nicol prism" label="Nicol prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q958131" start="9974" end="9982" title="Polaroid (polarizer)" label="Polaroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419514" start="10093" end="10114" title="cloak of invisibility" label="cloak of invisibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157498" start="10117" end="10155" title="Microbiologically induced calcite precipitation" label="Microbiologically precipitated calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139722" start="10490" end="10501" title="carbonation" label="carbonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40088" start="10716" end="10730" title="Carrara marble" label="Carrara marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="10747" end="10751" title="IAEA" label="IAEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="10777" end="10794" title="mass spectrometry" label="mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q344117" start="10818" end="10822" title="δ18O" label="δ18O"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278929" start="10827" end="10831" title="δ13C" label="δ13C"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="11123" end="11136" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q156698" start="11195" end="11209" title="eutrophication" label="eutrophication"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="11516" end="11532" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="11707" end="11718" title="Metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="11719" end="11725" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q177380" start="11759" end="11769" title="hot spring" label="hot spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q952465" start="11776" end="11780" title="Vein (geology)" label="vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q177197" start="11804" end="11814" title="stalactite" label="stalactite"/>
<link wikidata="Q177197" start="11820" end="11830" title="stalactite" label="stalagmite"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="11840" end="11848" title="volcanic rock" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="11852" end="11866" title="mantle (geology)" label="mantle-derived"/>
<link wikidata="Q195178" start="11881" end="11892" title="carbonatite" label="carbonatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q204376" start="11895" end="11905" title="kimberlite" label="kimberlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q239918" start="11921" end="11931" title="peridotite" label="peridotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q14560" start="11935" end="11940" title="Cactus" label="Cacti"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305550" start="12111" end="12130" title="Carbon sequestration" label="sequestering carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173" start="12191" end="12206" title="Marine biology" label="marine organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="12217" end="12225" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q608189" start="12235" end="12244" title="coccolith" label="coccolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q107027" start="12259" end="12271" title="foraminifera" label="foraminifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="12296" end="12301" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="12308" end="12314" title="sea sponge" label="sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q178272" start="12317" end="12327" title="brachiopod" label="brachiopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q44631" start="12330" end="12340" title="echinoderm" label="echinoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213001" start="12348" end="12357" title="Serpulidae" label="serpulids"/>
<link wikidata="Q148134" start="12364" end="12371" title="bryozoa" label="bryozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="12405" end="12413" title="Bivalvia" label="bivalves"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411" start="12423" end="12429" title="oyster" label="oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541069" start="12435" end="12442" title="rudists" label="rudists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548757" start="12489" end="12505" title="Snowy River Cave" label="Snowy River Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="12509" end="12519" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q17170" start="12599" end="12608" title="Trilobite" label="Trilobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q141118" start="12624" end="12659" title="Permian–Triassic extinction event" label="extinct a quarter billion years ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278929" start="12806" end="12808" title="δ13C" label="δC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726558" start="13027" end="13041" title="Madawaska Mine" label="Madawaska Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850051" start="13048" end="13065" title="Bancroft, Ontario" label="Bancroft, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q806617" start="13068" end="13075" title="Bed (geology)" label="Bedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="13258" end="13272" title="fluid pressure" label="fluid pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q180621" start="13280" end="13290" title="diagenesis" label="diagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318052" start="13390" end="13414" title="terrace ledge kink model" label="terrace ledge kink model"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747785" start="13478" end="13505" title="amorphous calcium carbonate" label="amorphous calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q903984" start="13519" end="13535" title="Ostwald ripening" label="Ostwald ripening"/>
<link wikidata="Q421362" start="13735" end="13743" title="vaterite" label="vaterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q739398" start="13794" end="13805" title="Solvation" label="dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="13810" end="13825" title="Precipitation (chemistry)" label="reprecipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394849" start="13846" end="13859" title="reaction rate" label="reaction rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379273" start="13878" end="13890" title="surface area" label="surface area"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="14067" end="14069" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686031" start="14074" end="14087" title="concentration" label="concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="14091" end="14100" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193" start="14278" end="14283" title="Base (chemistry)" label="basic"/>
<link wikidata="Q849516" start="14337" end="14347" title="Metastability" label="metastable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135540" start="14614" end="14623" title="Epitaxy" label="Epitaxial"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="14663" end="14672" title="Weathering" label="weathered"/>
<link wikidata="Q107400" start="14673" end="14681" title="Cleavage (crystal)" label="cleavage"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="15209" end="15222" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q172290" start="15241" end="15248" title="sulfate" label="sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065016" start="15259" end="15289" title="anaerobic oxidation of methane" label="anaerobic oxidation of methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="15297" end="15304" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="15308" end="15316" title="Redox" label="oxidized"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="15332" end="15339" title="Redox" label="reduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="15381" end="15387" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q409202" start="15406" end="15417" title="bicarbonate" label="bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q221205" start="15422" end="15429" title="sulfide" label="sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q471790" start="15477" end="15491" title="carbon isotope" label="carbon isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770822" start="15557" end="15560" title="Carbon-13" label="13C"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15597" end="15600" title="Δ13C#Reference standard" label="PDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018792" start="15633" end="15644" title="Calcite sea" label="Calcite sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="15705" end="15716" title="Precipitation (chemistry)" label="precipitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="15720" end="15737" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23775" start="15806" end="15815" title="aragonite" label="aragonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783732" start="15898" end="15911" title="aragonite sea" label="aragonite sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q101313" start="15922" end="15933" title="Phanerozoic" label="Phanerozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="15963" end="15973" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="15978" end="15986" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q907364" start="16030" end="16035" title="Polymorphism (materials science)" label="morph"/>
<link wikidata="Q289600" start="16200" end="16212" title="Petrography" label="Petrographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q642735" start="16276" end="16280" title="ooid" label="ooid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783332" start="16296" end="16307" title="hardgrounds" label="hardgrounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="16539" end="16547" title="catalysis" label="catalyze"/>
<link wikidata="Q416211" start="16586" end="16602" title="formose reaction" label="formose reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734365" start="16670" end="16676" title="Chirality" label="chiral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16691" end="16695" title="#Form" label="Form"/>
<link wikidata="Q178450" start="16702" end="16715" title="aspartic acid" label="aspartic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q903478" start="16814" end="16827" title="homochirality" label="homochirality"/>
<link wikidata="Q855711" start="16898" end="16917" title="ocean acidification" label="ocean acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q777913" start="17657" end="17671" title="Carbonate rock" label="Carbonate rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252057" start="17674" end="17680" title="Ikaite" label="Ikaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q243479" start="17695" end="17711" title="List of minerals" label="List of minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122689" start="17714" end="17723" title="Lysocline" label="Lysocline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748802" start="17726" end="17743" title="Manganoan calcite" label="Manganoan calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901631" start="17758" end="17774" title="Monohydrocalcite" label="Monohydrocalcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622967" start="17788" end="17797" title="Nitratine" label="Nitratine"/>
<link wikidata="Q855711" start="17800" end="17819" title="Ocean acidification" label="Ocean acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q409611" start="17822" end="17829" title="Ulexite" label="Ulexite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736526" start="17832" end="17846" title="Dolomitization" label="Dolomitization"/>
</links>
</doc>
