<doc id="39943" wikidata="Q243842" url="?curid=39943" title="History of Malta">
<text>Malta has been inhabited since 5900 BC. DNA analysis indicates that the first inhabitants originated from various European and African regions of the Mediterranean. They practiced mixed farming after clearing most of the existing conifer forest that dominated the islands, but their agricultural methods degraded the soil until the islands became uninhabitable. The islands were repopulated around 3850 BC by a civilization that at its peak built the Megalithic Temples, which today are among the oldest surviving buildings in the world. Their civilization collapsed in around 2350 BC; the islands were repopulated by Bronze Age warriors soon afterwards.

Malta&#x27;s prehistory ends in around 700 BC, when the islands were colonized by the Phoenicians. They ruled the islands until they fell in 218 BC to the Roman Republic. The island was acquired by the Eastern Romans or Byzantines in the 6th century AD, who were expelled by Aghlabids following a siege in 870 AD. Malta may have been sparsely populated for a few centuries until being repopulated by Arabs in the 11th century. The islands were invaded by the Norman County of Sicily in 1091, and a gradual Christianization of the islands followed. At this point, the islands became part of the Kingdom of Sicily and were dominated by successive feudal rulers, including the Swabians, the Aragonese, and eventually the Spanish. The islands were given to the Order of St. John in 1530, which ruled them as a vassal state of Sicily. In 1565, the Ottoman Empire attempted to take the islands in the Great Siege of Malta, but the invasion was repelled. The Order continued to rule Malta for over two centuries, and this period was characterized by a flourishing of the arts and architecture and an overall improvement in the social order [citation needed]. The Order was expelled after the French First Republic invaded the islands in 1798, marking the beginning of the French occupation of Malta.

After a few months of French rule, the Maltese rebelled and the French were expelled in 1800. Malta became a British protectorate, becoming a &quot;de facto&quot; colony in 1813. The islands became an important naval base for the British, serving as the headquarters of the Mediterranean Fleet. During the last quarter of the 19th century, there were advancements in technology and finance. In subsequent years, the Anglo-Egyptian Bank was established in 1882 and the Malta Railway began operating in 1883. In 1921, London granted self-government to Malta. This resulted in the establishment of a bicameral parliament consisting of a Senate (which was later eliminated in 1949) and an elected Legislative Assembly. The Crown Colony of Malta was self-governing in 1921–1933, 1947–1958, and 1962–1964.

During World War II British forces in Malta were heavily attacked by Italian and German air power, but the British held firm. In 1942 the island was awarded the George Cross, which today appears on Malta&#x27;s flag and coat of arms.

In 1964 Malta became an independent Commonwealth realm known as the State of Malta, and in 1974 it became a republic while remaining in the Commonwealth. Since 2004 the country has been a member state of the European Union.

==Geology==

Malta stands on an underwater ridge that extends from North Africa to Sicily. At some time in the distant past, Malta was submerged, as shown by marine fossils embedded in rock in the highest points of Malta. As the ridge was pushed up and the Strait of Gibraltar closed through tectonic activity, the sea level was lower, and Malta was on a bridge of dry land that extended between the two continents, surrounded by large lakes. Some caverns in Malta have revealed bones of elephants, hippopotamuses, and other large animals now found in Africa, while others have revealed animals native to Europe.

==Neolithic (5900 BC–3850 BC)==

While until recently, it was believed that Malta&#x27;s first inhabitants arrived in the islands in 5700  BC, it has now been established that this occurred around 5900 BC, as is evidenced by studies of ancient soils. These first Neolithic people have generally been assumed to have arrived from Sicily (about north), but DNA analysis shows that they originated from different parts of the Mediterranean, including both Europe and Africa.

They were mainly farming and fishing communities, with some evidence of hunting activities. They apparently lived in caves and open dwellings. During the centuries that followed there is evidence of further contacts with other cultures, which left their influence on the local communities, evidenced by their pottery designs and colours. The farming methods degraded the soil; at the same time prolonged drought set in, and the islands became too dry to sustain agricultural practices. This occurred partly due to climate change and drought, and the islands were uninhabited for about a millennium.

Research carried out as part of the FRAGSUS project, comprising analysis of soil cores from valleys, which contained ancient pollen and animal evidence from past environments, revealed that &quot;climate change fluctuations made Malta uninhabitable in some periods of prehistory. There was a substantial break of around 1,000 years between the first settlers and the next group who settled permanently on the Maltese islands and eventually built the megalithic temples.&quot;

== Temple period (3850 BC–2350 BC)==

A second wave of colonization arrived from Sicily in around 3850 BC. Prof. Caroline Malone has said: &quot;Given the restricted land space of Malta, it is remarkable that the second colonisation survived for 1,500 years. This sort of settlement stability is unheard of in Europe and is impressive in terms of how they were able to live on an ever-degrading land for such a period of time.&quot;

One of the most notable periods of Malta&#x27;s history is the temple period, starting around 3600 BC. The Ġgantija Temple in Gozo is one of the oldest free-standing buildings in the world. The name of the complex stems from the Maltese word &quot;ġgant&quot;, which reflects the magnitude of the temple&#x27;s size. Many of the temples are in the form of five semicircular rooms connected at the centre. It has been suggested that these might have represented the head, arms, and legs of a deity, since one of the commonest kinds of statue found in these temples comprises obese human figures, popularly termed &quot;fat ladies&quot; despite their ambiguity of gender, and often considered to represent fertility.

The civilization which built the temples lasted for about 1,500 years until about 2350 BC, at which point the culture seems to have disappeared. There is speculation about what might have happened and whether they were completely wiped out or assimilated, but it is thought that the collapse occurred due to climate conditions and drought.

Prof. Malone has stated: &quot;We can learn a lot from the mistakes made by the first Maltese. The lack of water, coupled with the destruction of soil that takes centuries to form, can cause the failure of a civilisation. The second group of inhabitants to Malta in 3850–2350 BC managed their resources adequately and harnessed soil and food for over 1,500 years. It was only when climate conditions and drought became so extreme that they failed.&quot;

Between 2600 and 2400 BC, half of those who died were children.

==Bronze Age (2350 BC–700 BC)==
After the Temple period came the Bronze Age. From this period there are remains of a number of settlements and villages, as well as dolmens — altar-like structures made out of very large slabs of stone. They are claimed to belong to a population certainly different from that which built the previous megalithic temples.

It is presumed the population arrived from Sicily because of the similarity to the constructions found in the largest island of the Mediterranean sea.

One surviving menhir, which was used to build temples, still stands at Kirkop; it is one of the few still in good condition.

Among the most interesting and mysterious remnants of this era are the so-called cart ruts as they can be seen at a place on Malta called Misraħ Għar il-Kbir (informally known as Clapham Junction). These are pairs of parallel channels cut into the surface of the rock, and extending for considerable distances, often in an exactly straight line. Their exact use is unknown. One suggestion is that beasts of burden used to pull carts along, and these channels would guide the carts and prevent the animals from straying. The society that built these structures eventually died out or at any rate disappeared.

Between 1400 BC and 1200 BC there was a Mycaenaean influence on the Malta, which is evidenced by presence of Mycaenaean artefacts.

== Antiquity ==

===Phoenicians and Carthage===

Phoenicianspossibly from Tyrebegan to colonize the islands around the early , using it as an outpost from which they expanded sea exploration and trade in the Mediterranean. They called the principal island Ann (, ). Necropolises have been found at Rabat on Malta and Rabat on Gozo, suggesting the main settlements were at present-day Mdina on Malta and Cittadella on Gozo. The former settlement was also known as Ann, suggesting it served as the colony&#x27;s seat of government. The principal port, meanwhile, was at Cospicua on the Grand Harbor. Known simply as Maleth (, , &quot;The Port&quot;), it was probably the namesake of the Greeks&#x27; and Romans&#x27; names for the entire island.

The Maltese Islands fell under the hegemony of Carthage around the middle of 6th century BC, along with most other Phoenician colonies in the western Mediterranean. By the late 4th century BC, Malta had become a trading post linking southern Italy and Sicily to Tripolitania. This resulted in the introduction of Hellenistic features in architecture and pottery. It is not known if Malta was settled like a traditional Greek , so some support that Malta was never a Greek colony. Hellenistic architectural features can be seen in the Punic temple at Tas-Silġ and a tower in Żurrieq. The Greek language also began to be used in Malta, as shown in the bilingual Phoenician and Greek inscriptions found on the Cippi of Melqart. In the 18th century, French scholar Jean-Jacques Barthélemy deciphered the extinct Phoenician alphabet using the inscriptions on these cippi.

In 255 BC, the Romans raided Malta during the First Punic War, devastating much of the island.

===Roman rule===
According to Latin historian Livy, the Maltese Islands passed into the hands of the Romans at the start of the Second Punic War in the year Livy reports the commander of the Punic garrison on the Island surrendered without resistance to Tiberius Sempronius Longus, one of the two consuls for that year, who was on his way to North Africa. The archipelagoknown to the Romans as Melita or Melitebecame part of the province of Sicily, but by the 1st century it had its own local senate and people&#x27;s assembly. By this time, both Malta and Gozo minted distinctive coins based on Roman weight measurements.

Serving as the administrative hub of the islands, Mdina also became known as Melita. Its size grew to its maximum extent, occupying the entire area of present-day Mdina and large parts of Rabat, extending to what is now St Paul&#x27;s Church. Remains show that the city was surrounded by thick defensive walls and was also protected by a protective ditch that ran along the same line of St Rita Street, which was built directly above it. Remains hint that a religious centre with a number of temples was built on the highest part of the promontory. The remains of one impressive residence known as the Domus Romana have been excavated, revealing well-preserved Pompeian style mosaics. This seems to have been the residence of a rich Roman aristocrat, and it is believed to have been built in the 1st century BC and abandoned in the 2nd century AD.

The islands prospered under Roman rule, and were eventually distinguished as a Municipium and a Foederata Civitas. Many Roman antiquities still exist, testifying to the close link between the Maltese inhabitants and Sicily. Throughout the period of Roman rule, Latin became Malta&#x27;s official language, and Roman religion was introduced in the islands. Despite this, the local Punic-Hellenistic culture and language is thought to have survived until at least the 1st century AD.

In AD 60, the Acts of the Apostles records that Saint Paul was shipwrecked on an island named Melite, which many Bible scholars and Maltese conflate with Malta; there is a tradition that the shipwreck took place on the shores of the aptly named &quot;St. Paul&#x27;s Bay&quot;. In Acts 28, Saint Paul is welcomed by the islanders who build him a fire. As Paul is gathering wood for the fire, a poisonous viper in the wood is driven out by the heat and bites Paul. Paul is unaffected by the bite, leading the people of Malta to believe he is a god. This assumption allows Paul the opportunity to introduce the Gospel to the island.

Malta remained part of the Roman Empire until the early 6th century. The Vandals and later the Ostrogoths might have briefly occupied the islands in the 5th century, but there is no archaeological evidence to support this.

== Middle Ages ==
=== Byzantine rule ===

In 533, Byzantine general Belisarius may have landed at Malta while on his way from Sicily to North Africa, and by 535, the islands were integrated into the Byzantine province of Sicily. During the Byzantine period, the main settlements remained the city of Melite on mainland Malta and the Citadel on Gozo, while Marsaxlokk, Marsaskala, Marsa and Xlendi are believed to have served as harbours. The relatively high quantity of Byzantine ceramics found in Malta suggests that the island might have had an important strategic role within the empire from the 6th to 8th centuries.

From the late 7th century onward, the Mediterranean was being threatened by Muslim expansion. At this point, the Byzantines probably improved the defences of Malta, as can be seen by defensive walls built around the basilica at Tas-Silġ around the 8th century. The Byzantines might have also built the retrenchment which reduced Melite to one-third of its original size.

===Arab period ===

In 870 AD, Malta was occupied by Muslims from North Africa. According to Al-Himyarī, Aghlabids led by Halaf al-Hādim besieged the Byzantine city of Melite, which was ruled by governor Amros (probably Ambrosios). Al-Hādim was killed in the fighting, and Sawāda Ibn Muḥammad was sent from Sicily to continue the siege following his death. The duration of the siege is unknown, but it probably lasted for some weeks or months. After Melite fell to the invaders, the inhabitants were massacred, the city was destroyed and its churches were looted. Marble from Melite&#x27;s churches was used to build the castle of Sousse.
According to Al-Himyarī, Malta remained almost uninhabited until it was resettled in around 1048 or 1049 by a Muslim community and their slaves, who rebuilt the city of Melite as Medina, making it &quot;a finer place than it was before&quot;. However, archaeological evidence suggests that Melite/Medina was already a thriving Muslim settlement by the beginning of the 11th century, so Al-Himyarī&#x27;s account might be unreliable.
In 1053–54, the Byzantines besieged Medina but they were repelled by its defenders.
Although their rule was relatively short, the Arabs left a significant impact on Malta. In addition to their language, Siculo-Arabic, cotton, oranges and lemons and many new techniques in irrigation were introduced. Some of these, like the &quot;noria&quot; (waterwheel), are still used, unchanged, today. Many place names in Malta date to this period.

A long historiographic controversy loomed over Medieval Muslim Malta. According to the &quot;Christian continuity thesis&quot;, spearheaded by Giovanni Francesco Abela and still most present in popular narratives, the Maltese population continuously inhabited the islands from the early Christian Era up to today, and a Christian community persisted even during Muslim times. This was contested in the 1970s by the medieval historian Godfrey Wettinger, who claimed that nothing indicated the continuity of Christianity from the late 9th to the 11th century on the Maltese Islands – the Maltese must have integrated into the new Arab Islamic society. The Christian continuity thesis had a revival in 2010 following the publication of &quot;Tristia ex Melitogaudo&quot; by Stanley Fiorini, Horatio Vella and Joseph Brincat, who challenged Wettinger&#x27;s interpretation based on a line of a Byzantine poem (which later appeared to have been mistranslated). Wettinger subsequently reaffirmed his thesis, based on sources from the Arab historians and geographers Al Baqri, Al-Himyarī, Ibn Hauqal, Qazwini, who all seemed to be in agreement that &quot;the island of Malta remained after that a ruin without inhabitants&quot; – thus ruling out any continuity whatsoever between the Maltese prior to 870 and after. This is also consistent with Joseph Brincat’s finding of no further substrata beyond Arabic in the Maltese language, a very rare occurrence which may only be explained by a drastic lapse between one period and the following. To the contrary, the few Byzantine words in Maltese language can be traced to the 400 Rhodians coming with the knights in 1530, as well as to the influx of Greek rite Christians from Sicily.

===Norman Kingdom of Sicily rule===

Malta returned to Christian rule with the Norman conquest. It was, with Noto on the southern tip of Sicily, the last Arab stronghold in the region to be retaken by the resurgent Christians. In 1091, Count Roger I of Sicily, invaded Malta and turned the island&#x27;s Muslim rulers into his vassals. In 1127, his son Roger II of Sicily fully established Norman rule in Malta, paving the way for the islands&#x27; Christianization.

Malta was part of the Kingdom of Sicily for nearly 440 years. During this period, Malta was sold and resold to various feudal lords and barons and was dominated successively by the rulers of Swabia, Anjou, the Crown of Aragon, the Crown of Castile and Spain. Eventually, the Crown of Aragon, which then ruled Malta, joined with Castile in 1469, and Malta became part of the Spanish Empire.
Meanwhile, Malta&#x27;s administration fell in the hands of local nobility who formed a governing body called the &quot;Università&quot;.

The islands remained largely Muslim-inhabited long after the end of Arab rule. The Arab administration was also kept in place and Muslims were allowed to practise their religion freely until the 13th century. Muslims continued to demographically and economically dominate Malta for at least another 150 years after the Christian conquest.

In 1122, Malta experienced a Muslim uprising and in 1127 Roger II of Sicily reconquered the islands.

Even in 1175, Burchard, bishop of Strasbourg, an envoy of Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor, had the impression, based upon his brief visit to Malta, that it was exclusively or mainly inhabited by Muslims.

In 1192, Tancred of Sicily appointed Margaritus of Brindisi the first Count of Malta, perhaps for his unexpected success in capturing Empress Constance contender to the throne. Between 1194 and 1530, the Kingdom of Sicily ruled the Maltese islands and a process of full latinisation started in Malta. The conquest of the Normans would lead to the gradual Romanization and Latinization and subsequent firm establishment of Roman Catholicism in Malta, after previous Islamic domination. 

In 1224, Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor, sent an expedition against Malta to establish royal control and prevent its Muslim population from helping a Muslim rebellion in the Kingdom of Sicily.

After the Norman conquest, the population of the Maltese islands kept growing mainly through immigration from the north (Sicily and Italy), with the exile to Malta of the entire male population of the town of Celano (Italy) in 1223, the stationing of a Norman and Sicilian garrison on Malta in 1240 and the settlement in Malta of noble families from Sicily between 1372 and 1450. As a consequence of this, Capelli et al. found in 2005 that &quot;the contemporary males of Malta most likely originated from Southern Italy, including Sicily and up to Calabria.&quot;

According to a report in 1240 or 1241 by Gililberto Abbate, who was the royal governor of Frederick II of Sicily during the Genoese Period of the County of Malta, in that year the islands of Malta and Gozo had 836 Muslim families, 250 Christian families and 33 Jewish families.

Around 1249, some Maltese Muslims were sent to the Italian colony of Lucera, established for Sicilian Muslims. For some historians, including Godfrey Wettinger, who follow on this Ibn Khaldun, this event marked the end of Islam in Malta. According to Wettinger, &quot;there is no doubt that by the beginning of Angevin times [i.e. shortly after 1249] no professed Muslim Maltese remained either as free persons or even as serfs on the island.&quot; The Maltese language nevertheless survived – an indication that either a large number of Christians already spoke Maltese, or that many Muslims converted and remained behind.

In 1266, Malta was turned over in fiefdom to Charles of Anjou, brother of France&#x27;s King Louis IX, who retained it in ownership until 1283. Eventually, during Charles&#x27;s rule religious coexistence became precarious in Malta, since he had a genuine intolerance of religions other than Roman Catholicism. However, Malta&#x27;s links with Africa would still remain strong until the beginning of Aragonese and Spanish rule in 1283, following the War of the Sicilian Vespers.

In September 1429, Hafsid Saracens attempted to capture Malta but were repelled by the Maltese. The invaders pillaged the countryside and took about 3,000 inhabitants as slaves.

By the end of the 15th century, all Maltese Muslims would be forced to convert to Christianity and had to find ways to disguise their previous identities by Latinizing or adopting new surnames.

==Hospitaller rule (1530–1798) ==

Malta was ruled by the Order of Saint John as a vassal state of the Kingdom of Sicily from 1530 to 1798.

===Early years===
In the early 16th century, the Ottoman Empire started spreading over the region, reaching South East Europe. The Spanish king Charles V feared that if Rome fell to the Turks, it would be the end of Christian Europe. In 1522, Suleiman I drove the Knights Hospitaller of St. John out of Rhodes. They dispersed to their commanderies in Europe. Wanting to protect Rome from invasion from the south, in 1530, Charles V handed over the island to these knights.

For the next 275 years, the &quot;Knights of Malta&quot; made the island their domain and made the Italian language official. They built towns, palaces, churches, gardens, and fortifications, they embellished the island with numerous works of art, and enhanced cultural heritage.

The order of the Knights of St. John was originally established to set up outposts along the route to the Holy Land, to assist pilgrims going in either direction. Owing to the many confrontations that took place, one of their main tasks was to provide medical assistance, and even today the eight-pointed cross is still in wide use in ambulances and first aid organisations. In return for the many lives they saved, the Order received many newly conquered territories that had to be defended. Together with the need to defend the pilgrims in their care, this gave rise to the strong military wing of the knights. Over time, the Order became strong and rich. From hospitallers first and military second, these priorities reversed. Since much of the territory they covered was around the Mediterranean region, they became notable seamen.

From Malta the knights resumed their seaborne attacks of Ottoman shipping, and before long the Sultan Suleyman the Magnificent ordered a final attack on the Order. By this time the Knights had occupied the city of Birgu, which had excellent harbours to house their fleet. Birgu was one of the two major urban places at that time, the other most urban place being Mdina the old capital city of Malta. The defences around Birgu were enhanced and new fortifications built on the other point where now there is Senglea. A small fort was built at the tip of the peninsula where the city of Valletta now stands and was named Fort Saint Elmo.

===Great Siege===
On 18 May 1565, Suleiman the Magnificent laid siege to Malta. By the time the Ottoman fleet arrived the Knights were as ready as they could be. First, the Ottomans attacked the newly built fort of St. Elmo and after a whole month of fighting the fort was in rubble and the soldiers kept fighting until they were wiped out. After this the Turks started attacking Birgu and the fortifications at Senglea but to no gain.

After a protracted siege ended on 8 September of the same year, which became known in history as Great Siege of Malta, the Ottoman Empire conceded defeat as the approaching winter storms threatened to prevent them from leaving. The Ottoman Empire had expected an easy victory within weeks. They had 40,000 men arrayed against the Knights&#x27; 9,000, most of them Maltese soldiers and simple citizens bearing arms. Their loss of thousands of men was very demoralising. The Ottomans made no further attempts to conquer Malta and the Sultan died in the next year.

===After the siege===

The year after, the Order started work on a new city with fortifications like no other, on the Sciberras Peninsula which the Ottomans had used as a base during the siege. It was named Valletta after Jean Parisot de Valette, the Grand Master who had seen the Order through its victory. Since the Ottoman Empire never attacked again, the fortifications were never put to the test, and today remain one of the best-preserved fortifications of this period.

Unlike other rulers of the island, the Order of St. John did not have a &quot;home country&quot; outside the island. The island became their home, so they invested in it more heavily than any other power. Besides, its members came from noble families, and the Order had amassed considerable fortunes due to its services to those en route to the Holy Land. The architectural and artistic remains of this period remain among the greatest of Malta&#x27;s history, especially in their &quot;prize jewel&quot; — the city of Valletta.

However, as their main &quot;&quot; had ceased to exist, the Order&#x27;s glory days were over. In the last three decades of the eighteenth century, the Order experienced a steady decline. This was a result of a number of factors, including the bankruptcy that was a result of some lavish rule of the last Grand Masters, which drained the finances of the Order. Due to this, the Order also became unpopular with the Maltese.

Indeed, in 1775, a revolt known as the Rising of the Priests occurred. Rebels managed to capture Fort St Elmo and Saint James Cavalier, but the revolt was suppressed and some of the leaders were executed while others were imprisoned or exiled.

==French occupation (1798–1800)==

Over the years, the power of the knights declined; their reign ended in 1798 when Napoleon Bonaparte&#x27;s expeditionary fleet stopped off there en route to his Egyptian expedition. Napoleon asked for safe harbour to resupply his ships, and when they refused to supply him with water, Napoleon Bonaparte sent a division to scale the hills of Valletta. Grand Master Hompesch capitulated on 11 June. The following day a treaty was signed by which the order handed over sovereignty of the island of Malta to the French Republic. In return the French Republic agreed to &quot;employ all its credit at the congress of Rastatt to procure a principality for the Grand Master, equivalent to the one he gives up&quot;.

During his very short stay (six days), Napoleon accomplished quite a number of reforms, notably the creation of a new administration with a Government Commission, the creation of twelve municipalities, the setting up of a public finance administration, the abolition of all feudal rights and privileges, the abolition of slavery and the granting of freedom to all Turkish slaves (2000 in all). On the judicial level, a family code was framed and twelve judges were nominated. Public education was organised along principles laid down by Bonaparte himself, providing for primary and secondary education. Fifteen primary schools were founded and the university was replaced by an ’Ecole centrale’ in which there were eight chairs, all very scientific in outlook: notably, arithmetic and stereometry, algebra and stereotomy, geometry and astronomy, mechanics and physics, navigation, chemistry, etc.

He then sailed for Egypt leaving a substantial garrison in Malta. Since the Order had also been growing unpopular with the local Maltese, the latter initially viewed the French with optimism. This illusion did not last long. Within months the French were closing convents and seizing church treasures, most notably the sword of Jean de Valette which has since been returned to Malta in 2017, after a century in Paris, and for many years exhibited at the Louvre, in Paris. The Maltese people rebelled, and the French garrison of General Claude-Henri Belgrand de Vaubois retreated into Valletta. After several failed attempts by the locals to retake Valletta, the British were asked for their assistance. Rear Admiral Lord Horatio Nelson decided on a total blockade in 1799. The French garrison surrendered in 1800.

==Malta in the British Empire (1800–1964)==
=== British Malta in the 19th and early 20th centuries ===
In 1800, Malta voluntarily became part of the British Empire as a protectorate. Under the terms of the 1802 Treaty of Amiens with France, Britain was supposed to evacuate the island, but failed to keep this obligation – one of several mutual cases of non-adherence to the treaty, which eventually led to its collapse and the resumption of war between the two countries.

Although initially the island was not given much importance, its excellent harbours became a prized asset for the British, especially after the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869. The island became a military and naval fortress, the headquarters of the British Mediterranean fleet.

Home rule was refused to the Maltese until 1921 although a partly elected legislative council was created as early as 1849 (the first Council of Government under British rule had been held in 1835), and the locals sometimes suffered considerable poverty. This was due to the island being overpopulated and largely dependent on British military expenditure which varied with the demands of war. Throughout the 19th century, the British administration instituted several liberal constitutional reforms which were generally resisted by the Church and the Maltese elite who preferred to cling to their feudal privileges. Political organisations, like the Nationalist Party, were created or had as one of their aims, the protection of the Italian language in Malta.

In 1813 Malta was granted the Bathurst Constitution; in 1814 it was declared free of the plague, while the 1815 Congress of Vienna reaffirmed the British rule under the 1814 Treaty of Paris. In 1819, the local Italian-speaking &quot;Università&quot; was dissolved.

The year 1828 saw the revocation of the right of sanctuary, following the Vatican Church-State proclamation. Three years later, the See of Malta was made independent of the See of Palermo. In 1839, press censorship was abolished, and the construction of St. Paul&#x27;s Anglican Cathedral began.

Following the 1846 Carnival riots, in 1849 a Council of Government with elected members under British rule was set up. In 1870 a referendum was held on ecclesiastics serving on Council of Government, and in 1881 an Executive Council under British rule was created; in 1887, the Council of Government was entrusted with &quot;dual control&quot; under British rule. A backlash came in 1903, with the return to the 1849 form of Council of Government under British rule.

The last quarter of the century saw technical and financial progress in line with the Belle Époque: The following years saw the foundation of the Anglo-Egyptian Bank (1882) and the beginning of operation of the Malta Railway (1883); the first definitive postage stamps were issued in 1885, and in 1904 tram service began.
In 1886 Surgeon Major David Bruce discovered the microbe causing the Malta Fever, and in 1905 Themistocles Zammit discovered the fever&#x27;s sources.
Finally, in 1912, Dun Karm Psaila wrote his first poem in Maltese.

Between 1915 and 1918, during World War I, Malta became known as &quot;the Nurse of the Mediterranean&quot; due to the large number of wounded soldiers who were accommodated in Malta.

=== Interwar period ===

In 1919, the &quot;Sette Giugno&quot; (7 June) riots over the excessive price of bread led to greater autonomy for the locals during the 1920s. After Filippo Sciberras had convened a National Assembly, in 1921 self-government was granted under British rule. Malta obtained a bicameral parliament with a Senate (later abolished in 1949) and an elected Legislative Assembly. Joseph Howard was named Prime Minister. In 1923 the &quot;Innu Malti&quot; was played for the first time in public, and the same year Francisco Buhagiar became Prime Minister, followed in 1924 by Sir Ugo Pasquale Mifsud and in 1927 by Sir Gerald Strickland.

The 1930s saw a period of instability in the relations between the Maltese political elite, the Maltese Catholic church, and the British authorities; the 1921 Constitution was suspended twice. First in 1930–1932, when British authorities assumed that a free and fair election would not be possible following a clash between the governing Constitutional Party and the Church and the latter&#x27;s subsequent imposition of mortal sin on voters of the party and its allies, thus making a free and fair election impossible. Again, in 1933 the Constitution was withdrawn over the Government&#x27;s budgetary vote for the teaching of Italian in elementary schools, after just 13 months of a Nationalist administration. Malta thus reverted to the Crown Colony status it held in 1813.

Before the arrival of the British, the official language since 1530 (and the one of the handful of educated elite) had been Italian, but this was downgraded by the increased use of English. In 1934 Maltese was declared an official language, which brought the number up to three. Two years later, the Letters Patent of the 1936 constitution declared that Maltese and English were the only official languages, thereby legally settling the long-standing &#x27;Language Question&#x27; that had dominated Maltese politics for over half a century.
In 1934, only about 15% of the population could speak Italian fluently. This meant that out of 58,000 males qualified by age to be jurors, only 767 could qualify by language, as only Italian had until then been used in the courts.

In 1936 the Constitution was revised to provide for the nomination of members to Executive Council under British rule (similar to the 1835 constitution) and in 1939 to provide again for a partly elected Council of Government under British rule.

=== British Malta during the Second World War ===


Before World War II, Valletta was the location of the Royal Navy&#x27;s Mediterranean Fleet&#x27;s headquarters. However, despite Winston Churchill&#x27;s objections, the command was moved to Alexandria, Egypt, in April 1937 fearing it was too susceptible to air attacks from Europe. At the time of the Italian declaration of war (10 June 1940), Malta had a garrison of less than four thousand soldiers and about five weeks of food supplies for the population of about three hundred thousand. In addition, Malta&#x27;s air defences consisted of about forty-two anti-aircraft guns (thirty-four &quot;heavy&quot; and eight &quot;light&quot;) and four Gloster Gladiators, for which three pilots were available.

Being a British colony, situated close to Sicily and the Axis shipping lanes, Malta was bombarded by the Italian and German air forces. Malta was used by the British to launch attacks on the Italian navy and had a submarine base. It was also used as a listening post, reading German radio messages including Enigma traffic.

The first air raids against Malta occurred on 11 June 1940; there were six attacks that day. The island&#x27;s biplanes ability to defend the island was limited due to the Luqa Airfield being unfinished; however, the airfield was ready by the seventh attack. Initially, the Italians would fly at about 5,500 m, then they dropped down to three thousand metres (in order to improve the accuracy of their bomb-aiming). Journalist Mabel Strickland spoke of the Italian bombing efforts as such: &quot;The Italians decided they didn&#x27;t like [the Gladiators and AA guns], so they dropped their bombs twenty miles off Malta and went back.&quot; Despite these words, the accuracy of Italian bombers improved after repeated attempts, causing a great deal of devastation to both military and civilian infrastructure in Malta. However, these raids proved ineffective to the Axis siege efforts, as any damage incurred was eventually repaired before a new wave of bombers could launch bombing runs over the islands.

By the end of August, the Gladiators were reinforced by twelve Hawker Hurricanes which had arrived via HMS &quot;Argus&quot;. During the first five months of combat, the island&#x27;s aircraft destroyed or damaged about thirty-seven Italian aircraft, while suffering even greater losses than the Italians. Italian fighter pilot Francisco Cavalera observed, &quot;Malta was really a big problem for us—very well-defended.&quot;. Nevertheless, the Italian bombing campaign was causing serious damage to the island&#x27;s infrastructure and the ability of the Royal Navy to operate effectively in the Mediterranean.

On Malta, 330 people had been killed and 297 were seriously wounded from the war&#x27;s inception until December 1941. In January 1941, the German X. &quot;Fliegerkorps&quot; arrived in Sicily as the Afrika Korps arrived in Libya. Over the next four months 820 people were killed and 915 seriously wounded.
On 15 April 1942, King George VI awarded the George Cross (the highest civilian award for gallantry) &quot;to the island fortress of Malta — its people and defenders&quot;. Franklin D. Roosevelt arrived on 8 December 1943, and presented a United States Presidential Citation to the people of Malta on behalf of the people of United States. He presented the scroll on 8 December but dated it 7 December for symbolic reasons. In part it read: &quot;Under repeated fire from the skies, Malta stood alone and unafraid in the centre of the sea, one tiny bright flame in the darkness – a beacon of hope for the clearer days which have come.&quot; (The complete citation now stands on a plaque on the wall of the Grand Master&#x27;s Palace on Republic Street, in the town square of Valletta.)

In 1942, a convoy code-named Operation Pedestal was sent to relieve Malta. Five ships, including the tanker SS &quot;Ohio&quot;, managed to arrive in the Grand Harbour, with enough supplies for Malta to survive. In the following year Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill visited Malta. George VI also arrived in Grand Harbour for a visit.

During the Second World War, Ugo Mifsud and George Borg Olivier were the only remaining Nationalist members of parliament of Malta. Mifsud fainted after delivering a very passionate defence against the deportation to concentration camps in Uganda of Enrico Mizzi and 49 other Italian Maltese accused of pro-Italian political activities. He died a few days later.

In 1943, the Allies coordinated the invasion of Sicily from the Lascaris War Rooms in Valletta. Following the Armistice of Cassibile later in 1943, a large part of the Italian Navy surrendered to the British in Malta.

The Malta Conference was held in 1945, in which Churchill and Roosevelt met prior to the Yalta Conference with Joseph Stalin.

The 1946 National Assembly resulted in a new constitution in 1947. This restored Malta&#x27;s self-government, with Paul Boffa as Prime Minister. On 5 September 1947, universal suffrage for women in Malta was granted. That year, Agatha Barbara was the first woman elected as a Maltese Member of Parliament.

=== From home rule to independence ===

After the Second World War, the islands achieved self-rule, with the Malta Labour Party (MLP) of Dom Mintoff seeking either full integration with the UK or else &quot;self-determination&quot; (independence) and the Partit Nazzjonalista (PN) of George Borg Olivier favouring independence, with the same &quot;dominion status&quot; that Canada, Australia and New Zealand enjoyed.

The 1953 Coronation incident (where, initially, no invitation was sent for a Maltese delegation to attend the Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II), temporarily united Maltese politicians. After the MLP&#x27;s electoral victory in 1955, in December Round Table Talks were held in London, on the future of Malta, namely the Integration proposal put forward by Mintoff. It was attended by the new Prime Minister Dom Mintoff, Borg Olivier, and other Maltese politicians, along with the British Colonial Secretary, Alan Lennox-Boyd. The British government agreed to offer the islands their own representation in British Parliament, with three seats in the House of Commons, with the Home Office taking over responsibility for Maltese affairs from the Colonial Office.
Under the proposals, the Maltese Parliament would retain authority over all affairs except defence, foreign policy, and taxation. The Maltese were also to have social and economic parity with the UK, to be guaranteed by the British Ministry of Defence (MoD) the islands&#x27; main source of employment.

A UK integration referendum was held on 11 and 12 February 1956, in which 77.02% of voters were in favour of the proposal, but owing to a boycott by the Nationalist Party and the Church, only 59.1% of the electorate voted, thereby rendering the result inconclusive.

There were also concerns expressed by British MPs that the representation of Malta at Westminster would set a precedent for other colonies, and influence the outcome of general elections.
In addition, the decreasing strategic importance of Malta to the Royal Navy meant that the British government was increasingly reluctant to maintain the naval dockyards. Following a decision by the Admiralty to dismiss 40 workers at the dockyard, Mintoff declared that &quot;representatives of the Maltese people in Parliament declare that they are no longer bound by agreements and obligations toward the British government&quot; (the 1958 &quot;Caravaggio incident&quot;). In response, the Colonial Secretary sent a cable to Mintoff, stating that he had &quot;recklessly hazarded&quot; the whole integration plan.

Under protest, Dom Mintoff resigned as Prime Minister along with all the MLP deputies on 21 April 1958. Georgio Borg Olivier was offered to form an alternative government by Governor Laycock but refused. This led to the Governor declaring a state of emergency thus suspending the constitution and Malta was placed under direct colonial administration from London. The MLP had now fully abandoned support for integration (when Mintoff&#x27;s demands for financial guarantees were not accepted) and now advocated full independence from Britain. In 1959, an Interim Constitution provided for an Executive Council under British rule.

While France had implemented a similar policy in its colonies, some of which became overseas departments, the status offered to Malta from Britain constituted a unique exception. Malta was the only British colony where integration with the UK was seriously considered, and subsequent British governments have ruled out integration for remaining overseas territories, such as Gibraltar.

From 1959 Malta&#x27;s British governor started to pursue a plan of economic development based on promoting tourism and tax competition, offering very low tax rates on pensions, royalties and dividends to attract British (referred to as ‘sixpenny settlers’) and former colonial pensioners. Malta saw a large influx of Britons from Rhodesia after 1967.

In 1961, the Blood Commission provided for a new constitution allowing for a measure of self-government and recognising the &quot;State&quot; of Malta. Giorgio Borg Olivier became Prime Minister the following year, when the Stolper report was delivered.

==Independent Malta (since 1964)==

=== Nationalist governments (1964–1971) ===

Following the passage of the Malta Independence Act 1964 (c. 86) by the British Parliament and the approval of a new Maltese constitution by 54.5% of voters in a referendum, the State of Malta () was formed on 21 September 1964 as an independent constitutional monarchy, with Elizabeth II as Queen of Malta and head of state. The date continues to be celebrated annually as Independence Day (), a national holiday in Malta. On 1 December 1964, Malta was admitted to the United Nations.

In the first two post-independence electoral rounds, in 1962 and 1966 the Nationalist Party emerged as the largest party, gaining a majority of the Parliamentary seats. In these years, relations with Italy were of the utmost importance to secure independence and establish linkages with continental Europe. Malta signed four cooperation agreements with Italy in 1967, during a visit of Aldo Moro to the island.

In 1965 Malta joined the Council of Europe, and in 1970, Malta signed an Association Treaty with the European Economic Community.

=== Labour governments (1971–1987) ===
The elections of 1971 saw the Labour Party (MLP) under Dom Mintoff win by just over 4,000 votes.
The Labour government immediately set out to re-negotiate the post-Independence military and financial agreements with the United Kingdom. The government also undertook nationalization programmes and the expansion of the public sector and the welfare state. Employment laws were updated with gender equality being introduced in salary pay. Concerning civil law, civil marriage was introduced and homosexuality and adultery were decriminalised (1973); capital punishment for murder was abolished in 1971. The following year, Malta entered into a Military Base Agreement with the United Kingdom and other NATO countries, after mediation by Italy&#x27;s Aldo Moro.

Through a package of constitutional reforms, Malta became a republic on 13 December 1974, with the last Governor-General, Sir Anthony Mamo, as its first President. The &quot;Ġieħ ir-Repubblika&quot; Act, promulgated the following year, abolished all titles of nobility in Malta and mandated that they cease to be recognised.

The Party was confirmed in office in the 1976 elections. Between 1976 and 1981 Malta went through difficult times and the Labour government demanded that the Maltese tighten their belts in order to overcome the difficulties Malta was facing. There were shortages of essential items; water and electricity supplies were systematically suspended for two or three days a week. Political tensions increased, notably on Black Monday, when following an attempted assassination of the Prime Minister, the premises of the &quot;Times of Malta&quot; were burned and the house of the Leader of Opposition was attacked.

==== End of British presence and new regional alliances ====

On 1 April 1979 the last British forces left the island after the end of the economic pact to stabilise the Maltese economy. This is celebrated as Freedom Day (&quot;Jum Il-Ħelsien&quot;) on 31 March. Celebrations start with a ceremony in Floriana near the War Memorial. A popular event on this memorable day is the traditional regatta. The regatta is held at the Grand Harbour and the teams taking part in it give it their best shot to win the much coveted aggregate Regatta Shield.

Under Mintoff&#x27;s premiership, Malta began establishing close cultural and economic ties with Muammar Gaddafi&#x27;s Libya, as well as diplomatic and military ties with North Korea.

During the Mintoff years, Libya had loaned several million dollars to Malta to make up for the loss of rental income which followed the closure of British military bases in Malta. These closer ties with Libya meant a dramatic new (but short-lived) development in Maltese foreign policy: Western media reported that Malta appeared to be turning its back on NATO, the UK, and Europe generally.
History books were published that began to spread the idea of a disconnection between the Italian and Catholic populations, and instead tried to promote the theory of closer cultural and ethnic ties with North Africa. This new development was noted by Boissevain in 1991: &quot;The Labour government broke off relations with NATO and sought links with the Arab world. After 900 years of being linked to Europe, Malta began to look southward. Muslims, still remembered in folklore for savage pirate attacks, were redefined as blood brothers&quot;.

Malta and Libya had entered into a &quot;Friendship and Cooperation Treaty&quot;, in response to repeated overtures by Gaddafi for a closer, more formal union between the two countries; and, for a brief period, Arabic had become a compulsory subject in Maltese secondary schools. In 1984 the Mariam Al-Batool Mosque was officially opened by Muammar Gaddafi in Malta, two years after its completion.

In 1980 an oil rig of the Italian company Saipem commissioned by Texaco to drill on behalf of the Maltese government 68 nautical miles south-east of Malta had to stop operations after being threatened by a Libyan gunboat. Both Malta and Libya claimed economic rights to the area and this incident raised tensions. The matter was referred to the International Court of Justice in 1982 but the court&#x27;s ruling in 1985 dealt only with the delineation of a small part of the contested territory.

In 1980, Malta signed a neutrality agreement with Italy, under which Malta agreed not to enter into any alliance and Italy agreed to guarantee Malta&#x27;s neutrality. Malta&#x27;s relations with Italy have been described as &quot;generally excellent&quot;.

==== Constitutional crisis in the 1980s ====

The 1981 general elections saw the Nationalist Party (NP) gaining an absolute majority of votes, yet the Labour winning the majority of parliamentary seats under the Single Transferable Vote and Mintoff remained Prime Minister, leading to a political crisis. The Nationalists, now led by Eddie Fenech Adami, refused to accept the electoral result and also refused to take their seats in Parliament for the first years of the legislature, mounting a campaign demanding that Parliament should reflect the democratic will of the people. Despite this, the Labour government remained in power for the full five-year term. Mintoff resigned as Prime Minister and Party leader and appointed Karmenu Mifsud Bonnici as his successor in 1984.

The Mifsud Bonnici years were characterised by political tensions and violence. After a five-year debate, Fenech Adami, through the intervention of Dom Mintoff, reached an agreement with Karmenu Mifsud Bonnici to improve the constitution. Constitutional amendments were made voted and made effective in January 1987 which guaranteed that the party with an absolute majority of votes would be given a majority of parliamentary seats in order to govern. This paved the way for the return of the Nationalist Party to government later that year.

=== Accession process to the European Union (1987–2004) ===

The general elections that followed in 1987 saw the Nationalist Party achieve such a majority of votes. The new Nationalist administration of Edward Fenech Adami sought to improve Malta&#x27;s ties with Western Europe and the United States.
The Nationalist Party advocated Malta&#x27;s membership in the European Union presenting an application on 16 July 1990. This became a divisive issue, with Labour opposing membership.

A wide-ranging programme of liberalisation and public investments meant the confirmation in office of the Nationalists with a larger majority in the 1992 elections. In 1993, local councils were re-established in Malta.

General elections were held in Malta on 26 October 1996; although Labour received the most votes, the Nationalists won the most seats. The 1987 constitutional amendments had to be used for the second time, and the Labour Party was awarded an additional four seats to ensure they had a majority in Parliament.
Malta&#x27;s EU application was subsequently frozen.
A split in the Labour Party in 1998, between the PM Sant and the former PM Mintoff (died in 2012) resulted in the government losing the majority. Notwithstanding the President of the Republic&#x27;s preference for a negotiated solution, all attempts proved futile, and he had no other option but to accept Sant and his government&#x27;s resignation and a call for early elections.

On being returned to office in the 1998 elections with a wide 13,000 vote margin, the Nationalist Party reactivated the EU membership application. Malta was formally accepted as a candidate country at the Helsinki European Council of December 1999.
In 2000, capital punishment was abolished also from the military code of Malta.

EU accession negotiations were concluded late in 2002 and a referendum on membership in 2003 saw 90.86% casting a valid vote of which 53.65% were &quot;yes&quot; votes. Labour stated that it would not be bound by this result were it returned to power in the following general election that year. In the circumstances, elections were called and the Nationalist Party, led by Prime minister Fenech Adami, won another mandate, In April 2004, Eddie Fenech Adami was sworn in as President of Malta. Lawrence Gonzi succeeded him as Prime Minister and the leader of the Nationalist Party. The accession treaty was signed and ratified and Malta joined the EU on 1 May 2004. A consensus on membership was subsequently achieved with Labour saying it would respect this result. Joe Borg was appointed as first Maltese European commissioner in the first Barroso Commission.

=== Malta in the European Union (2004–present)===
Malta&#x27;s accession to the European Union in 2004 had important implications for the state&#x27;s foreign policy. Notably, Malta was required to withdraw from the Non-Aligned Movement of which the state had been an active member since 1971.

In the context of EU membership, Malta joined the Eurozone on 1 January 2008; the 2008 election confirmed Gonzi in the premiership, while in 2009 George Abela became President of Malta.

On 28 May 2011, the Maltese voted &#x27;yes&#x27; in the consultative divorce referendum. At that time, Malta was one of only three countries in the world, along with the Philippines and the Vatican City, in which divorce was not permitted. As a consequence of the referendum outcome, a law allowing divorce under certain conditions was enacted in the same year.

Following a corruption scandal John Dalli had to resign and was replaced by Tonio Borg as Maltese commissioner in 2012. A snap election was called for March 2013 after the Gonzi government lost the Parliamentary majority. The Nationalist Party lost the election after having governed Malta more than 15 years since 1987 (except for a period from 1996 to 1998). Labour Party leader Joseph Muscat was elected as Prime Minister.

In April 2019, the parliament elected George Vella as the 10th President of the Republic of Malta to succeed Marie-Louise Coleiro Preca.

On 16 October 2017, Maltese journalist and anti-corruption activist Daphne Caruana Galizia was assassinated in a car bomb near her residence in Bidnija. Her murder caused an uproar of criticism for the Labour government and the judicial system on the islands. Following evidence of implication between Joseph Muscat&#x27;s close circle and the arrest of Yorgen Fenech, a long series of protests on the islands and international criticism precipitated the 2019–2020 political crisis. This resulted in the resignation of Prime Minister Joseph Muscat, Minister Konrad Mizzi, and Prime Minister&#x27;s Chief of Staff Keith Schembri. An internal election on 11 January 2020 within the Maltese Labour party elected Robert Abela, son of former president George Abela, as party leader, and Prime Minister of Malta.

Malta became the first country in the European Union to legalize recreational use of cannabis on 14 December 2021.

In March 2022, the ruling Labour party, led by Prime Minister Robert Abela, won its third successive election. It gained even bigger victory than in 2013 and in 2017.

==See also==
* Culture of Malta
* History of the Jews in Malta
* List of heads of state of Malta
* Malta Summit
* Norman-Arab-Byzantine culture
* Operation Pedestal
* Timeline of Maltese history
==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* Baldoli, Claudia. &quot;The ‘Northern Dominator’ and the Mare Nostrum: Fascist Italy&#x27;s ‘Cultural War’ in Malta.&quot; &quot;Modern Italy&quot; 13.1 (2008): 5-20.
* Bishku, Michael B. &quot;The Middle Eastern Relations of Cyprus and Malta: From Independence to Nonalignment to the European Union.&quot; &quot;Mediterranean Quarterly&quot; 26.2 (2015): 42–62. excerpt
* Bulmer, William Elliot. &quot;Constrained majoritarianism: Westminster constitutionalism in Malta.&quot; &quot;Commonwealth &amp; Comparative Politics&quot; 52.2 (2014): 232–253.
* Buttigieg, Emanuel. &quot;Childhood and adolescence in early modern Malta (1565-1632).&quot; &quot;Journal of Family History&quot; 33.2 (2008): 139–155.
* Castillo, Dennis. &quot;The Santa Marija Convoy: Faith and Endurance in Wartime Malta, 1940–1942&quot; (Lexington Books, 2011).
* .
* Harwood, Mark. &quot;Malta in the European Union&quot; (Routledge, 2016) .
* Heraclidou, Antigone. &quot;Politics of education and language in Cyprus and Malta during the inter-war years.&quot; &quot;Journal of Mediterranean Studies&quot; 23.1 (2014): 75–88. excerpt
* Katsourides, Yiannos, and Antigone Heraclidou. &quot;Nationalism and Decolonisation in the Mediterranean: Cyprus and Malta Compared, 1918–1964.&quot; &quot;Journal of Mediterranean Studies&quot; 23.1 (2014): 1–7.
* Rudolf, Uwe Jens. &quot;Historical dictionary of Malta&quot; (Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2018).
* .
* Yiangou, Anastasia. &quot;The Political Impact of World War II on Cyprus and Malta.&quot; &quot;Journal of Mediterranean Studies&quot; 23.1 (2014): 101–112. online
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="0" end="5" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="150" end="163" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="230" end="237" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q753383" start="451" end="469" title="Megalithic Temples of Malta" label="Megalithic Temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="618" end="628" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="742" end="751" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85750594" start="789" end="803" title="Capture of Malta (218 BC)" label="fell in 218 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="811" end="825" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="876" end="886" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q207600" start="931" end="940" title="Aghlabids" label="Aghlabids"/>
<link wikidata="Q28162861" start="953" end="968" title="Siege of Melite (870)" label="siege in 870 AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="1056" end="1061" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276752" start="1100" end="1107" title="Norman invasion of Malta" label="invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917014" start="1122" end="1138" title="County of Sicily" label="County of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="1250" end="1267" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970302" start="1330" end="1338" title="Swabians" label="Swabians"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="1344" end="1353" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="1374" end="1381" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="1413" end="1430" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Order of St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355522" start="1446" end="1456" title="Hospitaller Malta" label="ruled them"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1499" end="1513" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q58732" start="1551" end="1571" title="Great Siege of Malta" label="Great Siege of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="1841" end="1862" title="French First Republic" label="French First Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16630286" start="1863" end="1882" title="French invasion of Malta" label="invaded the islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984282" start="1921" end="1947" title="French occupation of Malta" label="French occupation of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493908" start="1997" end="2005" title="Siege of Malta (1798–1800)" label="rebelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744683" start="2059" end="2079" title="Malta Protectorate" label="British protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744657" start="2113" end="2119" title="Crown Colony of Malta" label="colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940268" start="2224" end="2243" title="Mediterranean Fleet" label="Mediterranean Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2758" end="2770" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q682452" start="2800" end="2816" title="Siege of Malta (World War II)" label="heavily attacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829842" start="2885" end="2907" title="Award of the George Cross to Malta" label="the island was awarded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143510" start="2912" end="2924" title="George Cross" label="George Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="3022" end="3040" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603765" start="3054" end="3068" title="State of Malta" label="State of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="3126" end="3138" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="3194" end="3208" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="3294" end="3300" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="3376" end="3383" title="fossils" label="fossils"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="3468" end="3487" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q605948" start="3488" end="3520" title="Messinian salinity crisis" label="closed through tectonic activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107" start="3615" end="3625" title="continents" label="continents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="3699" end="3708" title="elephants" label="elephants"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="3710" end="3724" title="hippopotamuses" label="hippopotamuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="3763" end="3769" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="3816" end="3822" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="4088" end="4097" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045145" start="5488" end="5503" title="Caroline Malone" label="Caroline Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q216862" start="5916" end="5924" title="Ġgantija" label="Ġgantija"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133242" start="6170" end="6182" title="semicircular" label="semicircular"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="7451" end="7461" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q101659" start="7550" end="7556" title="dolmen" label="dolmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193475" start="7906" end="7912" title="menhir" label="menhir"/>
<link wikidata="Q597464" start="7963" end="7969" title="Kirkop" label="Kirkop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760477" start="8156" end="8175" title="Misraħ Għar il-Kbir" label="Misraħ Għar il-Kbir"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="8808" end="8819" title="Phoenicians" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="8833" end="8837" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="8846" end="8854" title="Phoenician colonization" label="colonize"/>
<link wikidata="Q44381" start="9057" end="9062" title="Rabat, Malta" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q752348" start="9076" end="9081" title="Victoria, Gozo" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q207277" start="9143" end="9148" title="Mdina" label="Mdina"/>
<link wikidata="Q867647" start="9162" end="9172" title="Cittadella (Gozo)" label="Cittadella"/>
<link wikidata="Q757225" start="9327" end="9335" title="Cospicua" label="Cospicua"/>
<link wikidata="Q220899" start="9343" end="9355" title="Grand Harbor" label="Grand Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="9551" end="9559" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="9756" end="9762" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q192435" start="9766" end="9778" title="Tripolitania" label="Tripolitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q221375" start="9817" end="9828" title="Hellenistic art" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687070" start="10054" end="10062" title="Tas-Silġ" label="Tas-Silġ"/>
<link wikidata="Q106433172" start="10067" end="10074" title="Punic building, Żurrieq" label="a tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q44417" start="10078" end="10085" title="Żurrieq" label="Żurrieq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121287" start="10211" end="10227" title="Cippi of Melqart" label="Cippi of Melqart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418816" start="10265" end="10288" title="Jean-Jacques Barthélemy" label="Jean-Jacques Barthélemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="10312" end="10331" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="Phoenician alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="10387" end="10393" title="Roman Republic" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="10418" end="10433" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="10514" end="10518" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271" start="10596" end="10612" title="Second Punic War" label="Second Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q85750594" start="10688" end="10718" title="Capture of Malta (218 BC)" label="surrendered without resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q382276" start="10722" end="10748" title="Tiberius Sempronius Longus (consul 218 BC)" label="Tiberius Sempronius Longus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="10765" end="10772" title="Roman consul" label="consuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="10897" end="10905" title="Roman provinces" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q691321" start="10909" end="10915" title="Sicilia (Roman province)" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11064" end="11089" title="Ancient Roman units of measurement#Weight" label="Roman weight measurements"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352142" start="11169" end="11175" title="Melita (ancient city)" label="Melita"/>
<link wikidata="Q207277" start="11255" end="11260" title="Mdina" label="Mdina"/>
<link wikidata="Q44381" start="11280" end="11285" title="Rabat, Malta" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494719" start="11312" end="11333" title="Collegiate church of St Paul, Rabat" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291392" start="11694" end="11706" title="Domus Romana" label="Domus Romana"/>
<link wikidata="Q740856" start="11753" end="11767" title="Pompeian Styles" label="Pompeian style"/>
<link wikidata="Q213468" start="12020" end="12030" title="Municipium" label="Municipium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094545" start="12047" end="12054" title="Civitas" label="Civitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="12202" end="12207" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="12251" end="12265" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="Roman religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="12438" end="12458" title="Acts of the Apostles" label="Acts of the Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="12472" end="12482" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q39521" start="12675" end="12694" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Bay" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="12705" end="12712" title="Acts of the Apostles" label="Acts 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="13033" end="13039" title="Gospel" label="Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="13129" end="13136" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="13151" end="13161" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="13330" end="13339" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174943" start="13348" end="13358" title="Belisarius" label="Belisarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="13406" end="13412" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="13501" end="13507" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q867647" start="13613" end="13620" title="Cittadella (Gozo)" label="Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q781921" start="13636" end="13646" title="Marsaxlokk" label="Marsaxlokk"/>
<link wikidata="Q534571" start="13648" end="13658" title="Marsaskala" label="Marsaskala"/>
<link wikidata="Q267431" start="13660" end="13665" title="Marsa, Malta" label="Marsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q670218" start="13670" end="13676" title="Xlendi" label="Xlendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="13978" end="13994" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="Muslim expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687070" start="14130" end="14138" title="Tas-Silġ" label="Tas-Silġ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960977" start="14204" end="14216" title="Retrenchment (military)" label="retrenchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="14340" end="14352" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417674" start="14367" end="14377" title="Al-Himyarī" label="Al-Himyarī"/>
<link wikidata="Q207600" start="14379" end="14388" title="Aghlabids" label="Aghlabids"/>
<link wikidata="Q28162861" start="14411" end="14448" title="Siege of Melite (870)" label="besieged the Byzantine city of Melite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="14581" end="14587" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q180717" start="14905" end="14911" title="Sousse" label="Sousse"/>
<link wikidata="Q28216518" start="15373" end="15388" title="Siege of Medina (1053–54)" label="besieged Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069489" start="15549" end="15562" title="Siculo-Arabic" label="Siculo-Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="15564" end="15570" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="15572" end="15579" title="Orange (fruit)" label="oranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="15584" end="15589" title="lemon" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190405" start="15927" end="15951" title="Giovanni Francesco Abela" label="Giovanni Francesco Abela"/>
<link wikidata="Q28839277" start="16218" end="16235" title="Godfrey Wettinger" label="Godfrey Wettinger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16555" end="16570" title="Stanley Fiorini" label="Stanley Fiorini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417674" start="16854" end="16864" title="Al-Himyarī" label="Al-Himyarī"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17122" end="17136" title="Joseph Brincat" label="Joseph Brincat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166" start="17192" end="17208" title="Maltese language" label="Maltese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="17404" end="17412" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodians"/>
<link wikidata="Q74011" start="17589" end="17604" title="Norman conquest of southern Italy" label="Norman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q487174" start="17619" end="17623" title="Noto" label="Noto"/>
<link wikidata="Q315297" start="17752" end="17769" title="Roger I of Sicily" label="Roger I of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276752" start="17771" end="17778" title="Norman invasion of Malta" label="invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q193901" start="17863" end="17881" title="Roger II of Sicily" label="Roger II of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="18000" end="18017" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970302" start="18169" end="18175" title="Swabians" label="Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q939200" start="18177" end="18182" title="Capetian House of Anjou" label="Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="18188" end="18203" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="18209" end="18225" title="Crown of Castile" label="Crown of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="18352" end="18366" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193901" start="18904" end="18922" title="Roger II of Sicily" label="Roger II of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18963" end="18993" title="Burchard, bishop of Strasbourg" label="Burchard, bishop of Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="19007" end="19038" title="Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q468653" start="19163" end="19180" title="Tancred of Sicily" label="Tancred of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q736758" start="19191" end="19213" title="Margaritus of Brindisi" label="Margaritus of Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986982" start="19224" end="19238" title="Count of Malta" label="Count of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q170335" start="19288" end="19305" title="Constance I of Sicily" label="Empress Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="19358" end="19375" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q747008" start="19424" end="19436" title="Romanization (cultural)" label="latinisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q747008" start="19509" end="19521" title="Romanization (cultural)" label="Romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q747008" start="19526" end="19538" title="Latinization (historical)" label="Latinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="19576" end="19593" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="19650" end="19682" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="19817" end="19834" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q74011" start="19847" end="19862" title="Norman conquest of southern Italy" label="Norman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q50079" start="20046" end="20052" title="Celano" label="Celano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20444" end="20461" title="Gililberto Abbate" label="Gililberto Abbate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20527" end="20541" title="Count of Malta#Genoese Period" label="Genoese Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q51933" start="20751" end="20757" title="Lucera" label="Lucera"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="20862" end="20873" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q939200" start="20993" end="21000" title="Capetian House of Anjou" label="Angevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166" start="21135" end="21151" title="Maltese language" label="Maltese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="21341" end="21348" title="fiefdom" label="fiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q203829" start="21352" end="21368" title="Charles I of Naples" label="Charles of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="21707" end="21733" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Aragonese and Spanish rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599340" start="21757" end="21784" title="War of the Sicilian Vespers" label="War of the Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q752662" start="21806" end="21812" title="Hafsid dynasty" label="Hafsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q20706642" start="21822" end="21848" title="Siege of Malta (1429)" label="attempted to capture Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="22219" end="22238" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Order of Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="22264" end="22281" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="22351" end="22365" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="22446" end="22455" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="22545" end="22555" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Suleiman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="22566" end="22585" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="22605" end="22611" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="22724" end="22733" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="22875" end="22891" title="Italian language" label="Italian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="23989" end="24020" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Sultan Suleyman the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q752346" start="24108" end="24113" title="Birgu" label="Birgu"/>
<link wikidata="Q207277" start="24257" end="24262" title="Mdina" label="Mdina"/>
<link wikidata="Q846593" start="24401" end="24408" title="Senglea" label="Senglea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23800" start="24479" end="24487" title="Valletta" label="Valletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438745" start="24513" end="24528" title="Fort Saint Elmo" label="Fort Saint Elmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="24565" end="24589" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Suleiman the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q58732" start="25065" end="25085" title="Great Siege of Malta" label="Great Siege of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="25091" end="25105" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23800" start="25738" end="25746" title="Valletta" label="Valletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q264097" start="25753" end="25776" title="Jean Parisot de Valette" label="Jean Parisot de Valette"/>
<link wikidata="Q20204978" start="27003" end="27024" title="Rising of the Priests" label="Rising of the Priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401400" start="27078" end="27098" title="Saint James Cavalier" label="Saint James Cavalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="27326" end="27344" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q253684" start="27406" end="27425" title="French Campaign in Egypt and Syria" label="Egyptian expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="27530" end="27548" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q77187" start="27610" end="27618" title="Ferdinand von Hompesch zu Bolheim" label="Hompesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="27754" end="27769" title="First French Republic" label="French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q567459" start="27846" end="27865" title="Second Congress of Rastatt" label="congress of Rastatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="29308" end="29314" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="29319" end="29324" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958137" start="29390" end="29422" title="Claude-Henri Belgrand de Vaubois" label="Claude-Henri Belgrand de Vaubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q83235" start="29575" end="29589" title="Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount Nelson" label="Horatio Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="29818" end="29832" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744683" start="29838" end="29850" title="Malta Protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183" start="29880" end="29896" title="Treaty of Amiens" label="Treaty of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="30097" end="30114" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="resumption of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="30302" end="30312" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="30425" end="30434" title="Home rule" label="Home rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q594056" start="31076" end="31093" title="Nationalist Party (Malta)" label="Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="31159" end="31175" title="Italian language" label="Italian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="31276" end="31282" title="plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="31299" end="31317" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q740724" start="31361" end="31376" title="Treaty of Paris (1814)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="31633" end="31640" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="31879" end="31889" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q466887" start="32304" end="32316" title="Belle Époque" label="Belle Époque"/>
<link wikidata="Q136325" start="32364" end="32383" title="Anglo-Egyptian Bank" label="Anglo-Egyptian Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q803380" start="32429" end="32442" title="Malta Railway" label="Malta Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q544284" start="32562" end="32573" title="David Bruce (microbiologist)" label="David Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q156050" start="32609" end="32620" title="Malta Fever" label="Malta Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q911040" start="32634" end="32653" title="Themistocles Zammit" label="Themistocles Zammit"/>
<link wikidata="Q575350" start="32709" end="32724" title="Dun Karm Psaila" label="Dun Karm Psaila"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="32789" end="32800" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805712" start="32988" end="33000" title="Sette Giugno" label="Sette Giugno"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="33244" end="33253" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817866" start="33254" end="33264" title="Parliament of Malta" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397679" start="33342" end="33355" title="Joseph Howard (Prime Minister)" label="Joseph Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q192792" start="33400" end="33410" title="Innu Malti" label="Innu Malti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396581" start="33542" end="33561" title="Ugo Pasquale Mifsud" label="Ugo Pasquale Mifsud"/>
<link wikidata="Q333979" start="33581" end="33598" title="Gerald Strickland" label="Gerald Strickland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164299" start="33939" end="33959" title="Constitutional Party (Malta)" label="Constitutional Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166" start="34577" end="34584" title="Maltese language" label="Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q19742029" start="34836" end="34853" title="Language Question (Malta)" label="Language Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="35505" end="35515" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940268" start="35523" end="35542" title="British Mediterranean Fleet" label="Mediterranean Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="35581" end="35598" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="35643" end="35653" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="35655" end="35660" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="36012" end="36025" title="anti-aircraft" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q850179" start="36100" end="36117" title="Gloster Gladiator" label="Gloster Gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="36217" end="36221" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q150758" start="36468" end="36474" title="Enigma (machine)" label="Enigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q223818" start="36596" end="36603" title="biplane" label="biplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275456" start="36657" end="36670" title="RAF Luqa" label="Luqa Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030" start="36901" end="36911" title="Journalism" label="Journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q59966" start="36912" end="36928" title="Mabel Strickland" label="Mabel Strickland"/>
<link wikidata="Q850179" start="37029" end="37039" title="Gloster Gladiator" label="Gladiators"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="37044" end="37046" title="Anti-aircraft warfare" label="AA"/>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="37555" end="37571" title="Hawker Hurricane" label="Hawker Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q656745" start="37595" end="37616" title="HMS Argus (1917)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Argus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="37806" end="37813" title="fighter plane" label="fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q682452" start="37820" end="37838" title="Francisco Cavalera" label="Francisco Cavalera"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="38049" end="38059" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049801" start="38253" end="38280" title="10th Air Corps (Germany)" label="X. &amp;quot;Fliegerkorps&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q153113" start="38306" end="38318" title="Afrika Korps" label="Afrika Korps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="38330" end="38335" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="38431" end="38445" title="George VI of the United Kingdom" label="King George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829842" start="38458" end="38470" title="George Cross (Malta)" label="George Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="38586" end="38607" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927362" start="39229" end="39247" title="Operation Pedestal" label="Operation Pedestal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016430" start="39308" end="39327" title="SS Ohio" label="SS &amp;quot;Ohio&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396581" start="39576" end="39586" title="Ugo Mifsud" label="Ugo Mifsud"/>
<link wikidata="Q983140" start="39591" end="39610" title="George Borg Olivier" label="George Borg Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097943" start="39787" end="39793" title="Uganda Protectorate" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q989815" start="39797" end="39809" title="Enrico Mizzi" label="Enrico Mizzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802118" start="39823" end="39838" title="Italian Maltese" label="Italian Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="39924" end="39930" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="39947" end="39965" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="invasion of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648164" start="39975" end="39993" title="Lascaris War Rooms" label="Lascaris War Rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="40021" end="40043" title="Armistice of Cassibile" label="Armistice of Cassibile"/>
<link wikidata="Q855186" start="40079" end="40091" title="Regia Marina" label="Italian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144521" start="40134" end="40150" title="Malta Conference (1945)" label="Malta Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="40219" end="40235" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="40241" end="40254" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q736796" start="40373" end="40383" title="Paul Boffa" label="Paul Boffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017699" start="40447" end="40461" title="women in Malta" label="women in Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q168387" start="40486" end="40500" title="Agatha Barbara" label="Agatha Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031464" start="40509" end="40528" title="Women in Maltese General Elections" label="first woman elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q684886" start="40674" end="40692" title="Labour Party (Malta)" label="Malta Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q167307" start="40702" end="40713" title="Dom Mintoff" label="Dom Mintoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q594056" start="40820" end="40840" title="Nationalist Party (Malta)" label="Partit Nazzjonalista"/>
<link wikidata="Q983140" start="40849" end="40868" title="George Borg Olivier" label="George Borg Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519998" start="41471" end="41489" title="Secretary of State for the Colonies" label="Colonial Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707145" start="41491" end="41507" title="Alan Lennox-Boyd" label="Alan Lennox-Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="41588" end="41606" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="41632" end="41648" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="41659" end="41670" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744821" start="42050" end="42075" title="1956 Maltese United Kingdom integration referendum" label="UK integration referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q202216" start="43835" end="43855" title="overseas departments" label="overseas departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="43949" end="43963" title="British overseas territory" label="British colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="44126" end="44135" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="44246" end="44253" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q933216" start="44258" end="44273" title="tax competition" label="tax competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="44469" end="44477" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44504" end="44520" title="Blood Commission" label="Blood Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q983140" start="44643" end="44663" title="Giorgio Borg Olivier" label="Giorgio Borg Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44715" end="44729" title="Stolper report" label="Stolper report"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="44899" end="44917" title="British Parliament" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948292" start="44944" end="44964" title="Constitution of Malta" label="Maltese constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744827" start="44989" end="44999" title="1964 Maltese constitutional referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603765" start="45005" end="45019" title="State of Malta" label="State of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="45073" end="45096" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="45103" end="45115" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898092" start="45119" end="45133" title="Queen of Malta" label="Queen of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="45138" end="45151" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="45297" end="45311" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069157" start="45370" end="45374" title="1962 Maltese general election" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069172" start="45379" end="45383" title="1966 Maltese general election" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q594056" start="45388" end="45405" title="Nationalist Party (Malta)" label="Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093870" start="45499" end="45519" title="Italy-Malta relations" label="relations with Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171834" start="45700" end="45709" title="Aldo Moro" label="Aldo Moro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="45751" end="45768" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="45827" end="45854" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069145" start="45900" end="45917" title="1971 Maltese general election" label="elections of 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q684886" start="45926" end="45938" title="Labour Party (Malta)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q167307" start="45951" end="45962" title="Dom Mintoff" label="Dom Mintoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="46073" end="46081" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="46116" end="46130" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="46162" end="46177" title="nationalization" label="nationalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q294217" start="46214" end="46227" title="public sector" label="public sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="46236" end="46249" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q628967" start="46251" end="46265" title="Employment law" label="Employment law"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="46285" end="46300" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q205572" start="46355" end="46369" title="civil marriage" label="civil marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="46389" end="46402" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="46407" end="46415" title="adultery" label="adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="46444" end="46462" title="capital punishment" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="46467" end="46473" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="46571" end="46585" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="46596" end="46600" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q171834" start="46644" end="46653" title="Aldo Moro" label="Aldo Moro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="46716" end="46724" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q356756" start="46782" end="46794" title="Anthony Mamo" label="Anthony Mamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q796593" start="46809" end="46818" title="President of Malta" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143095" start="46824" end="46858" title="Xirka Ġieħ ir-Repubblika" label="&amp;quot;Ġieħ ir-Repubblika&amp;quot; Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="46916" end="46924" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069110" start="47023" end="47037" title="1976 Maltese general election" label="1976 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921303" start="47397" end="47409" title="Black Monday (Malta)" label="Black Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735231" start="47502" end="47516" title="Times of Malta" label="Times of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091428" start="47801" end="47812" title="Freedom Day (Malta)" label="Freedom Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q832807" start="47893" end="47901" title="Floriana" label="Floriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q22947829" start="47911" end="47923" title="War Memorial (Floriana)" label="War Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="48236" end="48251" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17435890" start="48259" end="48264" title="History of Libya under Muammar Gaddafi" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="48311" end="48322" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q167307" start="48336" end="48343" title="Dom Mintoff" label="Mintoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="48681" end="48685" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="48691" end="48693" title="UK" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="49384" end="49391" title="Gaddafi" label="Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21476646" start="49557" end="49580" title="Mariam Al-Batool Mosque" label="Mariam Al-Batool Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213203" start="49707" end="49713" title="Saipem" label="Saipem"/>
<link wikidata="Q775060" start="49730" end="49736" title="Texaco" label="Texaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="50010" end="50040" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q185963" start="50186" end="50196" title="Neutrality (international relations)" label="neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="50212" end="50217" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722367" start="50471" end="50493" title="1981 Maltese general election" label="1981 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q594056" start="50502" end="50519" title="Nationalist Party (Malta)" label="Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="50633" end="50657" title="Single Transferable Vote" label="Single Transferable Vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q152511" start="50755" end="50773" title="Eddie Fenech Adami" label="Eddie Fenech Adami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043593" start="51150" end="51172" title="Karmenu Mifsud Bonnici" label="Karmenu Mifsud Bonnici"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043593" start="51387" end="51409" title="Karmenu Mifsud Bonnici" label="Karmenu Mifsud Bonnici"/>
<link wikidata="Q748138" start="51808" end="51847" title="1987 Maltese general election" label="general elections that followed in 1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="52007" end="52021" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="52030" end="52043" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q594056" start="52049" end="52066" title="Nationalist Party (Malta)" label="Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q684886" start="52201" end="52207" title="Malta Labour Party" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069151" start="52379" end="52393" title="1992 Maltese general election" label="1992 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q929182" start="52450" end="52505" title="1996 Maltese general election" label="General elections were held in Malta on 26 October 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q684886" start="52516" end="52522" title="Malta Labour Party" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069102" start="53229" end="53243" title="1998 Maltese general election" label="1998 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q594056" start="53280" end="53297" title="Nationalist Party (Malta)" label="Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="53452" end="53470" title="capital punishment" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744789" start="53584" end="53616" title="2003 Maltese European Union membership referendum" label="referendum on membership in 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q684886" start="53693" end="53699" title="Malta Labour Party" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q594056" start="53872" end="53889" title="Nationalist Party (Malta)" label="Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069083" start="53927" end="53946" title="2003 Maltese general election" label="won another mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q796593" start="53998" end="54016" title="President of Malta" label="President of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q57620" start="54018" end="54032" title="Lawrence Gonzi" label="Lawrence Gonzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q684886" start="54247" end="54253" title="Malta Labour Party" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q549456" start="54291" end="54299" title="Joe Borg" label="Joe Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661677" start="54331" end="54352" title="European commissioner" label="European commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q388354" start="54366" end="54384" title="Barroso Commission" label="Barroso Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="54603" end="54623" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="54732" end="54740" title="Eurozone" label="Eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q82498" start="54764" end="54777" title="2008 Maltese general election" label="2008 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57502" start="54828" end="54840" title="George Abela" label="George Abela"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744844" start="54939" end="54957" title="2011 Maltese divorce referendum" label="divorce referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="55040" end="55051" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="55060" end="55072" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q518375" start="55264" end="55274" title="John Dalli" label="John Dalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q58176" start="55309" end="55319" title="Tonio Borg" label="Tonio Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586695" start="55355" end="55394" title="2013 Maltese general election" label="snap election was called for March 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q938224" start="55614" end="55627" title="Joseph Muscat" label="Joseph Muscat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508402" start="55698" end="55710" title="George Vella" label="George Vella"/>
<link wikidata="Q796593" start="55723" end="55757" title="President of Malta" label="President of the Republic of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762928" start="55769" end="55795" title="Marie-Louise Coleiro Preca" label="Marie-Louise Coleiro Preca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="55826" end="55836" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646809" start="55866" end="55888" title="Daphne Caruana Galizia" label="Daphne Caruana Galizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794641" start="55942" end="55949" title="Bidnija" label="Bidnija"/>
<link wikidata="Q76861319" start="56152" end="56165" title="Yorgen Fenech" label="Yorgen Fenech"/>
<link wikidata="Q78774708" start="56253" end="56279" title="2019–2020 Maltese protests" label="2019–2020 political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q938224" start="56332" end="56345" title="Joseph Muscat" label="Joseph Muscat"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711259" start="56356" end="56368" title="Konrad Mizzi" label="Konrad Mizzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882072" start="56411" end="56425" title="Keith Schembri" label="Keith Schembri"/>
<link wikidata="Q684886" start="56478" end="56498" title="Labour Party (Malta)" label="Maltese Labour party"/>
<link wikidata="Q37860840" start="56507" end="56519" title="Robert Abela" label="Robert Abela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="56671" end="56699" title="cannabis (drug)" label="recreational use of cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q108366724" start="56823" end="56831" title="2022 Maltese general election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401292" start="56905" end="56921" title="Culture of Malta" label="Culture of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045623" start="56924" end="56952" title="History of the Jews in Malta" label="History of the Jews in Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622084" start="56955" end="56986" title="List of heads of state of Malta" label="List of heads of state of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157030" start="56989" end="57001" title="Malta Summit" label="Malta Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973348" start="57004" end="57033" title="Norman-Arab-Byzantine culture" label="Norman-Arab-Byzantine culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927362" start="57036" end="57054" title="Operation Pedestal" label="Operation Pedestal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805814" start="57057" end="57084" title="Timeline of Maltese history" label="Timeline of Maltese history"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39945" wikidata="Q1371594" url="?curid=39945" title="Negro league baseball">
<text>The Negro leagues were United States professional baseball leagues comprising teams of African Americans. The term may be used broadly to include professional black teams outside the leagues and it may be used narrowly for the seven relatively successful leagues beginning in 1920 that are sometimes termed &quot;Negro Major Leagues&quot;. 

In the late 19th century, the baseball color line developed, excluding African Americans from play in Major League Baseball and its affiliated minor leagues (collectively known as organized baseball). The first professional baseball league consisting of all-black teams, the National Colored Base Ball League, was organized strictly as a minor league but failed in 1887 after only two weeks owing to low attendance. After several decades of mostly independent play by a variety of teams, the first Negro National League was formed in 1920 by Rube Foster. Ultimately, seven Negro major leagues existed at various times over the next thirty years. After integration of organized baseball began in the late 1940s, the quality of the Negro leagues slowly deteriorated; the Negro American League&#x27;s 1951 season is generally considered the last Negro league season, although the last professional club, the Indianapolis Clowns, operated as a humorous sideshow rather than competitively from the mid-1960s to the 1980s.

In December 2020, Major League Baseball announced that based on recent decades of historical research, it classified the seven &quot;major Negro leagues&quot; as additional major leagues, adding them to the six historical &quot;major league&quot; designations it made in 1969, thus recognizing statistics and approximately 3,400 players who played from 1920 to 1948. On May 28, 2024, Major League Baseball announced that it had integrated Negro league statistics into its records, which among other changes gives Josh Gibson the highest single-season major league batting average at .466 (1943) and the highest career batting average at .372.

== Etymology ==

During the formative years of black baseball, the term &quot;colored&quot; was the established usage when referring to African-Americans. References to black baseball prior to the 1930s are usually to &quot;colored&quot; leagues or teams, such as the Southern League of Colored Base Ballists (1886), the National Colored Base Ball League (1887) and the Eastern Colored League (1923), among others. By the 1920s or 1930s, the term &quot;Negro&quot; came into use which led to references to &quot;Negro&quot; leagues or teams. The black World Series was referred to as the Colored World Series from 1924 to 1927, and the Negro World Series from 1942 to 1948.

The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People petitioned the public to recognize a capital &quot;N&quot; in negro as a matter of respect for black people. By 1930, essentially every major US outlet had adopted &quot;Negro&quot; as the accepted term for black people. By about 1970, the term &quot;Negro&quot; had fallen into disfavor, but by then the Negro leagues were mere historic artifacts.

==History of the Negro leagues==

===Amateur era===

Because black people were not being accepted into the major and minor baseball leagues due to racism which established the color line, they formed their own teams and had made professional teams by the 1880s. The first known baseball game between two black teams was held on November 15, 1859, in New York City. The Henson Base Ball Club of Jamaica, Queens, defeated the Unknowns of Weeksville, Brooklyn, 54 to 43.

Immediately after the end of the American Civil War in 1865 and during the Reconstruction period that followed, a black baseball scene formed in the East and Mid-Atlantic states. Comprising mainly ex-soldiers and promoted by some well-known black officers, teams such as the Jamaica Monitor Club, Albany Bachelors, Philadelphia Excelsiors and Chicago Uniques started playing each other and any other team that would play against them.

By the end of the 1860s, the black baseball mecca was Philadelphia, which had an African-American population of 22,000. Two former cricket players, James H. Francis and Francis Wood, formed the Pythian Base Ball Club. They played in Camden, New Jersey, at the landing of the Federal Street Ferry, because it was difficult to get permits for black baseball games in the city. Octavius Catto, the promoter of the Pythians, decided to apply for membership in the National Association of Base Ball Players, normally a matter of sending delegates to the annual convention; beyond that, a formality. At the end of the 1867 season, &quot;the National Association of Baseball Players voted to exclude any club with a black player.&quot; In some ways &quot;Blackball&quot; thrived under segregation, with the few black teams of the day playing not only each other but white teams as well. &quot;Black teams earned the bulk of their income playing white independent &#x27;semipro&#x27; clubs.&quot;

===Professional baseball===

Baseball featuring African American players became professionalized by the 1870s. The first known professional black baseball player was Bud Fowler, who appeared in a handful of games with a Chelsea, Massachusetts club in April 1878 and then pitched for the Lynn, Massachusetts team in the International Association.
Moses Fleetwood Walker and his brother, Welday Wilberforce Walker, were the first two recognizably black players in the major leagues. They both played for the 1884 Toledo Blue Stockings in the American Association, which was considered a major league at the time. Then in 1886 second baseman Frank Grant joined the Buffalo Bisons of the International League, the strongest minor league, and hit .340, third highest in the league. Several other black American players joined the International League the following season, including pitchers George Stovey and Robert Higgins, but 1888 was the last season blacks were permitted in that or any other high minor league.
The first nationally known black professional baseball team was founded in 1885 when three clubs, the Keystone Athletics of Philadelphia, the Orions of Philadelphia, and the Manhattans of Washington, D.C., merged to form the Cuban Giants.

The success of the Cubans led to the creation of the first recognized &quot;Negro league&quot; in 1887—the National Colored Base Ball League. It was organized strictly as a minor league and founded with six teams: Baltimore Lord Baltimores, Boston Resolutes, Louisville Fall City, New York Gorhams, Philadelphia Pythians, and Pittsburgh Keystones. Two more joined before the season but never played a game, the Cincinnati Browns and Washington Capital. The league, led by Walter S. Brown of Pittsburgh, applied for and was granted official minor league status and thus &quot;protection&quot; under the major league-led National Agreement. This move prevented any team in organized baseball from signing any of the NCBBL players, which also locked the players to their particular teams within the league. The reserve clause would have tied the players to their clubs from season to season but the NCBBL failed. One month into the season, the Resolutes folded. A week later, only three teams were left.

Because the original Cuban Giants were a popular and business success, many similarly named teams came into existence—including the Cuban X-Giants, a splinter and a powerhouse around 1900; the Genuine Cuban Giants, the renamed Cuban Giants, the Columbia Giants, the Brooklyn Royal Giants, and so on. The early &quot;Cuban&quot; teams were all composed of African Americans rather than Cubans; the purpose was to increase their acceptance with white patrons, as Cuba was on very friendly terms with the United States during those years. Beginning in 1899 several Cuban baseball teams played in North America, including the All Cubans, the Cuban Stars (West), the Cuban Stars (East), and the New York Cubans. Some of them included white Cuban players, and some were Negro league players.

The few players on the white minor league teams were constantly dodging verbal and physical abuse from both competitors and fans. The Compromise of 1877 removed the few remaining obstacles from the South enacting Jim Crow laws, allowing legal discrimination against blacks. On July 14, 1887, Cap Anson&#x27;s Chicago White Stockings were scheduled to play the Newark Giants of the International League, which had Fleet Walker and George Stovey on its roster. After Anson marched his team onto the field in military style as was his custom, he declared that his team would not play unless Walker and Stovey were barred from the field. Newark capitulated, and later that same day, league owners voted to refuse future contracts to blacks, citing the &quot;hazards&quot; imposed by such athletes.

In 1888, the Middle States League was formed and it admitted two all-black teams to its otherwise all-white league, the Cuban Giants and their arch-rivals, the New York Gorhams. Despite the animosity between the two clubs, they managed to form a traveling team, the Colored All Americans. This enabled them to make money barnstorming while fulfilling their league obligations. In 1890, the Giants returned to their independent, barnstorming identity, and by 1892, they were the only black team in the East still in operation on a full-time basis.

===Frank Leland===

Also in 1888, Frank Leland got some of Chicago&#x27;s black businessmen to sponsor the black amateur Union Base Ball Club. Through Chicago&#x27;s city government, Leland obtained a permit and lease to play at the South Side Park, a 5,000-seat facility. Eventually, his team went pro and became the Chicago Unions.

After his stint with the Gorhams, Bud Fowler caught on with a team out of Findlay, Ohio. While his team was playing in Adrian, Michigan, Fowler was persuaded by two white local businessmen, L. W. Hoch and Rolla Taylor to help them start a team financed by the Page Woven Wire Fence Company, the Page Fence Giants. The Page Fence Giants went on to become a powerhouse team that had no home field. Barnstorming through the Midwest, they would play all comers. Their success became the prototype for black baseball for years to come.

After the 1898 season, the Page Fence Giants were forced to fold because of finances. Alvin H. Garrett, a black businessman in Chicago, and John W. Patterson, the left fielder for the Page Fence Giants, reformed the team under the name the Columbia Giants. In 1901, the Giants folded because of a lack of a place to play. Leland bought the Giants in 1905 and merged it with his Unions (despite the fact that not a single Giant player ended up on the roster), and named them the Leland Giants.

===Rube Foster===

The Philadelphia Giants, owned by Walter Schlichter, a white businessman, rose to prominence in 1903 when they lost to the Cuban X-Giants in their version of the &quot;Colored Championship&quot;. Leading the way for the Cubans was a young pitcher by the name of Andrew &quot;Rube&quot; Foster. The following season, Schlichter, in the finest blackball tradition, hired Foster away from the Cubans and beat them in their 1904 rematch. Philadelphia remained on top of the blackball world until Foster left the team in 1907 to play and manage the Leland Giants (Frank Leland renamed his Chicago Union Giants the Leland Giants in 1905).

Around the same time, Nat Strong, a white businessman, started using his ownership of baseball fields in the New York City area to become the leading promoter of blackball on the East coast. Just about any game played in New York, Strong would get a cut. Strong eventually used his leverage to almost put the Brooklyn Royal Giants out of business, and then he bought the club and turned it into a barnstorming team.

When Foster joined the Leland Giants, he demanded that he be put in charge of not only the on-field activities but the bookings as well. Foster immediately turned the Giants into &quot;the&quot; team to beat. He indoctrinated them to take the extra base, to play hit and run on nearly every pitch, and to rattle the opposing pitcher by taking them deep into the count. He studied the mechanics of his pitchers and could spot the smallest flaw, turning his average pitchers into learned craftsmen. Foster also was able to turn around the business end of the team as well, by demanding and getting 40 percent of the gate instead of the 10 percent that Frank Leland was getting.

By the end of the 1909, Foster demanded that Leland step back from all baseball operations or he (Foster) would leave. When Leland would not give up complete control, Foster quit, and in a heated court battle, got to keep the rights to the Leland Giants&#x27; name. Leland took the players and started a new team named the Chicago Giants, while Foster took the Leland Giants and started to encroach on Nat Strong&#x27;s territory.

As early as 1910, Foster started talking about reviving the concept of an all-black league. The one thing he was insistent upon was that black teams should be owned by black men. This put him in direct competition with Strong. After 1910, Foster renamed his team the Chicago American Giants to appeal to a larger fan base. During the same year, J. L. Wilkinson started the All Nations traveling team. The All Nations team would eventually become one of the best-known and popular teams of the Negro leagues, the Kansas City Monarchs.

On April 6, 1917, the United States entered World War I. Manpower needed by the defense plants and industry accelerated the migration of blacks from the South to the North. This meant a larger and more affluent fan base with more money to spend. By the end of the war in 1919, Foster was again ready to start a Negro baseball league.

On February 13 and 14, 1920, talks were held in Kansas City, Missouri, that established the Negro National League and its governing body the National Association of Colored Professional Base Ball Clubs. The league was initially composed of eight teams: Chicago American Giants, Chicago Giants, Cuban Stars, Dayton Marcos, Detroit Stars, Indianapolis ABCs, Kansas City Monarchs, and St. Louis Giants. Foster was named league president and controlled every aspect of the league, including which players played on which teams, when and where teams played, and what equipment was used (all of which had to be purchased from Foster). Foster, as booking agent of the league, took a five percent cut of all gate receipts.

===Golden age===
On May 2, 1920, the Indianapolis ABCs beat Charles &quot;Joe&quot; Green&#x27;s Chicago Giants (4–2) in the first game played in the inaugural season of the Negro National League, played at Washington Park in Indianapolis. However, because of the Chicago Race Riot of 1919, the National Guard still occupied the Giants&#x27; home field, Schorling&#x27;s Park (formerly South Side Park). This forced Foster to cancel all the Giants&#x27; home games for almost a month and threatened to become a huge embarrassment for the league. On March 2, 1920, the Negro Southern League was founded in Atlanta, Georgia. In 1921, the Negro Southern League joined Foster&#x27;s National Association of Colored Professional Base Ball Clubs. As a dues-paying member of the association, it received the same protection from raiding parties as any team in the Negro National League.

Foster then admitted John Connors&#x27; Atlantic City Bacharach Giants as an associate member to move further into Nat Strong&#x27;s territory. Connors, wanting to return the favor of helping him against Strong, raided Ed Bolden&#x27;s Hilldale Daisies team. Bolden saw little choice but to team up with Foster&#x27;s nemesis, Nat Strong. Within days of calling a truce with Strong, Bolden made an about-face and signed up as an associate member of Foster&#x27;s Negro National League.

On December 16, 1922, Bolden once again shifted sides and, with Strong, formed the Eastern Colored League as an alternative to Foster&#x27;s Negro National League, which started with six teams: Atlantic City Bacharach Giants, Baltimore Black Sox, Brooklyn Royal Giants, New York Cuban Stars, Hilldale, and New York Lincoln Giants. The National League was having trouble maintaining continuity among its franchises: three teams folded and had to be replaced after the 1921 season, two others after the 1922 season, and two more after the 1923 season. Foster replaced the defunct teams, sometimes promoting whole teams from the Negro Southern League into the NNL. Finally Foster and Bolden met and agreed to an annual World Series beginning in 1924.
Although this was a strong beginning to the Negro Leagues, throughout the 1920&#x27;s the leagues were very unorganized, having teams play uneven numbers of games. Teams would skip official games for non-league matchups which would be more lucrative for the team. Players would jump from franchise to franchise, looking for the highest pay, causing imbalance within the leagues. 
1925 saw the St. Louis Stars come of age in the Negro National League. They finished in second place during the second half of the year due in large part to their pitcher turned center fielder, Cool Papa Bell, and their shortstop, Willie Wells. A gas leak in his home nearly asphyxiated Rube Foster in 1926, and his increasingly erratic behavior led to him being committed to an asylum a year later. While Foster was out of the picture, the owners of the National League elected William C. Hueston as new league president. In 1927, Ed Bolden suffered a similar fate as Foster, by committing himself to a hospital because the pressure was too great. The Eastern League folded shortly after that, marking the end of the World Series between the NNL and the ECL.

After the Eastern League folded following the 1927 season, a new eastern league, the American Negro League, was formed to replace it. The makeup of the new ANL was nearly the same as the Eastern League, the exception being that the Homestead Grays joined in place of the now-defunct Brooklyn Royal Giants. The ANL lasted just one season. In the face of harder economic times, the Negro National League folded after the 1931 season. Some of its teams joined the only Negro league then left, the Negro Southern League. Only strong independent clubs were able to survive the hard economic turn that affected the country, such as the Kansas City Monarchs. During this time, strong clubs would build teams that had potential to beat the teams in the major leagues with new players and tactics that many have never seen before. 

On March 26, 1932, the Chicago &quot;Defender&quot; announced the end of Negro National League.

===Satchel Paige, Josh Gibson, and Gus Greenlee===
Just as Negro league baseball seemed to be at its lowest point and was about to fade into history, along came Cumberland Posey and his Homestead Grays. Posey, Charlie Walker, John Roesnik, George Rossiter, John Drew, Lloyd Thompson, and L.R. Williams got together in January 1932 and founded the East–West League. Eight cities were included in the new league: &quot;Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, Detroit, Baltimore, Cleveland, Newark, New York, and Washington, D.C.&quot;. By May 1932, the Detroit Wolves were about to collapse, and instead of letting the team go, Posey kept pumping money into it. By June the Wolves had disintegrated and all the rest of the teams, except for the Grays, were beyond help, so Posey had to terminate the league.

Across town from Posey, Gus Greenlee, a reputed gangster and numbers runner, had just purchased the Pittsburgh Crawfords. Greenlee&#x27;s main interest in baseball was to use it as a way to launder money from his numbers games. But, after learning about Posey&#x27;s money-making machine in Homestead, he became obsessed with the sport and his Crawfords. On August 6, 1931, Satchel Paige made his first appearance as a Crawford. With Paige on his team, Greenlee took a huge risk by investing $100,000 in a new ballpark to be called Greenlee Field. On opening day, April 30, 1932, the pitcher-catcher battery was made up of the two most marketable icons in all of black baseball: Satchel Paige and Josh Gibson.

In 1933, Greenlee, riding the popularity of his Crawfords, became the next man to start a Negro league. In February 1933, Greenlee and delegates from six other teams met at Greenlee&#x27;s Crawford Grill to ratify the constitution of the National Organization of Professional Baseball Clubs. The name of the new league was the same as the old league Negro National League which had disbanded a year earlier in 1932. The members of the new league were the Pittsburgh Crawfords, the Columbus Blue Birds, the Indianapolis ABCs, the Baltimore Black Sox, the Brooklyn Royal Giants, Cole&#x27;s American Giants (formerly the Chicago American Giants), and the Nashville Elite Giants. Greenlee also came up with the idea to duplicate the Major League Baseball All-Star Game, except, unlike the big league method in which the sportswriters chose the players, the fans voted for the participants. The first game, known as the East–West All-Star Game, was held September 10, 1933, at Comiskey Park in Chicago before a crowd of 20,000.

===World War II===
With the Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, the United States was thrust into World War II. Remembering World War I, black America vowed it would not be shut out of the beneficial effects of a major war effort: economic boom and social unification.

Just like the major leagues, the Negro leagues saw many stars miss one or more seasons while fighting overseas. While many players were over 30 and considered &quot;too old&quot; for service, Monte Irvin, Larry Doby and Leon Day of Newark; Ford Smith, Hank Thompson, Joe Greene, Willard Brown and Buck O&#x27;Neil of Kansas City; Lyman Bostock of Birmingham; and Lick Carlisle and Howard Easterling of Homestead all served. But the white majors were barely recognizable, while the Negro leagues reached their highest plateau. Millions of black Americans were working in war industries and, making good money, they packed league games in every city. Business was so good that promoter Abe Saperstein (famous for the Harlem Globetrotters) started a new circuit, the Negro Midwest League, a minor league similar to the Negro Southern League. The Negro World Series was revived in 1942, this time pitting the winners of the eastern Negro National League and midwestern Negro American League. It continued through 1948 with the NNL winning four championships and the NAL three.

In 1946, Saperstein partnered with Jesse Owens to form another Negro league, the West Coast Baseball Association (WCBA); Saperstein was league president and Owens was vice-president and the owner of the league&#x27;s Portland (Oregon) Rosebuds franchise. The WCBA disbanded after only two months.

===Integration era===
Judge Kenesaw M. Landis, the first Commissioner of Major League Baseball, was an intractable opponent of integrating the white majors. During his quarter-century tenure, he blocked all attempts at integrating the game. A popular story has it that in , Bill Veeck planned to buy the moribund Philadelphia Phillies and stock them with Negro league stars. However, when Landis got wind of his plans, he and National League president Ford Frick scuttled it in favor of another bid by William D. Cox.

After Landis&#x27;s death in 1944, Happy Chandler was named his successor. Chandler was open to integrating the game, even at the risk of losing his job as Commissioner. He later said in his biography that he could not, in good conscience, tell black players they could not play baseball with whites when they had fought for their country [although they had fought in segregated units].

In March 1945, the white majors created the Major League Committee on Baseball Integration. Its members included Joseph P. Rainey, Larry MacPhail and Branch Rickey. Because MacPhail, who was an outspoken critic of integration, kept stalling, the committee never met. Under the guise of starting an all-black league, Rickey sent scouts all around the United States, Mexico and Puerto Rico, looking for the perfect candidate to break the color line. His list was eventually narrowed down to three: Roy Campanella, Don Newcombe and Jackie Robinson.

On August 28, 1945, Jackie Robinson met with Rickey in Brooklyn, where Rickey gave Robinson a &quot;test&quot; by berating him and shouting racial epithets that Robinson would hear from day one in the white game. Having passed the test, Robinson signed the contract which stipulated that from then on, Robinson had no &quot;written or moral obligations&quot; to any other club. By the inclusion of this clause, precedent was set that would raze the Negro leagues as a functional commercial enterprise.

To throw off the press and keep his intentions hidden, Rickey got heavily involved in Gus Greenlee&#x27;s newest foray into black baseball, the United States League. Greenlee started the league in 1945 as a way to get back at the owners of the Negro National League teams for throwing him out. Rickey saw the opportunity as a way to convince people that he was interested in cleaning up blackball, not integrating it. In midsummer 1945, Rickey, almost ready with his Robinson plan, pulled out of the league. The league folded after the end of the 1946 season.

Pressured by civil rights groups, the Fair Employment Practices Act was passed by the New York State Legislature in 1945. This followed the passing of the Quinn-Ives Act banning discrimination in hiring. At the same time, NYC Mayor La Guardia formed the Mayor&#x27;s Commission on Baseball to study integration of the major leagues. All this led to Rickey announcing the signing of Robinson much earlier than he would have liked. On October 23, 1945, Montreal Royals president Hector Racine announced that, &quot;We are signing this boy.&quot;

Early in 1946, Rickey signed four more black players, Campanella, Newcombe, John Wright and Roy Partlow, this time with much less fanfare. After the integration of the major leagues in 1947, marked by the appearance of Jackie Robinson with the Brooklyn Dodgers that April, interest in Negro league baseball waned. Black players who were regarded as prospects were signed by major league teams, often without regard for any contracts that might have been signed with Negro league clubs. Negro league owners who complained about this practice were in a no-win situation: They could not protect their own interests without seeming to interfere with the advancement of players to the majors. By 1948, the Dodgers, along with Veeck&#x27;s Cleveland Indians, had integrated.

The Negro leagues also &quot;integrated&quot; around the same time, as Eddie Klep pitched for the Cleveland Buckeyes during the 1946 season, becoming the first white American to play in the Negro leagues.

These moves came despite strong opposition from the owners; Rickey was the only one of the 16 owners to support integrating the sport in January 1947. Chandler&#x27;s decision to overrule them may have been a factor in his ouster in 1951 in favor of Ford C. Frick.

===End of the Negro leagues===
Some proposals were floated to bring the Negro leagues into &quot;organized baseball&quot; as developmental leagues for black players, but that was recognized as contrary to the goal of full integration. And so, the Negro leagues, once among the largest and most prosperous black-owned business ventures, were allowed to fade into oblivion.

First a trickle and then a flood of players signed with Major League Baseball teams. Most signed minor league contracts and many languished, shuttled from one bush league team to another despite their success at that level.

The Negro National League folded after the 1948 season when the Grays withdrew to resume barnstorming, the Newark Eagles moved from New Jersey to Houston, Texas, and the New York Black Yankees folded. The Grays folded one year later after losing $30,000 in the barnstorming effort. The Negro American League was the only &quot;major&quot; Negro league operating in 1949. Within two years it had been reduced to minor league caliber and it played its last game in 1958.

The last All-Star game was held in 1962, and by 1966 the Indianapolis Clowns were the last Negro league team still playing. The Clowns continued to play exhibition games into the 1980s, but as a humorous sideshow rather than a competitive sport.

== Major Negro leagues ==
While organized leagues were common in black baseball, there were only seven leagues that are considered to be of the top quality of play at the time of their existence. In 2020, Major League Baseball announced their official determination and designation of Negro Leagues by seasons as &quot;Major Leagues&quot;, including the incorporation of applicable player records into the official baseball statistics. None materialized prior to 1920 and by 1950, due to integration, they were in decline. Even though teams were league members, most still continued to barnstorm and play non-league games against local or semi-pro teams. Those games, sometimes approaching 100 per season, did not count in the official standings or statistics. However, some teams were considered &quot;associate&quot; teams and games played against them did count, but an associate team held no place in the league standings.

* Negro National League (I), 1920–1931.
* Eastern Colored League, 1923–1928.
* American Negro League, 1929; was created from some of the ECL teams but lasted just one season.
* East–West League, 1932; ceased operations midway through the season.
* Negro Southern League, 1932; incorporated some teams from the NNL(I) and functioned for one year as a major league, was otherwise a minor league that played from 1920 into the 1940s.
* Negro National League (II), 1933–1948.
* Negro American League, 1937–1960 or so; after 1950, the league and its teams operated after a fashion, mostly as barnstorming units, but historians have a hard time deciding when the league actually came to an end.

===Colored and Negro World Series===

The NNL(I) and ECL champions met in a World Series, usually referred to as the &quot;Colored World Series&quot;, from 1924 to 1927 (1924, 1925, 1926, 1927).

The NNL(II) and NAL also met in a World Series, usually referred to as the &quot;Negro World Series&quot; from 1942 to 1948 (1942, 1943, 1944, 1945, 1946, 1947, 1948).

Five of those years with a World Series at the end also saw a &quot;Championship Series&quot; played to determine the pennant winner that went to the Series. In years without a World Series, leagues would either award a championship to the team that had the best record/percentage at the end of the year or had a &quot;Championship Series&quot; to determine the winner between first half and second half champions. Eleven seasons exist with a postseason series held to determine a pennant winner, although one (1936) was not completed.

===Minor Negro leagues===

Early professional leagues cannot be called major or minor. Until the twentieth century, not one completed even half of its planned season. Two leagues can be considered the prototypes for Negro league baseball:
*Southern League of Colored Base Ballists, 1886
*National Colored Baseball League, 1887

Eventually, some teams were able to survive and even profit by barnstorming small towns and playing local semi-pro teams as well as league games. Two important leagues of this era are:
*International League of Independent Professional Base Ball Clubs, 1906.
*National Association of Colored Baseball Clubs of the United States and Cuba, 1907–1909.

Early Negro leagues were unable to attract and retain top talent due to financial, logistical and contractual difficulties. Some early dominant teams did not join a league since they could pull in larger profits independently. The early leagues were specifically structured as minor leagues. With the integration of Organized Baseball, beginning 1946, all leagues simply lost elite players to white leagues, and historians do not consider any Negro league &quot;major&quot; after 1950.

A number of leagues from the major-league era (post-1900) are recognized as Negro minor leagues. A rule of thumb was leagues in the north were major while leagues in the south were minor, due mainly to population and economic disparities. Below are some of the better-documented leagues:
* Texas Colored League/Texas–Oklahoma–Louisiana League/Texas–Louisiana Negro League, 1919–1931
* Negro Southern League (I), 1920–1936 – considered a &quot;de facto&quot; major league in 1932 because it was the only league to play a full season schedule due to the Great Depression
* Negro Southeastern League, 1921
* Interstate League, 1926 and 1940 (mixed-race league)
* Tri State League, 1935
* Negro American Association, 1939 and 1948–1949
* Negro Major League, 1942

By default, leagues established after integration are considered minor league, as is the one of two 1940s majors that continued after 1950. Also at this time, leagues began to appear in the west, just as in other sports, due to the post-War boom and improved transportation modes. Below are some of the better-documented leagues:
* Negro Southern League (II), 1945–1951
* United States League, 1945–1946
* West Coast Negro Baseball Association, 1946
* East Texas Negro League, 1946
* Negro Texas League, 1949
* Negro American League, 1951–1960 – considered a major league from 1937 until integration diminished the quality of play around 1950/51
* Arkansas–Louisiana–Texas League, 1951
* Eastern Negro League, 1954
* Negro National Baseball Association, 1954

==The Negro leagues and the Hall of Fame==
In his Baseball Hall of Fame induction speech in 1966, Ted Williams made a strong plea for inclusion of Negro league stars in the Hall. After the publication of Robert Peterson&#x27;s landmark book &quot;Only the Ball was White&quot; in 1970, the Hall of Fame found itself under renewed pressure to find a way to honor Negro league players who would have been in the Hall had they not been barred from the major leagues due to the color of their skin.

At first, the Hall of Fame planned a &quot;separate but equal&quot; display, which would be similar to the Ford C. Frick Award for baseball commentators, in that this plan meant that the Negro league honorees would not be considered members of the Hall of Fame. This plan was criticized by the press, the fans and the players it was intended to honor, and Satchel Paige himself insisted that he would not accept anything less than full-fledged induction into the Hall of Fame. The Hall relented and agreed to admit Negro league players on an equal basis with their Major League counterparts in 1971. A special Negro league committee selected Satchel Paige in 1971, followed by (in alphabetical order) Cool Papa Bell, Oscar Charleston, Martín Dihigo, Josh Gibson, Monte Irvin, Judy Johnson, Buck Leonard and John Henry Lloyd. Of the nine players selected, only Irvin and Paige spent any time in the integrated major leagues. The Veterans Committee later selected Ray Dandridge, as well as choosing Rube Foster on the basis of meritorious service.

Other members of the Hall who played in both the Negro leagues and Major League Baseball are Hank Aaron, Ernie Banks, Roy Campanella, Larry Doby, Willie Mays, and Jackie Robinson. Except for Doby, their play in the Negro leagues was a minor factor in their selection: Aaron, Banks, and Mays played in Negro leagues only briefly and after the leagues had declined with the migration of many black players to the integrated minor leagues; Campanella (1969) and Robinson (1962) were selected before the Hall began considering performance in the Negro leagues.

From 1995 to 2001, the Hall made a renewed effort to honor luminaries from the Negro leagues, one each year. There were seven selections: Leon Day, Bill Foster, Bullet Rogan, Hilton Smith, Turkey Stearnes, Willie Wells, and Smokey Joe Williams.

In February 2006, a committee of twelve baseball historians elected 17 more people from black baseball to the National Baseball Hall of Fame, twelve players and five executives.

; Negro league players (7): Ray Brown; Willard Brown; Andy Cooper; Biz Mackey; Mule Suttles; Cristóbal Torriente; Jud Wilson

; Pre-Negro league players (5) : Frank Grant; Pete Hill; José Méndez; Louis Santop; Ben Taylor

; Negro league executives (4) : Effa Manley; Alex Pompez; Cum Posey; J. L. Wilkinson

; Pre-Negro league executive, manager, player, and historian (1): Sol White

Effa Manley, co-owner (with her husband Abe Manley) and business manager of the Newark Eagles club in the Negro National League, is the first woman elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame.

The committee reviewed the careers of 29 Negro league and 10 Pre-Negro league candidates. The list of 39 had been pared from a roster of 94 candidates by a five-member screening committee in November 2005. The voting committee was chaired by Fay Vincent, Major League Baseball&#x27;s eighth Commissioner and an Honorary Director of the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum.

=== Table of Hall of Fame players ===
Players whose careers also included American League or National League teams are noted with a dagger(†).
The below players were inducted for their Major League Baseball career but started their careers in the Negro leagues.
==Last Negro leaguers==
Hank Aaron was the last Negro league player to hold a regular position in Major League Baseball.

Minnie Miñoso was the last Negro league player to play in a Major League game when he appeared in two games for the Chicago White Sox in 1980.

Buck O&#x27;Neil was the most recent former Negro league player to appear in a professional game when he made two appearances (one for each team) in the Northern League All-Star Game in 2006.

==2008 Major League draft==

On June 5, 2008, Major League Baseball held a special draft of the surviving Negro league players to acknowledge and rectify their exclusion from the major leagues on the basis of race. The idea of the special draft was conceived by Hall of Famer Dave Winfield. Each major league team drafted one player from the Negro leagues. Bobo Henderson, Joe B. Scott, Mule Miles, Lefty Bell, James &quot;Red&quot; Moore, Mack &quot;The Knife&quot; Pride and his brother Charley Pride (who went on to a legendary career in country music) were among the players selected. Also drafted, by the New York Yankees, was Emilio Navarro, who, at 102 years of age at the time of the draft, was believed to be the oldest living professional ballplayer.

==Museum==

The Negro Leagues Baseball Museum is located in the 18th and Vine District in Kansas City, Missouri.

===Postage stamp recognition===

On July 17, 2010, the U.S. Postal Service issued a se-tenant pair of 44-cent U.S. commemorative postage stamps, to honor the all-black professional baseball leagues that operated from 1920 to about 1960. The stamps were formally issued at the Negro Leagues Baseball Museum, during the celebration of the museum&#x27;s twentieth anniversary. One of the stamps depicts Rube Foster.

== See also ==

* East–West All-Star Game
* List of first black Major League Baseball players
* List of Negro league baseball players
* List of Negro league baseball teams
* Negro World Series
* Negro Leagues Baseball Museum
* Ted Williams Museum and Hitters Hall of Fame (including &quot;The Negro Leagues&quot; wing)
* &quot;The Soul of Baseball&quot;, 2007 book by Joe Posnanski
* Toni Stone, Mamie Johnson, Connie Morgan (the only women to play in the leagues)

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==

Histories and encyclopedias
* 
* 1992 winner of CASEY Award for best baseball book.
* 
* 2008 winner of CASEY Award for best baseball book.
* 

Biographies and autobiographies
*&quot;Josh Gibson: The Power and the Darkness&quot;. Mark Ribowsky. Biography.
*&quot;Josh and Satch&quot; by John Holway. .
*&quot;Don&#x27;t Look Back: Satchel Paige in the Shadows of the Game&quot;. Mark Ribowsky. Biography.
*&quot;Maybe I&#x27;ll Pitch Forever&quot; by Satchel Paige. .
*&quot;I Was Right On Time&quot; by Buck O&#x27;Neil. .
*
*&quot;Blackball Stars&quot;, as told to John Holway; a collection of first-person accounts of the Negro leagues by the men who played in them. .
*&quot;Some Are Called Clowns&quot; by Bill Heward &amp; Dimitri Gat (1974). The first white player with the Indianapolis Clowns tells of his 1973 season of barnstorming. .
*&quot;Ruling Over Monarchs, Giants &amp; Stars: Umpiring in the Negro Leagues &amp; Beyond&quot;, by Bob Motley. First-hand account of umpiring in the dying days of Negro league ball. .
*&quot;20 Years Too Soon&quot;, by Quincy Trouppe. Memoir of a longtime Negro League player and manager, who played briefly as a 39-year-old rookie for the Cleveland Indians in 1952. Privately published, 1977; reprinted 1995. .

==External links==
* Black Baseball&#x27;s Negro Baseball Leagues
* Negro League Baseball Players Association
* Negro Leagues Baseball Museum web site
* Center for Negro League Baseball Research
* Negro League Baseball Project (3 interviews) via Western Historical Manuscript Collection – University of Missouri-St. Louis
* For Negro League Players, a Measure of Recognition, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, 30 June 2010
* Black Diamonds: An Oral History of the Negro Leagues (six audio programs)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="4" end="17" title="Negro league baseball" label="Negro leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="50" end="58" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="87" end="103" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="227" end="280" title="#Significant Negro leagues" label="seven relatively successful leagues beginning in 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866604" start="372" end="391" title="baseball color line" label="baseball color line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="403" end="430" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="excluding African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="444" end="465" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="474" end="498" title="Minor League Baseball" label="affiliated minor leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q125238109" start="522" end="540" title="organized baseball" label="organized baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971637" start="617" end="650" title="National Colored Base Ball League" label="National Colored Base Ball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2810673" start="707" end="711" title="1887 in baseball" label="1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987609" start="840" end="861" title="Negro National League (1920–1931)" label="Negro National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544179" start="884" end="895" title="Rube Foster" label="Rube Foster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="994" end="1027" title="Baseball color line#Jackie Robinson and Larry Doby" label="integration of organized baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987577" start="1111" end="1132" title="Negro American League" label="Negro American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273453" start="1140" end="1151" title="1951 in baseball" label="1951 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972699" start="1247" end="1266" title="Indianapolis Clowns" label="Indianapolis Clowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="1378" end="1399" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040584" start="1873" end="1884" title="Josh Gibson" label="Josh Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="1924" end="1939" title="Batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2082" end="2089" title="colored#United States" label="colored"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570076" start="2272" end="2312" title="Southern League of Colored Base Ballists" label="Southern League of Colored Base Ballists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971637" start="2325" end="2358" title="National Colored Base Ball League" label="National Colored Base Ball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330071" start="2374" end="2396" title="Eastern Colored League" label="Eastern Colored League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2457" end="2462" title="Negro#United States" label="Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147465" start="2592" end="2612" title="Colored World Series" label="Colored World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147465" start="2640" end="2658" title="Negro World Series" label="Negro World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="2683" end="2741" title="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People" label="National Association for the Advancement of Colored People"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617137" start="3239" end="3245" title="Racism in the United States" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866604" start="3268" end="3278" title="Baseball color line" label="color line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320403" start="3486" end="3501" title="Jamaica, Queens" label="Jamaica, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163943" start="3528" end="3548" title="Weeksville, Brooklyn" label="Weeksville, Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="3594" end="3612" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="3636" end="3650" title="Reconstruction Era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709292" start="3858" end="3874" title="Albany Bachelors" label="Albany Bachelors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="4051" end="4063" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="4128" end="4135" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182795" start="4191" end="4213" title="Pythian Base Ball Club" label="Pythian Base Ball Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q138367" start="4230" end="4248" title="Camden, New Jersey" label="Camden, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076836" start="4372" end="4386" title="Octavius Catto" label="Octavius Catto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566374" start="4457" end="4498" title="National Association of Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="4775" end="4786" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983845" start="5153" end="5163" title="Bud Fowler" label="Bud Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q54156" start="5207" end="5229" title="Chelsea, Massachusetts" label="Chelsea, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49188" start="5274" end="5293" title="Lynn, Massachusetts" label="Lynn, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048347" start="5306" end="5331" title="International Association for Professional Base Ball Players" label="International Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252979" start="5333" end="5355" title="Fleet Walker" label="Moses Fleetwood Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16023509" start="5373" end="5398" title="Welday Walker" label="Welday Wilberforce Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564564" start="5498" end="5519" title="Toledo Blue Stockings" label="Toledo Blue Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q463393" start="5527" end="5547" title="American Association (19th century)" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486927" start="5626" end="5637" title="Frank Grant (baseball)" label="Frank Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q733939" start="5649" end="5663" title="Buffalo Bisons" label="Buffalo Bisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351657" start="5671" end="5691" title="International League" label="International League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544884" start="5874" end="5887" title="George Stovey" label="George Stovey"/>
<link wikidata="Q127334" start="6074" end="6078" title="1885 in baseball" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006667" start="6224" end="6236" title="Cuban Giants" label="Cuban Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971637" start="6346" end="6379" title="National Colored Base Ball League" label="National Colored Base Ball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q105972848" start="6453" end="6478" title="Baltimore Lord Baltimores" label="Baltimore Lord Baltimores"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948062" start="6480" end="6496" title="Boston Resolutes" label="Boston Resolutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689475" start="6498" end="6518" title="Louisville Fall City" label="Louisville Fall City"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021518" start="6520" end="6536" title="New York Gorhams" label="New York Gorhams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182795" start="6538" end="6559" title="Philadelphia Pythians" label="Philadelphia Pythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199313" start="6565" end="6585" title="Pittsburgh Keystones (baseball)" label="Pittsburgh Keystones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120222" start="6650" end="6667" title="Cincinnati Browns" label="Cincinnati Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q97179110" start="6672" end="6690" title="Washington Capital Citys" label="Washington Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="6730" end="6740" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="6858" end="6876" title="National Agreement (baseball)" label="National Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192056" start="7373" end="7387" title="Cuban X-Giants" label="Cuban X-Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095553" start="7486" end="7501" title="Columbia Giants" label="Columbia Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974889" start="7507" end="7528" title="Brooklyn Royal Giants" label="Brooklyn Royal Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="7702" end="7706" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q809888" start="7803" end="7823" title="Baseball in Cuba" label="Cuban baseball teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728676" start="7863" end="7873" title="All Cubans" label="All Cubans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192053" start="7879" end="7897" title="Cuban Stars (West)" label="Cuban Stars (West)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192050" start="7903" end="7921" title="Cuban Stars (East)" label="Cuban Stars (East)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013434" start="7931" end="7946" title="New York Cubans" label="New York Cubans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983570" start="8162" end="8180" title="Compromise of 1877" label="Compromise of 1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="8241" end="8254" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028466" start="8320" end="8329" title="Cap Anson" label="Cap Anson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869217" start="8337" end="8360" title="Chicago White Stockings (1870–89)" label="Chicago White Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544884" start="8458" end="8471" title="George Stovey" label="George Stovey"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455158" start="8836" end="8856" title="Middle States League" label="Middle States League"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021518" start="8983" end="8999" title="New York Gorhams" label="New York Gorhams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861985" start="9144" end="9156" title="barnstorm (sports)" label="barnstorming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487911" start="9405" end="9417" title="Frank Leland" label="Frank Leland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9492" end="9512" title="Union Base Ball Club" label="Union Base Ball Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568485" start="9604" end="9619" title="South Side Park" label="South Side Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095824" start="9689" end="9703" title="Chicago Unions" label="Chicago Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q590191" start="9780" end="9793" title="Findlay, Ohio" label="Findlay, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q372304" start="9825" end="9841" title="Adrian, Michigan" label="Adrian, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9896" end="9906" title="L. W. Hoch" label="L. W. Hoch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9911" end="9923" title="Rolla Taylor" label="Rolla Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124237" start="10001" end="10018" title="Page Fence Giants" label="Page Fence Giants"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10324" end="10340" title="Alvin H. Garrett" label="Alvin H. Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066783" start="10378" end="10395" title="John W. Patterson" label="John W. Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149868" start="10401" end="10413" title="left fielder" label="left fielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095553" start="10478" end="10493" title="Columbia Giants" label="Columbia Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520740" start="10716" end="10729" title="Leland Giants" label="Leland Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182703" start="10755" end="10774" title="Philadelphia Giants" label="Philadelphia Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966074" start="10785" end="10802" title="Walter Schlichter" label="Walter Schlichter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544179" start="11013" end="11043" title="Rube Foster" label="Andrew &amp;quot;Rube&amp;quot; Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520740" start="11295" end="11308" title="Leland Giants" label="Leland Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967886" start="11407" end="11417" title="Nat Strong" label="Nat Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974889" start="11694" end="11715" title="Brooklyn Royal Giants" label="Brooklyn Royal Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963291" start="13178" end="13201" title="Chicago American Giants" label="Chicago American Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106301" start="13256" end="13271" title="J. L. Wilkinson" label="J. L. Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729141" start="13284" end="13295" title="All Nations" label="All Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q731544" start="13423" end="13443" title="Kansas City Monarchs" label="Kansas City Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="13829" end="13850" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987609" start="13873" end="13894" title="Negro National League (the first)" label="Negro National League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13922" end="13982" title="National Association of Colored Professional Base Ball Clubs" label="National Association of Colored Professional Base Ball Clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095619" start="14059" end="14073" title="Chicago Giants" label="Chicago Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243552" start="14088" end="14101" title="Dayton Marcos" label="Dayton Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266012" start="14103" end="14116" title="Detroit Stars" label="Detroit Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023793" start="14118" end="14135" title="Indianapolis ABCs" label="Indianapolis ABCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589701" start="14163" end="14179" title="St. Louis Giants" label="St. Louis Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091648" start="14761" end="14786" title="Chicago Race Riot of 1919" label="Chicago Race Riot of 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568485" start="14851" end="14872" title="Schorling&amp;#x27;s Park" label="Schorling&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q30597414" start="15133" end="15154" title="Negro Southern League (1920–36)" label="Negro Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15176" end="15236" title="National Association of Colored Professional Base Ball Clubs" label="National Association of Colored Professional Base Ball Clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838713" start="15418" end="15448" title="Atlantic City Bacharach Giants" label="Atlantic City Bacharach Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967886" start="15493" end="15503" title="Nat Strong" label="Nat Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334576" start="15597" end="15606" title="Ed Bolden" label="Ed Bolden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135664" start="15614" end="15630" title="Hilldale Daisies" label="Hilldale Daisies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852781" start="16091" end="16110" title="Baltimore Black Sox" label="Baltimore Black Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550675" start="16171" end="16194" title="New York Lincoln Giants" label="New York Lincoln Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147465" start="16581" end="16593" title="Negro World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561521" start="16607" end="16611" title="1924 Colored World Series" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="16657" end="16670" title="Negro Leagues" label="Negro Leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589701" start="17006" end="17021" title="St. Louis Stars (baseball)" label="St. Louis Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q425884" start="17187" end="17201" title="Cool Papa Bell" label="Cool Papa Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021882" start="17224" end="17236" title="Willie Wells" label="Willie Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q118120944" start="17472" end="17490" title="William C. Hueston" label="William C. Hueston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744576" start="17839" end="17860" title="American Negro League" label="American Negro League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115867" start="17986" end="18001" title="Homestead Grays" label="Homestead Grays"/>
<link wikidata="Q731544" start="18384" end="18404" title="Kansas City Monarchs" label="Kansas City Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q961669" start="18609" end="18629" title="Chicago Defender" label="&amp;quot;Defender&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193937" start="18836" end="18852" title="Cumberland Posey" label="Cumberland Posey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327571" start="19022" end="19038" title="East–West League" label="East–West League"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998235" start="19492" end="19504" title="Gus Greenlee" label="Gus Greenlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069608" start="19529" end="19543" title="Numbers game" label="numbers runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002355" start="19568" end="19588" title="Pittsburgh Crawfords" label="Pittsburgh Crawfords"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="19658" end="19671" title="money laundering" label="launder money"/>
<link wikidata="Q912465" start="19759" end="19768" title="Homestead, Pennsylvania" label="Homestead"/>
<link wikidata="Q555730" start="19842" end="19855" title="Satchel Paige" label="Satchel Paige"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604292" start="20000" end="20014" title="Greenlee Field" label="Greenlee Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040584" start="20165" end="20176" title="Josh Gibson" label="Josh Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20417" end="20469" title="National Organization of Professional Baseball Clubs" label="National Organization of Professional Baseball Clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987611" start="20529" end="20550" title="Negro National League (the second)" label="Negro National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150005" start="20660" end="20679" title="Columbus Blue Birds" label="Columbus Blue Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963291" start="20798" end="20821" title="Chicago American Giants" label="Chicago American Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="20909" end="20944" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="Major League Baseball All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327565" start="21095" end="21118" title="East–West All-Star Game" label="East–West All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114772" start="21152" end="21165" title="Comiskey Park" label="Comiskey Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="21241" end="21263" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356515" start="21683" end="21694" title="Monte Irvin" label="Monte Irvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q711825" start="21696" end="21706" title="Larry Doby" label="Larry Doby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524607" start="21711" end="21719" title="Leon Day" label="Leon Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016676" start="21723" end="21729" title="Newark Eagles" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q100146534" start="21731" end="21741" title="Ford Smith" label="Ford Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662383" start="21743" end="21756" title="Hank Thompson (baseball)" label="Hank Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210109" start="21758" end="21768" title="Joe Greene (baseball)" label="Joe Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003381" start="21770" end="21783" title="Willard Brown" label="Willard Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398459" start="21788" end="21804" title="Buck O&amp;#x27;Neil" label="Buck O&amp;#x27;Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q731544" start="21808" end="21819" title="Kansas City Monarchs" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708006" start="21821" end="21834" title="Lyman Bostock, Sr." label="Lyman Bostock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916613" start="21838" end="21848" title="Birmingham Black Barons" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q30070989" start="21854" end="21867" title="Lick Carlisle" label="Lick Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012964" start="21872" end="21889" title="Howard Easterling" label="Howard Easterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115867" start="21893" end="21902" title="Homestead Grays" label="Homestead"/>
<link wikidata="Q318200" start="22175" end="22189" title="Abe Saperstein" label="Abe Saperstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q506754" start="22206" end="22226" title="Harlem Globetrotters" label="Harlem Globetrotters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22255" end="22275" title="Negro Midwest League" label="Negro Midwest League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147465" start="22334" end="22352" title="Negro World Series" label="Negro World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987611" start="22419" end="22440" title="Negro National League (the second)" label="Negro National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987577" start="22456" end="22477" title="Negro American League" label="Negro American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q52651" start="22600" end="22611" title="Jesse Owens" label="Jesse Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984819" start="22646" end="22677" title="West Coast Baseball Association" label="West Coast Baseball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232028" start="22782" end="22808" title="Portland Rosebuds (baseball)" label="Portland (Oregon) Rosebuds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106481" start="22885" end="22908" title="Kenesaw Mountain Landis" label="Judge Kenesaw M. Landis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051088" start="22920" end="22957" title="Baseball Commissioner" label="Commissioner of Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746900" start="23137" end="23147" title="Bill Veeck" label="Bill Veeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="23176" end="23197" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077090" start="23315" end="23325" title="Ford C. Frick" label="Ford Frick"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012222" start="23365" end="23379" title="William D. Cox" label="William D. Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q573029" start="23417" end="23431" title="Happy Chandler" label="Happy Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23814" end="23860" title="Major League Committee on Baseball Integration" label="Major League Committee on Baseball Integration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23883" end="23899" title="Joseph P. Rainey" label="Joseph P. Rainey"/>
<link wikidata="Q383433" start="23901" end="23915" title="Larry MacPhail" label="Larry MacPhail"/>
<link wikidata="Q126019" start="23920" end="23933" title="Branch Rickey" label="Branch Rickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="24146" end="24157" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q735795" start="24266" end="24280" title="Roy Campanella" label="Roy Campanella"/>
<link wikidata="Q285629" start="24282" end="24294" title="Don Newcombe" label="Don Newcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="24299" end="24314" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998235" start="24906" end="24918" title="Gus Greenlee" label="Gus Greenlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q85812114" start="24964" end="24984" title="United States League" label="United States League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25419" end="25448" title="Fair Employment Practices Act" label="Fair Employment Practices Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270268" start="25467" end="25493" title="New York State Legislature" label="New York State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q116814602" start="25536" end="25550" title="Quinn-Ives Act" label="Quinn-Ives Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q785304" start="25603" end="25612" title="Mayor of New York City" label="NYC Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q312502" start="25613" end="25623" title="Fiorello La Guardia" label="La Guardia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25635" end="25670" title="Mayor&amp;#x27;s Commission on Baseball" label="Mayor&amp;#x27;s Commission on Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446304" start="25832" end="25847" title="Montreal Royals" label="Montreal Royals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25858" end="25871" title="Hector Racine" label="Hector Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267933" start="26002" end="26013" title="John Wright (baseball)" label="John Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373250" start="26018" end="26029" title="Roy Partlow" label="Roy Partlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="26145" end="26160" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="26170" end="26186" title="Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375237" start="26477" end="26493" title="no-win situation" label="no-win situation"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="26660" end="26677" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336198" start="26767" end="26777" title="Eddie Klep" label="Eddie Klep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927467" start="26794" end="26812" title="Cleveland Buckeyes" label="Cleveland Buckeyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077090" start="27152" end="27165" title="Ford C. Frick" label="Ford C. Frick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016676" start="27873" end="27886" title="Newark Eagles" label="Newark Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="27898" end="27908" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="27912" end="27926" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013072" start="27936" end="27958" title="New York Black Yankees" label="New York Black Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972699" start="28293" end="28312" title="Indianapolis Clowns" label="Indianapolis Clowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="28688" end="28709" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987609" start="29413" end="29438" title="Negro National League (1920–1931)" label="Negro National League (I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330071" start="29453" end="29475" title="Eastern Colored League" label="Eastern Colored League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744576" start="29490" end="29511" title="American Negro League" label="American Negro League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327571" start="29588" end="29604" title="East–West League" label="East–West League"/>
<link wikidata="Q30597414" start="29659" end="29680" title="Negro Southern League (1920–1936)" label="Negro Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987611" start="29844" end="29870" title="Negro National League (1933–1948)" label="Negro National League (II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987577" start="29885" end="29906" title="Negro American League" label="Negro American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561521" start="30271" end="30275" title="1924 Colored World Series" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561700" start="30277" end="30281" title="1925 Colored World Series" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561877" start="30283" end="30287" title="1926 Colored World Series" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562047" start="30289" end="30293" title="1927 Colored World Series" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565090" start="30422" end="30426" title="1942 Negro World Series" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565246" start="30428" end="30432" title="1943 Negro World Series" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565404" start="30434" end="30438" title="1944 Negro World Series" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565569" start="30440" end="30444" title="1945 Negro World Series" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565770" start="30446" end="30450" title="1946 Negro World Series" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153283" start="30452" end="30456" title="1947 Negro World Series" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566295" start="30458" end="30462" title="1948 Negro World Series" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570076" start="31243" end="31283" title="Southern League of Colored Base Ballists" label="Southern League of Colored Base Ballists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971637" start="31291" end="31323" title="National Colored Baseball League" label="National Colored Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861985" start="31394" end="31406" title="Barnstorm (sports)" label="barnstorming"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997185" start="31517" end="31581" title="International League of Independent Professional Base Ball Clubs" label="International League of Independent Professional Base Ball Clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020416" start="31590" end="31666" title="National Association of Colored Baseball Clubs of the United States and Cuba" label="National Association of Colored Baseball Clubs of the United States and Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866604" start="31981" end="32014" title="Baseball color line" label="integration of Organized Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="32196" end="32208" title="Major League Baseball" label="major-league"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357541" start="32299" end="32304" title="Northern United States" label="north"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="32337" end="32342" title="Southern United States" label="south"/>
<link wikidata="Q20925278" start="32457" end="32538" title="Texas Colored League" label="Texas Colored League/Texas–Oklahoma–Louisiana League/Texas–Louisiana Negro League"/>
<link wikidata="Q30597414" start="32552" end="32577" title="Negro Southern League (1920–36)" label="Negro Southern League (I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="32719" end="32735" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q123684763" start="32738" end="32763" title="Negro Southeastern League" label="Negro Southeastern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057066" start="32772" end="32789" title="Interstate League" label="Interstate League"/>
<link wikidata="Q123684845" start="32827" end="32843" title="Tri State League" label="Tri State League"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121944" start="32852" end="32878" title="Negro American Association" label="Negro American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q97474445" start="32901" end="32919" title="Negro Major League" label="Negro Major League"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="33117" end="33121" title="Western United States" label="west"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634334" start="33159" end="33172" title="Post–World War II economic expansion" label="post-War boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30602271" start="33259" end="33285" title="Negro Southern League (1945–51)" label="Negro Southern League (II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85812114" start="33299" end="33319" title="United States League" label="United States League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984819" start="33333" end="33370" title="West Coast Negro Baseball Association" label="West Coast Negro Baseball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879501" start="33379" end="33402" title="East Texas Negro League" label="East Texas Negro League"/>
<link wikidata="Q20925227" start="33411" end="33429" title="Negro Texas League" label="Negro Texas League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987577" start="33438" end="33459" title="Negro American League" label="Negro American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864630" start="33575" end="33606" title="Arkansas–Louisiana–Texas League" label="Arkansas–Louisiana–Texas League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33615" end="33635" title="Eastern Negro League" label="Eastern Negro League"/>
<link wikidata="Q123684895" start="33644" end="33679" title="Negro National Baseball Association" label="Negro National Baseball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="33737" end="33758" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="33785" end="33797" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350735" start="33891" end="33906" title="Robert W. Peterson (writer)" label="Robert Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404596" start="34290" end="34309" title="Ford C. Frick Award" label="Ford C. Frick Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q555730" start="34825" end="34838" title="Satchel Paige" label="Satchel Paige"/>
<link wikidata="Q425884" start="34884" end="34898" title="Cool Papa Bell" label="Cool Papa Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063511" start="34900" end="34916" title="Oscar Charleston" label="Oscar Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q970037" start="34918" end="34931" title="Martín Dihigo" label="Martín Dihigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040584" start="34933" end="34944" title="Josh Gibson" label="Josh Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356515" start="34946" end="34957" title="Monte Irvin" label="Monte Irvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363111" start="34959" end="34971" title="Judy Johnson" label="Judy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982893" start="34973" end="34985" title="Buck Leonard" label="Buck Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238874" start="34990" end="35006" title="John Henry Lloyd" label="John Henry Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365076" start="35145" end="35158" title="Ray Dandridge" label="Ray Dandridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544179" start="35180" end="35191" title="Rube Foster" label="Rube Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q215777" start="35323" end="35333" title="Hank Aaron" label="Hank Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051017" start="35335" end="35346" title="Ernie Banks" label="Ernie Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q735795" start="35348" end="35362" title="Roy Campanella" label="Roy Campanella"/>
<link wikidata="Q711825" start="35364" end="35374" title="Larry Doby" label="Larry Doby"/>
<link wikidata="Q561852" start="35376" end="35387" title="Willie Mays" label="Willie Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="35393" end="35408" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524607" start="35926" end="35934" title="Leon Day" label="Leon Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909024" start="35936" end="35947" title="Bill Foster (baseball)" label="Bill Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996809" start="35949" end="35961" title="Bullet Rogan" label="Bullet Rogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764732" start="35963" end="35975" title="Hilton Smith" label="Hilton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855097" start="35977" end="35992" title="Turkey Stearnes" label="Turkey Stearnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021882" start="35994" end="36006" title="Willie Wells" label="Willie Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198827" start="36012" end="36031" title="Smokey Joe Williams" label="Smokey Joe Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297248" start="36241" end="36250" title="Ray Brown (Negro leagues pitcher)" label="Ray Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003381" start="36252" end="36265" title="Willard Brown" label="Willard Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760550" start="36267" end="36278" title="Andy Cooper" label="Andy Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919351" start="36280" end="36290" title="Biz Mackey" label="Biz Mackey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933897" start="36292" end="36304" title="Mule Suttles" label="Mule Suttles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299253" start="36306" end="36325" title="Cristóbal Torriente" label="Cristóbal Torriente"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364238" start="36327" end="36337" title="Jud Wilson" label="Jud Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486927" start="36372" end="36383" title="Frank Grant (baseball)" label="Frank Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172021" start="36385" end="36394" title="Pete Hill" label="Pete Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293535" start="36396" end="36407" title="José Méndez" label="José Méndez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688132" start="36409" end="36421" title="Louis Santop" label="Louis Santop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886554" start="36423" end="36433" title="Ben Taylor (Negro leagues)" label="Ben Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q187534" start="36467" end="36478" title="Effa Manley" label="Effa Manley"/>
<link wikidata="Q301422" start="36480" end="36491" title="Alex Pompez" label="Alex Pompez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193937" start="36493" end="36502" title="Cumberland Posey" label="Cum Posey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106301" start="36504" end="36519" title="J. L. Wilkinson" label="J. L. Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11315428" start="36587" end="36596" title="Sol White" label="Sol White"/>
<link wikidata="Q187534" start="36598" end="36609" title="Effa Manley" label="Effa Manley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666416" start="36638" end="36648" title="Abe Manley" label="Abe Manley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987611" start="36704" end="36725" title="Negro National League (1933–48)" label="Negro National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067674" start="37027" end="37038" title="Fay Vincent" label="Fay Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="37239" end="37254" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="37258" end="37273" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="37350" end="37371" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q215777" start="37451" end="37461" title="Hank Aaron" label="Hank Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315554" start="37549" end="37562" title="Minnie Miñoso" label="Minnie Miñoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398459" start="37693" end="37709" title="Buck O&amp;#x27;Neil" label="Buck O&amp;#x27;Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134410" start="37846" end="37861" title="Northern League (baseball, 1993–2010)" label="Northern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="37932" end="37953" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173396" start="38162" end="38175" title="Dave Winfield" label="Dave Winfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q61044408" start="38243" end="38257" title="Neale Henderson" label="Bobo Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208442" start="38259" end="38271" title="Joe B. Scott" label="Joe B. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217403" start="38273" end="38283" title="Mule Miles" label="Mule Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q61718224" start="38285" end="38295" title="William Bell Jr. (baseball)" label="Lefty Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139968" start="38297" end="38324" title="James Moore (baseball)" label="James &amp;quot;Red&amp;quot; Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q61968965" start="38326" end="38358" title="Mack Pride" label="Mack &amp;quot;The Knife&amp;quot; Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066772" start="38375" end="38388" title="Charley Pride" label="Charley Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="38427" end="38440" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="38496" end="38512" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635890" start="38518" end="38532" title="Emilio Navarro" label="Emilio Navarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987602" start="38664" end="38693" title="Negro Leagues Baseball Museum" label="Negro Leagues Baseball Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557686" start="38712" end="38734" title="18th and Vine District" label="18th and Vine District"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="38738" end="38759" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="38817" end="38836" title="U.S. Postal Service" label="U.S. Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q825187" start="38837" end="38843" title="First day of issue" label="issued"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064495" start="38846" end="38855" title="se-tenant (philately)" label="se-tenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756502" start="38877" end="38890" title="Commemorative stamp" label="commemorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="38891" end="38904" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987602" start="39038" end="39067" title="Negro Leagues Baseball Museum" label="Negro Leagues Baseball Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544179" start="39162" end="39173" title="Rube Foster" label="Rube Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327565" start="39194" end="39217" title="East–West All-Star Game" label="East–West All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620178" start="39220" end="39269" title="List of first black Major League Baseball players" label="List of first black Major League Baseball players"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591666" start="39272" end="39309" title="List of Negro league baseball players" label="List of Negro league baseball players"/>
<link wikidata="Q109975286" start="39312" end="39347" title="List of Negro league baseball teams" label="List of Negro league baseball teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147465" start="39350" end="39368" title="Negro World Series" label="Negro World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987602" start="39371" end="39400" title="Negro Leagues Baseball Museum" label="Negro Leagues Baseball Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810119" start="39403" end="39447" title="Ted Williams Museum and Hitters Hall of Fame" label="Ted Williams Museum and Hitters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955703" start="39503" end="39523" title="The Soul of Baseball" label="The Soul of Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821344" start="39560" end="39570" title="Toni Stone" label="Toni Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15490071" start="39572" end="39585" title="Mamie Johnson" label="Mamie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161908" start="39587" end="39600" title="Connie Morgan" label="Connie Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008861" start="39756" end="39767" title="CASEY Award" label="CASEY Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008861" start="39812" end="39823" title="CASEY Award" label="CASEY Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398459" start="40212" end="40228" title="Buck O&amp;#x27;Neil" label="Buck O&amp;#x27;Neil"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39946" wikidata="Q52925" url="?curid=39946" title="Charles XV">
<text>Charles XV or Carl (&quot;Carl Ludvig Eugen&quot;; Swedish and Norwegian officially: &quot;Karl&quot;; 3 May 1826 – 18 September 1872) was King of Sweden and Norway, there often referred to as Charles IV, from 8 July 1859 until his death in 1872. Charles was the third Swedish monarch from the House of Bernadotte. He was the first one to be born in Sweden, the first to grow up speaking Swedish as his first language, and the first to be raised from birth in the Lutheran faith.

==Biography==

===Early life===
He was born in Stockholm Palace, Stockholm, in 1826 and dubbed Duke of Scania at birth. Born the eldest son of Crown Prince Oscar of Sweden and his wife Crown Princess Josephine, he would be second in line to the throne of his grandfather, the ruling King Charles XIV John of Sweden. During his childhood he was placed in the care of the royal governess, Countess Christina Ulrika Taube. When he was just 15, he was given his first officer&#x27;s commission in 1841 by his grandfather the king.

===Crown Prince===
The aging King Charles XIV John would suffer a stroke on his 81st birthday in 1844, dying little more than a month later. His successor would be his son, Charles&#x27;s father Oscar, who ascended the throne as King Oscar I of Sweden. Upon his father&#x27;s accession to the throne in 1844, the youth Charles was made a chancellor of the universities of Uppsala and Lund, and in 1853 chancellor of Royal Swedish Academy of Arts. On 11 February 1846, he was made an honorary member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.

The Crown Prince was Viceroy of Norway briefly in 1856 and 1857. He became Regent on 25 September 1857, and king on the death of his father on 8 July 1859. As grandson of Augusta of Bavaria, he was a descendant of Gustav I of Sweden and Charles IX of Sweden, whose Vasa blood returned to the throne after being lost in 1818 when Charles XIII of Sweden died.

On 19 June 1850, he married in Stockholm Louise of the Netherlands, niece of William II of the Netherlands through her father and niece of William I of Prussia, German Emperor, through her mother. The couple was personally quite dissimilar; Louise was a cultured and refined woman, however, she was considered to be quite plain and Charles was disappointed with her appearance. Louise was in love with her husband, whereas he preferred other women, saddening her deeply. His well-known mistresses included the actress Laura Bergnéhr, the countess Josephine Sparre, Wilhelmine Schröder and the actresses Hanna Styrell and Elise Hwasser, and the Crown Prince neglected his shy wife. On the other hand, his relationship to his only daughter, Louise, was warm and close.

===Reign===

As Crown Prince, Charles&#x27;s brusque manner had led many to regard his future accession with some apprehension, yet he proved to be one of the most popular of Scandinavian kings and a constitutional ruler in the best sense of the word. His reign was remarkable for its manifold and far-reaching reforms. Sweden&#x27;s existing municipal law (1862), ecclesiastical law (1863) and criminal law (1864) were enacted appropriately enough under the direction of a king whose motto was: &quot;Land skall med lag byggas&quot; – &quot;With law shall the land be built&quot;. Charles also helped Louis De Geer to carry through his reform of the Parliament of Sweden in 1866. He also declared the freedom of women by passing the law of legal majority for unmarried women in 1858 – his sister Princess Eugenie became the first woman who was declared mature.

Though known as King Charles XV in Sweden (and also on contemporary Norwegian coins), he was actually the ninth Swedish king by that name, as his predecessor Charles IX (reigned 1604–1611) had adopted a numeral according to a fictitious history of Sweden.

Charles, like his father Oscar I, was an advocate of Scandinavianism and the political solidarity of the three northern kingdoms, and his friendship with Frederick VII of Denmark, it is said, led him to give half promises of help to Denmark on the eve of the war of 1864, which, in the circumstances, were perhaps misleading and unjustifiable. In view, however, of the unpreparedness of the Swedish army and the difficulties of the situation, Charles was forced to observe a strict neutrality. On behalf of Charles, Dirk de Graeff van Polsbroek, Dutch diplomat in Japan, concluded a &quot;Vänskaps-, handels- och sjöfartstraktat&quot; (&quot;Friendship, Trade and Maritime Treaty&quot;) between Sweden-Norway and Japan on 11 November 1868 (see the Treaty of Yokohama). The treaty opened Hakodate, Yokohama, Nagasaki, Kobe and Osaka to trade for Swedish and Norwegian traders (Article 3). The treaty also gave Sweden-Norway the opportunity to send consuls to the newly opened ports, where they were given the right to exercise jurisdiction over Swedes and Norwegians (consular jurisdiction). Charles died in Malmö on 18 September 1872.

Charles XV attained some eminence as a painter and as a poet. He was followed on the thrones of both Norway and Sweden by his brother Oscar II.

In 1872, Charles XV had controversial plans to enter a non-morganatic marriage with the Polish countess Maria Beatrix Krasińska through the assistance of Ohan Demirgian, plans that aroused opposition both in the Royal house and Government and which were interrupted only by his death.

Charles&#x27;s popularity often had him referred to colloquially as &quot;Kron-Kalle&quot; (&quot;Crown-Charlie&quot;).

==Issue==
By his wife, Louise of the Netherlands, Charles had two children, a son who died in infancy and a daughter who married the King of Denmark. The early death of Charles&#x27;s only legitimate son meant that he was succeeded on the thrones of Sweden and Norway by his younger brother Oscar II.
Charles also sired an illegitimate son, Carl Johan Bolander, (4 February 1854 – 28 July 1903), the father of Bishop Nils Bolander, and daughter, Ellen Svensson Hammar (28 October 1865 – 1931), and it has been widely rumored that Charles had many more extramarital children.

A few weeks before Charles&#x27;s death, his daughter Louise (then Crown Princess of Denmark) gave birth to her second son, Prince Carl of Denmark. In 1905, Prince Carl ascended to the throne of Norway with the regnal name &quot;Haakon VII&quot;, thus becoming Charles&#x27;s successor in that country.

No subsequent king of Sweden to this day is Charles&#x27;s descendant. However, his descendants are on the thrones of Denmark, Luxembourg, Belgium and Norway.

== Honours ==
;National decorations
* Knight and Commander of the Seraphim, with Collar, &quot;3 May 1826&quot;
* Knight of the Order of Charles XIII, &quot;3 May 1826&quot;
* Commander Grand Cross of the Sword, &quot;3 May 1826&quot;
* Commander Grand Cross of the Polar Star, &quot;3 May 1826&quot;
* Grand Cross of St. Olav, with Collar, &quot;3 May 1826&quot;

;Foreign decorations
== Arms ==

==Ancestry==

==References==
==External links==
*The Royal Norwegian Order of St Olav – Norwegian and Swedish Monarchs Grand Masters of the Order
*Family tree of the Royal Norwegian House
*Kings of Norway (in Norwegian)
*Much material on early kings (in Norwegian)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q52925" start="0" end="10" title="Charles XV" label="Charles XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q52925" start="14" end="18" title="Charles XV" label="Carl"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="51" end="58" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="63" end="72" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26796319" start="139" end="153" title="King of Sweden" label="King of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q189955" start="158" end="164" title="List of Norwegian monarchs" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q52925" start="193" end="203" title="Charles XV" label="Charles IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q201625" start="294" end="313" title="House of Bernadotte" label="House of Bernadotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q749243" start="464" end="472" title="Church of Sweden" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q750444" start="528" end="544" title="Stockholm Palace" label="Stockholm Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="546" end="555" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="576" end="590" title="Scania#Dukes" label="Duke of Scania"/>
<link wikidata="Q52926" start="624" end="652" title="Oscar I of Sweden" label="Crown Prince Oscar of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q229810" start="666" end="690" title="Josephine of Leuchtenberg" label="Crown Princess Josephine"/>
<link wikidata="Q52927" start="769" end="795" title="Charles XIV John of Sweden" label="Charles XIV John of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q185246" start="1381" end="1388" title="Uppsala University" label="Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q218506" start="1393" end="1397" title="Lund University" label="Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q167920" start="1425" end="1454" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Arts" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="1515" end="1548" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q815814" start="1572" end="1589" title="List of Prime Ministers of Norway" label="Viceroy of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q232155" start="1722" end="1740" title="Augusta of Bavaria" label="Augusta of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q52947" start="1765" end="1783" title="Gustav I of Sweden" label="Gustav I of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q52939" start="1788" end="1808" title="Charles IX of Sweden" label="Charles IX of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q52928" start="1880" end="1902" title="Charles XIII of Sweden" label="Charles XIII of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q130413" start="1951" end="1976" title="Princess Louise of the Netherlands" label="Louise of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q154287" start="1987" end="2016" title="William II of the Netherlands" label="William II of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q213708" start="2025" end="2035" title="Prince Frederick of the Netherlands" label="her father"/>
<link wikidata="Q150652" start="2049" end="2069" title="William I, German Emperor" label="William I of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="2071" end="2085" title="German Empire" label="German Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q60607" start="2095" end="2105" title="Princess Louise of Prussia (1808-1870)" label="her mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q55178463" start="2428" end="2442" title="Laura Bergnéhr" label="Laura Bergnéhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979795" start="2457" end="2473" title="Josephine Sparre" label="Josephine Sparre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977569" start="2475" end="2494" title="Wilhelmine Schröder" label="Wilhelmine Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4981058" start="2513" end="2526" title="Hanna Styrell" label="Hanna Styrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955200" start="2531" end="2544" title="Elise Hwasser" label="Elise Hwasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q232402" start="2649" end="2655" title="Lovisa of Sweden" label="Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q52950" start="3280" end="3293" title="Louis De Geer (1818-1896)" label="Louis De Geer"/>
<link wikidata="Q272930" start="3329" end="3349" title="Parliament of Sweden" label="Parliament of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18000" start="3419" end="3433" title="legal majority" label="legal majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q526915" start="3475" end="3491" title="Princess Eugenie of Sweden" label="Princess Eugenie"/>
<link wikidata="Q52939" start="3699" end="3709" title="Charles IX of Sweden" label="Charles IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q580296" start="3851" end="3866" title="Scandinavianism" label="Scandinavianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q94941" start="3952" end="3976" title="Frederick VII of Denmark" label="Frederick VII of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q154981" start="4057" end="4068" title="Second Schleswig War" label="war of 1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q935763" start="4314" end="4342" title="Dirk de Graeff van Polsbroek" label="Dirk de Graeff van Polsbroek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4546" end="4564" title="Treaty of Yokohama" label="Treaty of Yokohama"/>
<link wikidata="Q26418" start="4585" end="4593" title="Hakodate" label="Hakodate"/>
<link wikidata="Q38283" start="4595" end="4603" title="Yokohama" label="Yokohama"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="4605" end="4613" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="4615" end="4619" title="Kobe" label="Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="4624" end="4629" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135274" start="4865" end="4886" title="consular court" label="consular jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211" start="4905" end="4910" title="Malmö" label="Malmö"/>
<link wikidata="Q210761" start="5134" end="5157" title="Morganatic marriage" label="non-morganatic marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q18629579" start="5183" end="5206" title="Marya Krasińska" label="Maria Beatrix Krasińska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620144" start="5233" end="5247" title="Ohan Demirgian" label="Ohan Demirgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q201625" start="5291" end="5302" title="House of Bernadotte" label="Royal house"/>
<link wikidata="Q930729" start="5307" end="5317" title="Government of Sweden" label="Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q130413" start="5509" end="5534" title="Louise of the Netherlands" label="Louise of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429468" start="5903" end="5916" title="Nils Bolander" label="Nils Bolander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200976" start="6273" end="6284" title="regnal name" label="regnal name"/>
<link wikidata="Q154927" start="6291" end="6301" title="Haakon VII" label="Haakon VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331130" start="6564" end="6600" title="Order of the Seraphim" label="Knight and Commander of the Seraphim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028806" start="6654" end="6675" title="Order of Charles XIII" label="Order of Charles XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476049" start="6702" end="6736" title="Order of the Sword" label="Commander Grand Cross of the Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q961142" start="6763" end="6802" title="Order of the Polar Star" label="Commander Grand Cross of the Polar Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q94345" start="6829" end="6852" title="Order of St. Olav" label="Grand Cross of St. Olav"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39948" wikidata="Q5610" url="?curid=39948" title="1301">
<text>Year 1301 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCI]]) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
===January– March===
* January 14 – With the death of King Andrew III (&quot;Andrew the Venetian&quot;) after a short illness, possibly from poisoning, the Árpád Dynasty in Hungary ends. This results in a power struggle between Wenceslaus III of Bohemia, Otto III of Bavaria, and Charles Robert of Naples. Eventually, Wenceslaus is elected and crowned as king of Hungary and Croatia. His rule is only nominal, because a dozen powerful Hungarian nobles hold sway over large territories in the kingdom.
* January 25 – Second Mongol invasion of Burma: The forces of Temür Khan, Mongol leader who also serves as the Emperor Chengzong of China, reach Myinsaing, capital of the Myinsaing Kingdom in central Burma, and begin a siege of the city that will last for almost three months before the invasion leaders are paid to leave. 
* February 7 – The 16-year-old Prince Edward of Caernarfon, son and heir of King Edward I (&quot;Edward Longshanks&quot;), becomes the first Prince of Wales and is also granted the royal lands in Wales.
* February 28 – Second Mongol invasion of Burma: Five weeks after beginning the siege of Myinsaing with no success, the Mongol invaders launch a major assault, but the Burmese defenders continue their defense for 12 days, leading to a truce.
* March 2 – (Shōan 3, 21st day of the 1st month) Emperor Go-Fushimi abdicates the throne after a 2½-year reign. He is succeeded by his 15-year-old cousin, Go-Nijō, as the 94th emperor of Japan. Go-Nijō will reign until 1308.
* March 12 – Second Mongol invasion of Burma: After seven weeks of a stalemate, the Mongols and the Burmese begin negotiations for a truce.

===April– June===
* April 8 – Second Mongol invasion of Burma: The three Bagan brothers (Athinkhaya, Yazathingyan and Thihathu) who rule the Burmese Kingdom of Myinsaing reach an agreement for Mongol leader Temür Khan and his officers to be paid 800 taels (30 kg) of gold and 2200 taels (83 kg) of silver in return for ending the invasion and returning to Mongolia.
* April 10 – In the Principality of Monaco, the first Grimaldi family ruler, Rainier I, is forced to flee as troops from the Republic of Genoa besiege the Monacans. The Genoese rule will last for more than 30 years, until September 12, 1331.
* May 13 – After an attempt in the spring to have Prince Charles of Anjou succeed the late Andrew III as King of Hungary, the Diet of Hungary votes to declare his coronation invalid, in that Charles was not proclaimed king at Székesfehérvár and never received the Crown of Saint Stephen.
* June 22 – Nicola Boccasini, who will become Pope Benedict XI in 1303, begins his duties as the Roman Catholic apostolic legate to Hungary, having been appointed as the personal representative of Pope Boniface VIII.

===July– September===
* July 5 – First War of Scottish Independence: King Edward I of England launches his sixth campaign into Scotland, crossing into Berwickshire from Northumberland. 
* July 10 – Indian forces under Sultan Alauddin Khalji capture Ranthambore Fortress. During the siege, General Nusrat Khan Jalesari is hit and killed by a manjaniq stone.
* August 5 – The English Army, commanded by King Edward I, reaches Glasgow.
* August 27 – Wenceslaus III of Bohemia is crowned as King of Hungary under the regnal name King Vencel, receiving the Crown of Saint Stephen in a ceremony at Székesfehérvár.
* September 2 – In their invasion of Scotland, English troops under the command of Prince Edward of Caernarfon and Henry de Lacy, Earl of Lincoln, capture Turnberry Castle in Carrick, the headquarters of the Bruces.
* September 3 – Bartolomeo I della Scala becomes the new Lord of Verona, at the time a city-state in Italy that included most of the Veneto region (with the exception of Venice), upon the death of his father Alberto.
* September 16 – In Spain, the Emirate of Granada, ruled by Muhammad al-Faqih, and the Kingdom of Aragon, ruled by Jaime II the Just sign a military agreement to fight against the Kingdom of Castile and to capture the port of Tarifa.

===October– December===
* October 5 – (Shoan, 22nd day of the 8th month) Hojo Morotoki becomes the 10th regent for the Kamakura shogunate of Japan.
* October 6 – (2 Safar 701 AH) Abu Numayy I, Arabic ruler of the Emirate of Mecca, abdicates and is succeeded by two of his sons, Rumaythah and Humaydah. Abu Numayy dies two days later at the age of 69.
* November 1 – Charles of Valois, son of the late King Philip III (&quot;Philip the Bold&quot;), is summoned to Italy by Pope Boniface VIII to restore peace between the Guelphs and Ghibellines. He enters Florence, and allows the Neri (&quot;Black Guelphs&quot;) to return to the city. Charles installs a new government under Cante dei Gabrielli as Chief Magistrate (&quot;podestà&quot;), leading to the permanent exile of Dante Alighieri, Italian poet and philosopher, from the city.
* November 9 – Bolko I (&quot;Bolko the Strict&quot;), Polish nobleman and co-ruler dies and is succeeded by his three minor sons (Bernard, 10; Henry, 9; and Bolko II, 2), with his brother-in-law Herman, Margrave of Brandenburg-Salzwedel to serve as regent. 
* December 5 – Pope Boniface VIII issues the papal bull &quot;Ausculta Fili&quot; (&quot;Listen, my son&quot;), accusing King Philip IV of France (&quot;Philip the Fair&quot;) of malfeasance of office. 
* December 6 – In Spain, Ferdinand IV of Castile reaches the age of 16 and is proclaimed of the age of majority to be crowned as King of Castile and as King of León. Ferdinand IV had become the nominal monarch at age 9, under the regency of his mother, María de Molina.

=== By place ===

==== Middle East ====
* Spring – Sultan Osman I calls for a military campaign to strike deep into Byzantine Bithynia. During the campaign, Ottoman forces capture the towns of İnegöl and Yenişehir. The later town will be transformed into a capital city, as Osman moves his administration and personal household within its walls. By the end of the year, Ottoman forces begin blockading the major Byzantine city of Nicaea.

== Births ==
* February 6 – Henry Percy, English nobleman, governor and knight (d. 1352)
* June 19 – Morikuni, Japanese prince, shogun and puppet ruler (d. 1333)
* July 23 – Otto I (&quot;Otto the Merry&quot;), Austrian nobleman and co-ruler (d. 1339)
* August 5 – Edmund of Woodstock, English nobleman and prince (d. 1330)
* September 24 – Ralph de Stafford, English nobleman and knight (d. 1372)
* October 4 – Thomas de Monthermer, English nobleman and knight (d. 1340)
* October 7 – Aleksandr Mikhailovich, Russian Grand Prince (d. 1339)
*&quot;unknown dates&quot; 
** Ingeborg of Norway, Norwegian princess and &quot;de facto&quot; ruler (d. 1361)
** Nitta Yoshisada, Japanese nobleman, general and samurai (d. 1338)
** Ni Zan, Chinese nobleman, painter, musician and tea master (d. 1374)
** Rudolf II, German nobleman and knight (House of Zähringen) (d. 1352)

== Deaths ==
* January 14 – Andrew III (&quot;Andrew the Venetian&quot;), king of Hungary (b. 1265)
* February 19 – Pietro Gerra, Italian cleric, archbishop and patriarch
* February 20 – Asukai Gayū, Japanese nobleman and poet (b. 1241)
* March 21 – Guillaume de Champvent, Swiss nobleman and bishop
* May 7 – Hōjō Akitoki, Japanese military leader and poet (b. 1248)
* August 22 – Giacomo Bianconi, Italian priest and scholar (b. 1220)
* September 3 – Alberto I, Italian nobleman and Chief Magistrate
* November 19 – Johann III, Polish chaplain, bishop and diplomat
*&quot;unknown dates&quot;
** Blasco I d&#x27;Alagona (&quot;Blasc the Elder&quot;), Aragonese nobleman and captain
** &quot;False Margaret&quot;, Norwegian noblewoman and pretender (b. 1260)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5610" start="5" end="9" title="1301" label="1301"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610" start="11" end="35" title="1301" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCI]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235670" start="43" end="73" title="common year starting on Sunday" label="common year starting on Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="81" end="96" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257" start="135" end="145" title="January 14" label="January 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q298056" start="171" end="181" title="Andrew III of Hungary" label="Andrew III"/>
<link wikidata="Q51153" start="268" end="281" title="Árpád dynasty" label="Árpád Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470101" start="285" end="292" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1000–1301)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q54040" start="340" end="365" title="Wenceslaus III of Bohemia" label="Wenceslaus III of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57323" start="367" end="386" title="Otto III, Duke of Bavaria" label="Otto III of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="392" end="416" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="Charles Robert of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789596" start="487" end="494" title="Croatia in personal union with Hungary" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493428" start="532" end="563" title="Oligarch (Kingdom of Hungary)" label="dozen powerful Hungarian nobles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279" start="615" end="625" title="January 25" label="January 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933803" start="628" end="659" title="Second Mongol invasion of Burma" label="Second Mongol invasion of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8468" start="675" end="685" title="Temür Khan" label="Temür Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446205" start="784" end="801" title="Myinsaing Kingdom" label="Myinsaing Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322" start="939" end="949" title="February 7" label="February 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="975" end="995" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward of Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="1018" end="1026" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="1078" end="1093" title="Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="1133" end="1138" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362" start="1142" end="1153" title="February 28" label="February 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933803" start="1156" end="1187" title="Second Mongol invasion of Burma" label="Second Mongol invasion of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390" start="1384" end="1391" title="March 2" label="March 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q440454" start="1439" end="1449" title="Emperor Go-Fushimi" label="Go-Fushimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q374075" start="1537" end="1544" title="Emperor Go-Nijō" label="Go-Nijō"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="1558" end="1574" title="emperor of Japan" label="emperor of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5723" start="1601" end="1605" title="1308" label="1308"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402" start="1609" end="1617" title="March 12" label="March 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933803" start="1620" end="1651" title="Second Mongol invasion of Burma" label="Second Mongol invasion of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503" start="1768" end="1775" title="April 8" label="April 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933803" start="1778" end="1809" title="Second Mongol invasion of Burma" label="Second Mongol invasion of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q888574" start="1821" end="1826" title="Pagan dynasty" label="Bagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813668" start="1837" end="1847" title="Athinkhaya" label="Athinkhaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050574" start="1849" end="1861" title="Yazathingyan" label="Yazathingyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066500" start="1866" end="1874" title="Thihathu" label="Thihathu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446205" start="1889" end="1917" title="Myinsaing Kingdom" label="Burmese Kingdom of Myinsaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8468" start="1955" end="1965" title="Temür Khan" label="Temür Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q876244" start="1998" end="2002" title="tael" label="tael"/>
<link wikidata="Q876244" start="2029" end="2033" title="tael" label="tael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502" start="2116" end="2124" title="April 10" label="April 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q950631" start="2191" end="2200" title="Rainier I of Monaco, Lord of Cagnes" label="Rainier I"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="2239" end="2256" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560" start="2358" end="2364" title="May 13" label="May 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="2406" end="2429" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="Prince Charles of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412254" start="2461" end="2476" title="King of Hungary" label="King of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q700757" start="2482" end="2497" title="Diet of Hungary" label="Diet of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q51081" start="2620" end="2642" title="Holy Crown of Hungary" label="Crown of Saint Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663" start="2646" end="2653" title="June 22" label="June 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q169301" start="2690" end="2706" title="Pope Benedict XI" label="Pope Benedict XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q740369" start="2756" end="2772" title="papal legate" label="apostolic legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="2776" end="2783" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="2841" end="2859" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696" start="2886" end="2892" title="July 5" label="July 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242848" start="2895" end="2929" title="First War of Scottish Independence" label="First War of Scottish Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="2931" end="2955" title="Edward I of England" label="King Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="2989" end="2997" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q786649" start="3013" end="3025" title="Berwickshire" label="Berwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="3031" end="3045" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689" start="3050" end="3057" title="July 10" label="July 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q335362" start="3087" end="3102" title="Alauddin Khalji" label="Alauddin Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724894" start="3111" end="3127" title="Ranthambore Fort" label="Ranthambore Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q39215909" start="3159" end="3179" title="Nusrat Khan Jalesari" label="Nusrat Khan Jalesari"/>
<link wikidata="Q19776" start="3203" end="3211" title="Trebuchet" label="manjaniq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783" start="3221" end="3229" title="August 5" label="August 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822" start="3297" end="3306" title="August 27" label="August 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q54040" start="3309" end="3334" title="Wenceslaus III of Bohemia" label="Wenceslaus III of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208083" start="3349" end="3364" title="List of Hungarian monarchs" label="King of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q130212" start="3454" end="3468" title="Székesfehérvár" label="Székesfehérvár"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857" start="3472" end="3483" title="September 2" label="September 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="3553" end="3580" title="Edward II of England" label="Prince Edward of Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237622" start="3585" end="3615" title="Henry de Lacy, Earl of Lincoln" label="Henry de Lacy, Earl of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590136" start="3625" end="3641" title="Turnberry Castle" label="Turnberry Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216038" start="3645" end="3652" title="Carrick, Scotland" label="Carrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860" start="3688" end="3699" title="September 3" label="September 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q733418" start="3702" end="3726" title="Bartolomeo I della Scala" label="Bartolomeo I della Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680184" start="3743" end="3757" title="Lords of Verona" label="Lord of Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3787" end="3792" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243" start="3819" end="3825" title="Veneto" label="Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q322158" start="3894" end="3901" title="Alberto I della Scala" label="Alberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897" start="3905" end="3917" title="September 16" label="September 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="3934" end="3952" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Emirate of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q972278" start="3963" end="3980" title="Muhammad II of Granada" label="Muhammad al-Faqih"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="3990" end="4007" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Kingdom of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312735" start="4018" end="4035" title="James II of Aragon" label="Jaime II the Just"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="4083" end="4101" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Kingdom of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q222702" start="4129" end="4135" title="Tarifa" label="Tarifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930" start="4164" end="4173" title="October 5" label="October 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672978" start="4211" end="4224" title="Hojo Morotoki" label="Hojo Morotoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q736839" start="4257" end="4275" title="Kamakura shogunate" label="Kamakura shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928" start="4288" end="4297" title="October 6" label="October 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q29261524" start="4317" end="4329" title="Abu Numayy I" label="Abu Numayy I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121369" start="4351" end="4367" title="Sharifate of Mecca" label="Emirate of Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q29840947" start="4416" end="4425" title="Rumaythah ibn Abi Numayy" label="Rumaythah"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048767" start="4430" end="4438" title="Humaydah ibn Abi Numayy" label="Humaydah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997" start="4491" end="4501" title="November 1" label="November 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q270438" start="4504" end="4521" title="Charles, Count of Valois" label="Charles of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q172203" start="4544" end="4554" title="Philip III of France" label="Philip III"/>
<link wikidata="Q838931" start="4601" end="4606" title="Kingdom of Italy (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="4615" end="4628" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="4658" end="4681" title="Guelphs and Ghibellines" label="Guelphs and Ghibellines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="4693" end="4701" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936577" start="4814" end="4833" title="Cante dei Gabrielli" label="Cante dei Gabrielli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096992" start="4837" end="4853" title="Chief Magistrate" label="Chief Magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q694019" start="4861" end="4868" title="podestà" label="podestà"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="4911" end="4926" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991" start="4975" end="4985" title="November 9" label="November 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q673302" start="4988" end="4995" title="Bolko I the Strict" label="Bolko I"/>
<link wikidata="Q69761" start="5169" end="5210" title="Herman, Margrave of Brandenburg-Salzwedel" label="Herman, Margrave of Brandenburg-Salzwedel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300" start="5234" end="5244" title="December 5" label="December 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="5247" end="5265" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="5277" end="5287" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q778280" start="5294" end="5307" title="Ausculta Fili" label="Ausculta Fili"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="5353" end="5367" title="Philip IV of France" label="King Philip IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5371" end="5377" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303" start="5437" end="5447" title="December 6" label="December 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="5460" end="5483" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="Ferdinand IV of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q326470" start="5564" end="5579" title="King of Castile" label="King of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q736678" start="5587" end="5599" title="King of León" label="King of León"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="5665" end="5672" title="regency" label="regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q266025" start="5688" end="5703" title="María de Molina" label="María de Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q83100" start="5764" end="5771" title="Osman I" label="Osman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q373189" start="5832" end="5840" title="Bithynia" label="Bithynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q343973" start="5899" end="5905" title="İnegöl" label="İnegöl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994764" start="5910" end="5919" title="Yenişehir, Bursa" label="Yenişehir"/>
<link wikidata="Q739037" start="6136" end="6142" title="Nicaea" label="Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320" start="6160" end="6170" title="February 6" label="February 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730802" start="6173" end="6184" title="Henry Percy, 2nd Baron Percy" label="Henry Percy"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="6194" end="6202" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112" start="6228" end="6232" title="1352" label="1352"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669" start="6236" end="6243" title="June 19" label="June 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q552852" start="6246" end="6254" title="Prince Morikuni" label="Morikuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="6273" end="6279" title="shogun" label="shogun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260719" start="6284" end="6296" title="puppet ruler" label="puppet ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004" start="6301" end="6305" title="1333" label="1333"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722" start="6309" end="6316" title="July 23" label="July 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q313429" start="6319" end="6325" title="Otto, Duke of Austria" label="Otto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051" start="6391" end="6395" title="1339" label="1339"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783" start="6399" end="6407" title="August 5" label="August 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q956563" start="6410" end="6429" title="Edmund of Woodstock, 1st Earl of Kent" label="Edmund of Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5996" start="6463" end="6467" title="1330" label="1330"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890" start="6471" end="6483" title="September 24" label="September 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q942577" start="6486" end="6503" title="Ralph de Stafford, 1st Earl of Stafford" label="Ralph de Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258" start="6537" end="6541" title="1372" label="1372"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929" start="6545" end="6554" title="October 4" label="October 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795487" start="6557" end="6577" title="Thomas de Monthermer, 2nd Baron Monthermer" label="Thomas de Monthermer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056" start="6611" end="6615" title="1340" label="1340"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926" start="6619" end="6628" title="October 7" label="October 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q679083" start="6631" end="6653" title="Aleksandr Mikhailovich of Tver" label="Aleksandr Mikhailovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q467530" start="6717" end="6735" title="Ingeborg of Norway" label="Ingeborg of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="6766" end="6774" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159" start="6791" end="6795" title="1361" label="1361"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328796" start="6800" end="6815" title="Nitta Yoshisada" label="Nitta Yoshisada"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="6848" end="6855" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044" start="6860" end="6864" title="1338" label="1338"/>
<link wikidata="Q731030" start="6869" end="6875" title="Ni Zan" label="Ni Zan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269" start="6932" end="6936" title="1374" label="1374"/>
<link wikidata="Q98795" start="6941" end="6950" title="Rudolf II, Margrave of Hachberg-Sausenberg" label="Rudolf II"/>
<link wikidata="Q247331" start="6980" end="6998" title="House of Zähringen" label="House of Zähringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112" start="7004" end="7008" title="1352" label="1352"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257" start="7026" end="7036" title="January 14" label="January 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q298056" start="7039" end="7049" title="Andrew III of Hungary" label="Andrew III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470101" start="7093" end="7100" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1000–1301)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516" start="7105" end="7109" title="1265" label="1265"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340" start="7113" end="7124" title="February 19" label="February 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q3903918" start="7127" end="7139" title="Pietro Gerra" label="Pietro Gerra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344" start="7184" end="7195" title="February 20" label="February 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385040" start="7198" end="7209" title="Asukai Gayū" label="Asukai Gayū"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436" start="7242" end="7246" title="1241" label="1241"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433" start="7250" end="7258" title="March 21" label="March 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553942" start="7261" end="7283" title="Guillaume de Champvent" label="Guillaume de Champvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553" start="7313" end="7318" title="May 7" label="May 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402208" start="7321" end="7333" title="Hōjō Akitoki" label="Hōjō Akitoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483" start="7373" end="7377" title="1248" label="1248"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828" start="7381" end="7390" title="August 22" label="August 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q26259937" start="7393" end="7409" title="Giacomo Bianconi" label="Giacomo Bianconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392" start="7442" end="7446" title="1220" label="1220"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860" start="7450" end="7461" title="September 3" label="September 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q322158" start="7464" end="7473" title="Alberto I della Scala" label="Alberto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096992" start="7496" end="7512" title="Chief Magistrate" label="Chief Magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026" start="7515" end="7526" title="November 19" label="November 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694747" start="7529" end="7539" title="Johann III Romka" label="Johann III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640872" start="7608" end="7631" title="Blasco I d&amp;#x27;Alagona" label="Blasco I d&amp;#x27;Alagona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447235" start="7703" end="7717" title="False Margaret" label="False Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q845929" start="7750" end="7759" title="pretender" label="pretender"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508" start="7764" end="7768" title="1260" label="1260"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39949" wikidata="Q5612" url="?curid=39949" title="1302">
<text>Year 1302 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCII]]) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==

==January–March==
* January 2 – In Germany, Henry II becomes the ruler of the independent nation of Mecklenburg (now encompassing the northeastern German state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern) upon the death of his father, Henry the Pilgrim. Henry II had served as regent from 1290 to 1298 during Henry the Pilgrim&#x27;s pilgrimage to the Holy Land, and had continued most of the administration of Mecklenburg after the return of his 68-year-old father.
* January 20 – In Egypt, Al-Mustakfi I becomes the new Muslim Abbasid Caliph of Cairo, leader of Islam within the Mamluk Sultanate, upon the death of his father, the Caliph Al-Hakim I.
* January 23 – King Ferdinand IV of the Spanish Kingdom of Castile, having recently reached the age of majority at age 16, marries 12-year-old Princess Constance, the only daughter of King Dinis of Portugal, in a ceremony at Valladolid.
* January 26 – At the suggestion of France, and pursuant to the treaty signed between England and France at Asnières, King Edward I of England (&quot;Edward Longshanks&quot;) and the Scottish nobles led by Robert the Bruce agree to a nine-month peace treaty at Linlithgow, to last until St. Andrew&#x27;s Day, November 30, 1302. 
* February 8 – Yesün Temür becomes the Jinong (crown prince) of the Mongol Empire upon the death of his father Gammala, with authority over the Mongolian steppe north of the Gobi Desert. Yesün Temür will become the Emperor of China&#x27;s Yuan dynasty in 1323 and reign for almost five years.
* February 10 – The papal bull &quot;Ausculta Fili&quot; is delivered to Philip the Fair, King of France, but Robert II, Count of Artois, snatches the document from Jacques de Normans, the emissary of Pope Boniface VIII and burns the paper in a fire.
* February 19 – The Italian artist Cimabue completes construction of the image of John the Evangelist, a major potion of the mosaic &quot;Christ Enthroned&quot;, in the Pisa Cathedral, after 94 days. Cimabue dies shortly afterward, and the full mosaic will not be completed until 1320.
* March 3 – Upon the death of Roger-Bernard III, Count of Foix, who had founded the Co-principality of Andorra in 1278, Roger&#x27;s son Count Gaston continues as the new French administrator on behalf of King Philip of France. The holder of the title Count of Foix will continue to be the French representative in Andorra, with almost 200 years of unbroken rule, until the death of Gaston IV in 1472. 
* March 4 – After learning of the rejection of the papal bull by King Philip of France, Pope Boniface VIII sends Cardinal Jean Lemoine to inform King Philip of the Pope&#x27;s plans for an ecclesiastical council to control the appointment of French clergy. 
* March – Robert the Bruce, the future King of Scotland marries the 18-year-old Elizabeth de Burgh at Writtle in Essex. She is the daughter of Richard Óg de Burgh (&quot;the Red Earl&quot;), a powerful Irish nobleman and close friend of King Edward I of England.

==April–June==
* April 8 – (8 Shaban 701 AH) Sultan Muhammad II dies after a 29-year reign and is succeeded by his son Muhammad III as ruler of Granada. Within two weeks of his accession, he sends a Nasrid army under Hammu ibn Abd al-Haqq to seize Bedmar and other neighboring strongholds from Castile. Nasrid forces also attack Jódar, northeast of Bedmar, and recapture Quesada. Meanwhile, Muhammad contains friendly relations with King James II (&quot;James the Just&quot;).
* April 10 – The first meeting of the Estates General in France is convened King Philip IV (&quot;Philip the Fair&quot;) at the Notre-Dame in Paris. During the assembly, all three classes – the French nobles, clergy, and commons – discuss the conflict between Philip and Pope Boniface VIII about the papal legate, Bernard Saisset – who is accused to raise a rebellion of Occitan independence, associated with Navarre, under the banner of the County of Foix.
*April 12 – Ghazan of the Mongol Empire&#x27;s Ilkhanate division sends a letter to Pope Boniface and announces preparations for a new campaign against the Mamluk Sultanate. 
*April 22 – In what is now Turkey, Byzantine Emperor Michael IX Palaiologos launches a military campaign against Turkish forces who have been conducting raids, and marches from Constantinople. His army travels southward as far as Magnesia ad Maeander (the ruins of which are now near the town of Ortaklar in what is now Turkey&#x27;s Aydin Province). Palaiologos seeks to directly confront the Turkish forces, but is dissuaded by his generals. In the meantime, the Turks resume their raids, isolating Michael at Magnesia. His army is dissolved without a battle, as the local forces are left behind to defend their homes. The Alans (Byzantine mercenaries) too leave, to rejoin their families in Thrace. Michael is forced to withdraw by the sea, followed by another wave of refugees. 
*May 17 – At the age of 12, Eleanor of Anjou, daughter of King Charles II of Naples, marries King Frederick III of Sicily. 
*May 18 – Flemish militia kill 2,000 French soldiers in the course of the Matins of Bruges, after Pieter de Coninck and Jan Breydel call on soldiers to kill all of the French occupiers of the city in Flanders. The French Governor of Flanders, Jacques de Châtillon, escapes with a handful of soldiers while disguised as a priest. He arrives in Paris to bring the news of the massacre to King Philip the Fair, who sends an army to capture the city.
*June 12 – The Baltic Sea town of Wesenberg in Danish Estonia (now Rakvere) receives municipal self-government under the Hanseatic League doctrine of Lübeck law.
*June 14 – Matteo I Visconti, Lord of Milan (&quot;Signore di Milano&quot;), the semi-independent Italian region within the Holy Roman Empire, is deposed by Guido della Torre, but will return in 1311.

==July–September==
* July 11 – The Battle of the Golden Spurs takes place as France retaliates against Flanders for the May 18 Matins of Bruges massacre. Flemish forces led by William of Jülich (&quot;William the Younger&quot;) and Pieter de Coninck defeat the French army (some 9,000 men) at Kortrijk in Flanders. The cavalry charges of the French prove unable to defeat the untrained Flemish infantry militia, consisting mainly of members of the craft guilds. Many French nobles (some 500 knights) are killed, like the commander Robert II of Artois, and forced to retreat.
* July 27 – Battle of Bapheus: To counter the Turkish threat at Nicomedia, Emperor Andronikos II Palaiologos sends a Byzantine force (some 2,000 men) to cross over the Bosporus to relieve the city. On the plain, Turkish forces (some 5,000 light cavalry) led by Sultan Osman I defeat the Byzantines, who are forced to withdraw to Nicomedia. After the battle, Andronikos loses control of the countryside of Bithynia, withdrawing to the forts. Meanwhile, Turkish forces capture Byzantine settlements, such as the coastal city of Gemlik.
* August 5 – John Segrave is appointed to the custody of Berwick Castle, leaving him in charge with an English force of some 20,000 men. Robert, along with other nobles, gives his allegiance to Edward.
* August 31 – The Peace of Caltabellotta is signed between King Charles the Lame, King of Naples and King Frederick III of Sicily, ending the War of the Sicilian Vespers. The Kingdom of Sicily will pass to Angevin rule on Frederick&#x27;s death, in return Charles pays a tribute of some 100,000 ounces of gold. Frederick hands over all his possessions in Calabria and releases Charles&#x27; son Philip I, prince of Taranto, from his prison in Cefalù.
* September 3 – (1 Muharram 702 AH) At the start of the new Muslim year 702 AH, Mamluk Sultan Al-Nasir Muhammad sends a fleet of 20 galleys) to Tripoli of Lebanon, where Mamluk forces led by Kahardash al-Zarraq al-Mansuri, begin a blockade and siege.
* September 26 – (28 Muharram 702 AH) Fall of Ruad: The Knights Templar, European Crusaders to the Holy Land, surrender their control of the island of Ruad (now Arwad, off of the coast of Syria) to the Mamluk Sultanate. Hugh Dampierre negotiates a promise that the Europeans will be allowed safe conduct to a Christian-ruled land of their choice, but Knights are attacked as soon as they emerge from the garrison. Templar Grand Master Barthélemy de Quincy is killed in battle, all of the Syrian Christian bowmen and footsoldiers are executed, and the surviving Knights Templar are taken as prisoners of war and incarcerated in Cairo. 
* September – Roger de Flor, Italian military adventurer and knight (&quot;condottiere&quot;), founds the Catalan Company group of mercenaries, with soldiers (Almogavars) jobless after the Treaty of Caltabellotta.

==October–December==
* October 4 – Andronikos II Palaiologos, Byzantine Emperor, signs a peace treaty with the Republic of Venice, ending the Byzantine–Venetian War. The Venetians return most of their conquests – but keep the islands of Kea, Santorini, Serifos and Amorgos – which are retained by the privateers who have captured them. Andronikos agrees to repay the Venetians for their losses sustained during the massacre of Venetian residents (see 1296).
* November 18 – Boniface VIII issues the papal bull &quot;Unam sanctam&quot;, which asserts the superiority of the papacy&#x27;s spiritual power over secular rulers.
* December 2 – The coronation of Martha of Denmark, wife of Sweden&#x27;s King Birger since 1298, as Queen consort of Sweden takes place in a ceremony at Söderköping.
* December 10 – The Inuigin Era (Kengen) begins in Japan during the reign after the coronation of Emperor Gonijo.
* December 31 – Theobald II of the House of Metz becomes the new Duke of Lorraine within the Holy Roman Empire after the death of his father, Frederick III.

== Date unknown ==
* The Temple of Confucius is erected in Beijing during the reign of Emperor Temür Khan (or &quot;Chengzong&quot;) of the Chinese Yuan Dynasty.

== Births ==
* November 30 – Andrew Corsini, Italian prelate and bishop (d. 1374)
* December 7 – Azzone Visconti, Italian nobleman and knight (d. 1339)
* Fang Congyi, Chinese Daoist priest and landscape painter (d. 1393)
* Hōjō Sadayuki, Japanese nobleman, governor and samurai (d. 1333)
* Konoe Tsunetada, Japanese nobleman (&quot;kugyō&quot;) and regent (d. 1352)
* Shihabuddeen Ahmed Koya, Indian Grand Mufti and writer (d. 1374)
* Tai Situ Changchub Gyaltsen, Tibetan ruler and politician (d. 1364)

== Deaths ==
* January 2 – Henry I, German nobleman and co-ruler (b. 1230)
* January 19 – Al-Hakim I, Abbasid ruler (&quot;caliph&quot;) of Cairo (b. 1247)
* January 26 – Godfrey Giffard, English Lord Chancellor and bishop
* February 1 – Andrea dei Conti, Italian priest and mystic (b. 1240)
* February 10 – Gerald Le Marescal, Irish archdeacon and bishop
* March 3 – Roger-Bernard III, French nobleman and knight (b. 1243)
* March 9 – Richard FitzAlan, English nobleman and knight (b. 1267)
* March 20 – Ralph Walpole, English cleric, archdeacon and bishop
* April 8 – Muhammad II (&quot;al-Faqih&quot;), Nasrid ruler of Granada (b. 1235)
* April 9 – Constance of Sicily, queen and regent of Aragon (b. 1249)
* May 2 – Blanche of Artois, queen and regent of Navarre (b. 1248)
* June 30 – Ingeborg Birgersdotter, Swedish noblewoman (b. 1253)
* July 11 (Battle of the Golden Spurs):
** Godfrey of Brabant, Dutch nobleman and knight
** Guy I of Clermont, French nobleman and knight
** Jacques de Châtillon, French governor and knight
** John I de Trie, French knight and trouvère (b. 1225)
** John I of Ponthieu, French nobleman and knight
** John II of Brienne, French nobleman and knight
** Pierre Flotte, French knight, lawyer and chancellor
** Raoul II of Clermont, French nobleman and knight
** Robert II, French nobleman and seneschal (b. 1250)
** Simon de Melun, French knight and Marshal (b. 1250)
* September 6 – John St. John, English knight and seneschal
* September 18 – Eudokia Palaiologina, empress of Trebizond
* September 26 – Barthélemy de Quincy, French Grand Master
* October 29 – Matthew of Aquasparta, Italian Minister General
* November 17 – Gertrude the Great, German mystic (b. 1256)
* December 2 – Audun Hugleiksson, Norwegian knight (b. 1240)
* December 13 – Adolf II, German nobleman and prince-bishop
* December 26 – Valdemar Birgersson, king of Sweden (b. 1239)
* December 29 – Vitslav II, Danish nobleman, knight and prince
* December 31 – Frederick III, German nobleman and knight
* Balian of Ibelin, Cypriot nobleman and seneschal (b. 1240)
* Dietrich of Apolda, German monk, hagiographer and writer
* Gerardo Bianchi, Italian churchman, cardinal and diplomat
* Godfrey Giffard, English chancellor and bishop (b. 1235)
* Henry III of Bar, French nobleman and knight (b. 1259)
* Henry le Walleis, English advisor, mayor and politician
* Hu Sanxing, Chinese historian and politician (b. 1230)
* Ibn Daqiq al-&#x27;Id, Egyptian scholar and writer (b. 1228)
* John Comyn II, Scottish nobleman, knight and regent
* John de Sècheville, English philosopher and scientist
* Lotterio Filangieri, Italo-Norman nobleman and knight
* Louis I, Swiss nobleman and knight (House of Savoy)
* Maghinardo Pagani, Italian nobleman and statesman
* William of March, English Lord Treasurer and bishop

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5612" start="5" end="9" title="1302" label="1302"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612" start="11" end="36" title="1302" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCII]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235687" start="44" end="74" title="common year starting on Monday" label="common year starting on Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="82" end="97" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151" start="134" end="143" title="January 2" label="January 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q71254" start="158" end="166" title="Henry II, Lord of Mecklenburg" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q109057" start="214" end="225" title="Mecklenburg" label="Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196" start="277" end="299" title="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern" label="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern"/>
<link wikidata="Q67403" start="331" end="348" title="Henry I, Lord of Mecklenburg" label="Henry the Pilgrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267" start="565" end="575" title="January 20" label="January 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q285426" start="588" end="601" title="Al-Mustakfi I (Cairo)" label="Al-Mustakfi I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="625" end="648" title="List of caliphs#Abbasid Caliphate (750–1258)" label="Abbasid Caliph of Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="660" end="665" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="677" end="693" title="Mamluk Sultanate" label="Mamluk Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q284627" start="736" end="746" title="Al-Hakim I" label="Al-Hakim I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276" start="750" end="760" title="January 23" label="January 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="763" end="780" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="King Ferdinand IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="796" end="814" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Kingdom of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081231" start="891" end="909" title="Constance of Portugal" label="Princess Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q212890" start="932" end="942" title="Denis of Portugal" label="King Dinis"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="946" end="954" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8356" start="973" end="983" title="Valladolid" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282" start="987" end="997" title="January 26" label="January 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="1108" end="1127" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="1191" end="1207" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016911" start="1246" end="1256" title="Linlithgow" label="Linlithgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323" start="1317" end="1327" title="February 8" label="February 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q8560" start="1330" end="1341" title="Yesün Temür (Yuan dynasty)" label="Yesün Temür"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569228" start="1354" end="1360" title="Jinong" label="Jinong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="1554" end="1566" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325" start="1610" end="1621" title="February 10" label="February 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="1628" end="1638" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="1681" end="1696" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip the Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q262726" start="1718" end="1744" title="Robert II, Count of Artois" label="Robert II, Count of Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="1809" end="1827" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340" start="1861" end="1872" title="February 19" label="February 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q15790" start="1894" end="1901" title="Cimabue" label="Cimabue"/>
<link wikidata="Q328804" start="1941" end="1960" title="John the Evangelist" label="John the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="1984" end="1990" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16545739" start="1997" end="2013" title="Christ enthroned with the Virgin and St John" label="Christ Enthroned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754247" start="2028" end="2042" title="Pisa Cathedral" label="Pisa Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5768" start="2139" end="2143" title="1320" label="1320"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391" start="2147" end="2154" title="March 3" label="March 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q633333" start="2175" end="2207" title="Roger-Bernard III, Count of Foix" label="Roger-Bernard III, Count of Foix"/>
<link wikidata="Q228" start="2229" end="2255" title="Andorra" label="Co-principality of Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533" start="2259" end="2263" title="1278" label="1278"/>
<link wikidata="Q726943" start="2282" end="2294" title="Gaston I, Count of Foix" label="Count Gaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q24851389" start="2397" end="2410" title="Count of Foix" label="Count of Foix"/>
<link wikidata="Q372977" start="2528" end="2537" title="Gaston IV, Count of Foix" label="Gaston IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589" start="2541" end="2545" title="1472" label="1472"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396" start="2550" end="2557" title="March 4" label="March 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q721081" start="2670" end="2682" title="Jean Lemoine" label="Jean Lemoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q110" start="2808" end="2813" title="March" label="March"/>
<link wikidata="Q262059" start="2886" end="2904" title="Elizabeth de Burgh" label="Elizabeth de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013057" start="2908" end="2915" title="Writtle" label="Writtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="2919" end="2924" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q708175" start="2949" end="2968" title="Richard Óg de Burgh, 2nd Earl of Ulster" label="Richard Óg de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503" start="3087" end="3094" title="April 8" label="April 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q972278" start="3122" end="3133" title="Muhammad II of Granada" label="Muhammad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q704786" start="3189" end="3201" title="Muhammad III of Granada" label="Muhammad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="3214" end="3221" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q75863322" start="3287" end="3308" title="Hammu ibn Abd al-Haqq" label="Hammu ibn Abd al-Haqq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631814" start="3318" end="3324" title="Bedmar y Garcíez" label="Bedmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="3364" end="3371" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641632" start="3399" end="3404" title="Jódar" label="Jódar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866847" start="3441" end="3448" title="Quesada, Spain" label="Quesada"/>
<link wikidata="Q312735" start="3508" end="3516" title="James II of Aragon" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502" start="3549" end="3557" title="April 10" label="April 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q207304" start="3585" end="3600" title="Estates General (France)" label="Estates General"/>
<link wikidata="Q237131" start="3604" end="3610" title="France in the Middle Ages" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="3628" end="3637" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="3675" end="3685" title="Notre-Dame de Paris" label="Notre-Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="3689" end="3694" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="3823" end="3836" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q822689" start="3861" end="3876" title="Bernard Saisset" label="Bernard Saisset"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="3956" end="3963" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481436" start="3989" end="4003" title="County of Foix" label="County of Foix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499" start="4006" end="4014" title="April 12" label="April 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q334496" start="4017" end="4023" title="Ghazan" label="Ghazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="4052" end="4061" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526" start="4181" end="4189" title="April 22" label="April 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="4207" end="4213" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="4215" end="4224" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q37098" start="4233" end="4255" title="Michael IX Palaiologos" label="Michael IX Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="4357" end="4371" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432674" start="4410" end="4430" title="Magnesia on the Maeander" label="Magnesia ad Maeander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233259" start="4476" end="4484" title="Ortaklar" label="Ortaklar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79846" start="4514" end="4528" title="Aydin Province" label="Aydin Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="4874" end="4880" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575" start="4964" end="4970" title="May 17" label="May 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q126521" start="4991" end="5007" title="Eleanor of Anjou" label="Eleanor of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q314331" start="5026" end="5046" title="Charles II of Naples" label="Charles II of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q367226" start="5061" end="5084" title="Frederick III of Sicily" label="Frederick III of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576" start="5088" end="5094" title="May 18" label="May 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q850188" start="5161" end="5177" title="Matins of Bruges" label="Matins of Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394020" start="5185" end="5202" title="Pieter de Coninck" label="Pieter de Coninck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394408" start="5207" end="5218" title="Jan Breydel" label="Jan Breydel"/>
<link wikidata="Q836307" start="5330" end="5350" title="Jacques de Châtillon" label="Jacques de Châtillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="5430" end="5435" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619" start="5535" end="5542" title="June 12" label="June 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q191889" start="5568" end="5577" title="Rakvere" label="Wesenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9876461" start="5581" end="5595" title="Duchy of Estonia (1219–1346)" label="Danish Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q686235" start="5684" end="5694" title="Lübeck law" label="Lübeck law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612" start="5697" end="5704" title="June 14" label="June 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q715225" start="5707" end="5724" title="Matteo I Visconti" label="Matteo I Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q121753993" start="5726" end="5739" title="List of rulers of Milan" label="Lord of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="5820" end="5837" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q323020" start="5853" end="5870" title="Guido della Torre" label="Guido della Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701" start="5919" end="5926" title="July 11" label="July 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q44732" start="5933" end="5959" title="Battle of the Golden Spurs" label="Battle of the Golden Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q850188" start="6025" end="6041" title="Matins of Bruges" label="Matins of Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q195942" start="6074" end="6091" title="William of Jülich" label="William of Jülich"/>
<link wikidata="Q12995" start="6191" end="6199" title="Kortrijk" label="Kortrijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q262726" start="6429" end="6448" title="Robert II, Count of Artois" label="Robert II of Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719" start="6475" end="6482" title="July 27" label="July 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509619" start="6485" end="6502" title="Battle of Bapheus" label="Battle of Bapheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q209349" start="6537" end="6546" title="Nicomedia" label="Nicomedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37067" start="6556" end="6581" title="Andronikos II Palaiologos" label="Andronikos II Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="6641" end="6649" title="Bosporus" label="Bosporus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83100" start="6741" end="6748" title="Osman I" label="Osman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q373189" start="6878" end="6886" title="Bithynia" label="Bithynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q753752" start="6999" end="7005" title="Gemlik" label="Gemlik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783" start="7009" end="7017" title="August 5" label="August 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528055" start="7020" end="7032" title="John Segrave, 2nd Baron Segrave" label="John Segrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q678714" start="7064" end="7078" title="Berwick Castle" label="Berwick Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830" start="7211" end="7220" title="August 31" label="August 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q661425" start="7227" end="7249" title="Peace of Caltabellotta" label="Peace of Caltabellotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q314331" start="7273" end="7305" title="Charles II of Naples" label="Charles the Lame, King of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q367226" start="7310" end="7338" title="Frederick III of Sicily" label="King Frederick III of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599340" start="7351" end="7378" title="War of the Sicilian Vespers" label="War of the Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="7384" end="7401" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="7564" end="7572" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q712759" start="7604" end="7612" title="Philip I, Prince of Taranto" label="Philip I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078062" start="7624" end="7631" title="Principality of Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q235163" start="7652" end="7658" title="Cefalù" label="Cefalù"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860" start="7662" end="7673" title="September 3" label="September 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q293505" start="7754" end="7771" title="Al-Nasir Muhammad" label="Al-Nasir Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q168954" start="7804" end="7822" title="Tripoli, Lebanon" label="Tripoli of Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885" start="7913" end="7925" title="September 26" label="September 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q815114" start="7949" end="7961" title="Fall of Ruad" label="Fall of Ruad"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="7967" end="7982" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q377802" start="8062" end="8066" title="Arwad Island" label="Ruad"/>
<link wikidata="Q29243873" start="8346" end="8366" title="Barthélemy de Quincy" label="Barthélemy de Quincy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123" start="8548" end="8557" title="September" label="September"/>
<link wikidata="Q436817" start="8560" end="8573" title="Roger de Flor" label="Roger de Flor"/>
<link wikidata="Q273108" start="8621" end="8632" title="condottiere" label="condottiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501196" start="8652" end="8667" title="Catalan Company" label="Catalan Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138325" start="8705" end="8715" title="Almogavars" label="Almogavars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929" start="8784" end="8793" title="October 4" label="October 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="8872" end="8890" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778732" start="8903" end="8925" title="Byzantine–Venetian War (1296–1302)" label="Byzantine–Venetian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q214109" start="8998" end="9001" title="Kea (island)" label="Kea"/>
<link wikidata="Q129296" start="9003" end="9012" title="Santorini" label="Santorini"/>
<link wikidata="Q217214" start="9014" end="9021" title="Serifos" label="Serifos"/>
<link wikidata="Q208587" start="9026" end="9033" title="Amorgos" label="Amorgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="9062" end="9071" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561" start="9212" end="9216" title="1296" label="1296"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027" start="9221" end="9232" title="November 18" label="November 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q383653" start="9277" end="9289" title="Unam sanctam" label="Unam sanctam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296" start="9387" end="9397" title="December 2" label="December 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q291409" start="9418" end="9435" title="Martha of Denmark" label="Martha of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q434782" start="9459" end="9470" title="Birger, King of Sweden" label="King Birger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563" start="9477" end="9481" title="1298" label="1298"/>
<link wikidata="Q509086" start="9486" end="9509" title="List of Swedish royal consorts" label="Queen consort of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q984831" start="9539" end="9550" title="Söderköping" label="Söderköping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302" start="9554" end="9565" title="December 10" label="December 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327472" start="9585" end="9591" title="Kengen" label="Kengen"/>
<link wikidata="Q374075" start="9650" end="9664" title="Emperor Go-Nijō" label="Emperor Gonijo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912" start="9668" end="9679" title="December 31" label="December 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q571525" start="9682" end="9693" title="Theobald II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theobald II"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="9731" end="9747" title="List of rulers of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="9759" end="9776" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q574017" start="9808" end="9821" title="Frederick III, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064580" start="9849" end="9868" title="Beijing Temple of Confucius" label="Temple of Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="9883" end="9890" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8468" start="9919" end="9929" title="Temür Khan" label="Temür Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="9972" end="9984" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015" start="10002" end="10013" title="November 30" label="November 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q493698" start="10016" end="10030" title="Andrew Corsini" label="Andrew Corsini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269" start="10063" end="10067" title="1374" label="1374"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299" start="10071" end="10081" title="December 7" label="December 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q511928" start="10084" end="10099" title="Azzone Visconti" label="Azzone Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="10109" end="10117" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051" start="10133" end="10137" title="1339" label="1339"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066387" start="10141" end="10152" title="Fang Congyi" label="Fang Congyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="10162" end="10168" title="Taoism" label="Daoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390" start="10202" end="10206" title="1393" label="1393"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539353" start="10210" end="10223" title="Hōjō Sadayuki" label="Hōjō Sadayuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="10257" end="10264" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004" start="10269" end="10273" title="1333" label="1333"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198729" start="10277" end="10292" title="Konoe Tsunetada" label="Konoe Tsunetada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138036" start="10319" end="10324" title="kugyō" label="kugyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="10336" end="10342" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112" start="10347" end="10351" title="1352" label="1352"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089863" start="10355" end="10378" title="Shihabuddeen Ahmed Koya" label="Shihabuddeen Ahmed Koya"/>
<link wikidata="Q185992" start="10393" end="10398" title="Mufti" label="Mufti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238086" start="10422" end="10449" title="Tai Situ Changchub Gyaltsen" label="Tai Situ Changchub Gyaltsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185" start="10484" end="10488" title="1364" label="1364"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151" start="10506" end="10515" title="January 2" label="January 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q67403" start="10518" end="10525" title="Henry I, Lord of Mecklenburg" label="Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412" start="10560" end="10564" title="1230" label="1230"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266" start="10568" end="10578" title="January 19" label="January 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q284627" start="10581" end="10591" title="Al-Hakim I" label="Al-Hakim I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="10614" end="10620" title="caliph" label="caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="10631" end="10636" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482" start="10641" end="10645" title="1247" label="1247"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282" start="10649" end="10659" title="January 26" label="January 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576437" start="10662" end="10677" title="Godfrey Giffard" label="Godfrey Giffard"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="10687" end="10702" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312" start="10716" end="10726" title="February 1" label="February 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848882" start="10729" end="10745" title="Andrea dei Conti" label="Andrea dei Conti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435" start="10777" end="10781" title="1240" label="1240"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325" start="10785" end="10796" title="February 10" label="February 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q45294276" start="10799" end="10817" title="Gerald Le Marescal" label="Gerald Le Marescal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391" start="10849" end="10856" title="March 3" label="March 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q633333" start="10859" end="10876" title="Roger-Bernard III, Count of Foix" label="Roger-Bernard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438" start="10909" end="10913" title="1243" label="1243"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401" start="10917" end="10924" title="March 9" label="March 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034626" start="10927" end="10943" title="Richard Fitzalan, 8th Earl of Arundel" label="Richard FitzAlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519" start="10977" end="10981" title="1267" label="1267"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427" start="10985" end="10993" title="March 20" label="March 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288232" start="10996" end="11009" title="Ralph Walpole" label="Ralph Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503" start="11051" end="11058" title="April 8" label="April 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q972278" start="11061" end="11072" title="Muhammad II of Granada" label="Muhammad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="11113" end="11120" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425" start="11125" end="11129" title="1235" label="1235"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504" start="11133" end="11140" title="April 9" label="April 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q286537" start="11143" end="11162" title="Constance of Sicily, Queen of Aragon" label="Constance of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="11184" end="11190" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485" start="11195" end="11199" title="1249" label="1249"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545" start="11203" end="11208" title="May 2" label="May 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q242769" start="11211" end="11228" title="Blanche of Artois" label="Blanche of Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="11250" end="11257" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483" start="11262" end="11266" title="1248" label="1248"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657" start="11270" end="11277" title="June 30" label="June 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955679" start="11280" end="11302" title="Ingeborg Birgersdotter of Bjelbo" label="Ingeborg Birgersdotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498" start="11327" end="11331" title="1253" label="1253"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701" start="11335" end="11342" title="July 11" label="July 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q44732" start="11344" end="11370" title="Battle of the Golden Spurs" label="Battle of the Golden Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109727" start="11376" end="11394" title="Godfrey of Brabant" label="Godfrey of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q350745" start="11425" end="11442" title="Guy I of Clermont" label="Guy I of Clermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q836307" start="11474" end="11494" title="Jacques de Châtillon" label="Jacques de Châtillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q982846" start="11526" end="11540" title="John I, Count of Dammartin" label="John I de Trie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996467" start="11560" end="11568" title="trouvère" label="trouvère"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403" start="11573" end="11577" title="1225" label="1225"/>
<link wikidata="Q132511" start="11582" end="11600" title="John I, Count of Aumale" label="John I of Ponthieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q447470" start="11632" end="11650" title="John II of Brienne, Count of Eu" label="John II of Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q119628" start="11682" end="11695" title="Pierre Flotte" label="Pierre Flotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131265" start="11737" end="11757" title="Raoul II of Clermont" label="Raoul II of Clermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q262726" start="11789" end="11798" title="Robert II, Count of Artois" label="Robert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138622" start="11820" end="11829" title="seneschal" label="seneschal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487" start="11834" end="11838" title="1250" label="1250"/>
<link wikidata="Q466347" start="11843" end="11857" title="Simon de Melun" label="Simon de Melun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858" start="11897" end="11908" title="September 6" label="September 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q18810849" start="11911" end="11924" title="John St John (died 1302)" label="John St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893" start="11957" end="11969" title="September 18" label="September 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059527" start="11972" end="11992" title="Eudokia Palaiologina" label="Eudokia Palaiologina"/>
<link wikidata="Q178913" start="12005" end="12014" title="Empire of Trebizond" label="Trebizond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885" start="12017" end="12029" title="September 26" label="September 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q29243873" start="12032" end="12052" title="Barthélemy de Quincy" label="Barthélemy de Quincy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2951" start="12076" end="12086" title="October 29" label="October 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346310" start="12089" end="12110" title="Matthew of Aquasparta" label="Matthew of Aquasparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028" start="12139" end="12150" title="November 17" label="November 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q61934" start="12153" end="12171" title="Gertrude the Great" label="Gertrude the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502" start="12191" end="12195" title="1256" label="1256"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296" start="12199" end="12209" title="December 2" label="December 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q759063" start="12212" end="12229" title="Audun Hugleiksson" label="Audun Hugleiksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379" start="12260" end="12271" title="December 13" label="December 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q362645" start="12274" end="12282" title="Adolf II of Waldeck" label="Adolf II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761" start="12320" end="12331" title="December 26" label="December 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q357200" start="12334" end="12353" title="Valdemar, King of Sweden" label="Valdemar Birgersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="12363" end="12369" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434" start="12374" end="12378" title="1239" label="1239"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862" start="12382" end="12393" title="December 29" label="December 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q514046" start="12396" end="12406" title="Vitslav II, Prince of Rügen" label="Vitslav II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912" start="12445" end="12456" title="December 31" label="December 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q574017" start="12459" end="12472" title="Frederick III, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880843" start="12503" end="12519" title="Balian of Ibelin (1240–1302)" label="Balian of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q108567" start="12564" end="12582" title="Dietrich of Apolda" label="Dietrich of Apolda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583939" start="12623" end="12638" title="Gerardo Bianchi" label="Gerardo Bianchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576437" start="12683" end="12698" title="Godfrey Giffard" label="Godfrey Giffard"/>
<link wikidata="Q558233" start="12742" end="12758" title="Henry III, Count of Bar" label="Henry III of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507" start="12791" end="12795" title="1259" label="1259"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162535" start="12799" end="12815" title="Henry le Walleis" label="Henry le Walleis"/>
<link wikidata="Q721420" start="12857" end="12867" title="Hu Sanxing" label="Hu Sanxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535677" start="12914" end="12935" title="Ibn Daqiq al-&amp;#x27;Id" label="Ibn Daqiq al-&amp;#x27;Id"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410" start="12969" end="12973" title="1228" label="1228"/>
<link wikidata="Q524817" start="12977" end="12990" title="John Comyn II of Badenoch" label="John Comyn II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265646" start="13031" end="13049" title="John de Sècheville" label="John de Sècheville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684950" start="13087" end="13106" title="Lotterio Filangieri (died 1302)" label="Lotterio Filangieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262278" start="13143" end="13150" title="Louis I of Vaud" label="Louis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="13179" end="13193" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843159" start="13197" end="13214" title="Maghinardo Pagani" label="Maghinardo Pagani"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206868" start="13249" end="13265" title="William of March" label="William of March"/>
<link wikidata="Q944583" start="13275" end="13289" title="Lord High Treasurer" label="Lord Treasurer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39950" wikidata="Q5614" url="?curid=39950" title="1303">
<text>Year 1303 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCIII]]) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
===January–March===
* January 17 – A major earthquake strikes Byzantium and Constantinople (now Istanbul in Turkey). Byzantine Emperor Michael IX Palaiologos spreads the word that the former Patriarch of the Eastern Church, Athanasius I had given him a warning about the imminent wrath of God against the city.
* January 21 – John XII is forced to resign as Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople and leader of the Eastern Orthodox Church after the January 17 earthquake. 
* January 28 – In India, the siege of Chittorgarh, capital of the Medapata Kingdom (now in the state of Rajasthan), begins as the Sultan of Delhi, Alauddin Khalji, seeks to acquire the territory of the Medapata Emperor, Ratnasimha.
* February 24 – Battle of Roslin: Scottish forces (some 8,000 men) led by John Comyn III &quot;the Red&quot; and Simon Fraser ambush and defeat an English scouting party under John Segrave at Roslin. During the battle, the Scots attack the English camp, capturing Segrave and several other nobles. But a second English brigade manages to rescue Segrave in a pitched battle. Later, the English army is again defeated, according to sources they lose between 28,000 and 30,000 men.
* March 17 – Joan II of the Anscarids becomes the Countess and ruler of Burgundy, a free state within the Holy Roman Empire (now the département of Jura in France), upon the death of her father Otto IV.

===April–June===
* April 4 – Battle of Arques: Flemish forces (some 10,000 men) led by William of Jülich (&quot;the Younger&quot;) defeats a French army at Arques in Flanders. During the battle, the French cavalry (1,600 men) tries to break the Flemish infantry militia formations, but to no avail. Finally, the French withdraw to Saint-Omer, leaving 300 dead behind. Later, William receives a warm reception in Bruges as a liberator in May.
* April 20 – Pope Boniface VIII founds the University of Rome with the papal bull &quot;In Supremae praeminentia Dignitatis&quot;, as a &quot;Studium&quot; for ecclesiastical studies under his control, making it the first pontifical university.
* April 22 – Battle of Marj al-Saffar: Mamluk forces (some 20,000 men) under Sultan Al-Nasir Muhammad defeat a Mongol army and their Armenian allies led by Qutlugh-Shah, on the plain of Marj al-Saffar. After the battle, Al-Nasir enters Damascus and chases the Mongols as far as Al-Qaryatayn in Syria. He returns to Cairo in triumph through the Bab al-Nasr (&quot;Victory Gate&quot;) with chained prisoners of war.
* May 16 – King Edward I of England assembles 7,500 troops at Roxburgh to prepare for a resumption of his campaign against the Kingdom of Scotland, to begin after concluding peace between England and France. In advance of the invasion, Edward orders that three pre-fabricated pontoon bridges be built and transported, in a fleet of 27 ships. After crossing into Scotland, Edward and his soldiers burns hamlet and towns, granges and granaries. Meanwhile, Richard Óg de Burgh, &quot;the Red Earl&quot; with forces from Ireland capture the castles of Rothesay and Inverkip.
* May 20 – Treaty of Paris: King Philip the Fair of France signs a peace treaty with Edward Longshanks, King of England. According to the terms of the treaty, Gascony is restored to England – as well as the cities of Bordeaux and Bayonne. In return, Edward swears allegiance to Philip as his vassal and agrees that Philipp&#x27;s daughter, Isabella of France, be married to his son Edward of Caernarfon, until she is old enough.
* May 26 – Elizabeth Richeza, 14-year-old daughter of the late King Przemysl II of Poland, marries her father&#x27;s former rival and the new King of Poland, King Wenceslaus II of Bohemia. The marriage takes place at the Prague Cathedral in Bohemia (now in the Czech Republic, and Elizabeth is crowned as Queen Consort of Bohemia.
* May 31 – Pope Boniface VIII orders the nullification of the election of Wenceslaus as King of Hungary, and declares that Károly Róbert, son of the late Hungarian king Charles Martel of Anjou, is the rightful claimant to the throne. The Pope also threatens Wenceslaus with excommunication from the Roman Catholic Church if Wenceslaus continues to style himself &quot;King of Hungary&quot;. The decision causes a breakdown of Hungary between supporters of Wenceslaus and supporters of Károly.
* June 18 – Scottish nobles Edmund Comyn and Simon Fraser lead an invasion from Dumfriesshire in Scotland, crossing the border into England at Cumberland and laying waste to Carlisle and its surrounding area.
* June 23 – Athanasius I returns to leadership of the Eastern Orthodox church in Byzantium, receiving recognition as the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople almost 10 years of having been driven from that office.

===July–September===
* August 8 – 1303 Crete earthquake: An earthquake destroys the Lighthouse of Alexandria in Egypt, one of the Seven wonders of the World.
* August 26 – Siege of Chittorgarh: Delhi forces led by Sultan Alauddin Khalji capture the massive Chittor Fort in northern India, after an 8-month-long siege. Alauddin orders a general massacre of Chittor&#x27;s population. 
* August – The 17-year-old King Ferdinand the Summoned, supervised by his mother, Queen-Regent María de Molina, signs a peace treaty at Córdoba with Granada for three years. In return, Muhammad III renews his vassalage with Castile and pays the same tribute given as to his father, the late King Sancho the Brave. The strategic port city of Tarifa remains in Castilian hands. 
* September 7 – Boniface VIII is imprisoned by Guillaume de Nogaret, French councillor and advisor, on behalf of Philip the Fair at his residence in Anagni. During the incident, Gregory Bicskei, archbishop of Esztergom, is killed. Boniface is for three days held in captivity, where he is beaten, tortured and nearly executed.
* September 16 – The Kagen era begins in Japan during the reign of the Emperor Gonijo.
* September 25 – 1303 Hongdong earthquake: An earthquake destroys the cities of Taiyuan and Pingyang, some 200,000 people are killed.
* September – Emperor Andronikos II Palaiologos, facing a possible siege of Constantinople by Ottoman-Turkish forces, seeks support from the European kingdoms. He makes Roger de Flor, Italian military adventurer and nobleman, an offer of service. Roger with his fleet and army (some 7,000 men), now known as the Catalan Company, departs from Messina with 36 ships (including 18 galleys), and arrives in Constantinople. He is adopted into the imperial family, Andronikos appoints him as grand duke (&quot;megas doux&quot;) and commander-in-chief of the Byzantine army and fleet.

===October–December===
* October 11 – Pope Boniface VIII dies while imprisoned at Anagni, after a pontificate of 8 years. 
* October 22 – At the papal conclave in Rome to select a new Roman catholic Pontiff, Cardinal Nicolò Boccasini, Bishop of Ostia, is elected unanimously.
* October 27 – The coronation of Cardinal Boccasini as Pope Benedict XI, 194th pope of the Roman Catholic Church, is performed at St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica by Cardinal Matteo Rosso Orsini.
* November 9 – Edward I Longshanks, King of England spends the winter at Dunfermline Abbey where he plans the attack on Stirling Castle. He stations an army in the field and operations continue throughout the winter. An English force (some 1,000 men) raids and plunder into Lennox as far as Drymen. Meanwhile, Lord John Botetourt raids Galloway in strength, with four bannerets (some 3,000 men).
* December 18 – Pope Benedict XI issues a mandate directing that the rights of Cardinal Jean Lemoine of France, to income from the dioceses of Bayeux and Amiens is to be protected while Lemoine is serving as papal legate.

== By place ==

=== Byzantine Empire ===
* Autumn – Battle of Dimbos: The Byzantine governors (&quot;tekfurs&quot;) of Prusa, Adranos, Kestel, and Ulubat begin a military campaign against the Ottoman-Turkish forces of Sultan Osman I. They attack the Ottoman capital city of Yenişehir and proceed to relieve Nicaea, which is under an Ottoman blockade. Osman musters a 5,000-strong army and defeats the Byzantine forces at a mountain pass near Yenişehir.

=== Asia ===
* Mongol invasion of India: Mongol forces appear outside Delhi and begin the siege of the city. Alauddin Khalji and a Delhi vanguard army return to the capital, while the Delhi garrison resists assaults of the Mongols.
* Autumn – Mongol forces lift the siege of Delhi after two months, they retreat with great plunder and war booty. Meanwhile, Alauddin Khaliji orders to strengthen border fortresses along the Mongol routes to India.

== Births ==
* May 19 – Saw Zein (or Binnya Ran De), Burmese ruler (d. 1330)
* July 12 – Hugh de Courtenay, English nobleman and knight (d. 1377)
* Bridget of Sweden (or Birgitta), Swedish nun and mystic (d. 1373)
* Catherine II, Latin empress consort, regent and co-ruler (d. 1346)
* Henry Ferrers, English nobleman, constable and knight (d. 1343)
* Hōjō Shigetoki, Japanese nobleman (&quot;rensho&quot;) and official (d. 1333)
* Marie of Évreux, French noblewoman (House of Capet) (d. 1335)
* Willem IV of Horne, Dutch nobleman, diplomat and knight (d. 1343)

== Deaths ==
* March 4
** Daniel of Moscow, Russian nobleman and prince (b. 1261)
** Theodora Palaiologina, Byzantine empress consort (b. 1240)
* March 17 – Otto IV, French nobleman and co-ruler (House of Ivrea)
* May 19 – Ivo of Kermartin, French priest, judge and saint (b. 1253)
* July 8 – Procopius of Ustyug, German merchant and wonderworker
* August 8 – Henry of Castile (the Senator), Spanish prince (b. 1230)
* August 9 – Thomas Maule, Scottish nobleman, captain and knight
* August 25 – Ninshō, Japanese monk, disciple and priest (b. 1217)
* September 7 – Gregory Bicskei, Hungarian prelate and archbishop
* October 11 – Boniface VIII, pope of the Catholic Church (b. 1230)
* October 27 – Beatrice of Castile, queen consort of Portugal (b. 1242)
* November 1 – Hugh XIII of Lusignan, French nobleman (b. 1259)
* December 9 – Richard Gravesend, English archdeacon and bishop
* Drakpa Odzer, Tibetan monk, abbot and Imperial Preceptor (b. 1246)
* Elizabeth of Sicily, queen consort of Hungary and Croatia (b. 1261)
* Erik Knudsen Skarsholm, Danish nobleman and knight (b. 1235)
* Hajib Shakarbar, Indian scholar, poet, writer and mystic (b. 1213)
* Ibn Abd al-Malik, Almohad historian, biographer and writer (b. 1237)
* John of St. Amand, French pharmacist and philosopher (b. 1230)
* Otto VI (the Short), German nobleman and co-ruler (b. 1255)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5614" start="5" end="9" title="1303" label="1303"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614" start="11" end="37" title="1303" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCIII]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235684" start="45" end="76" title="common year starting on Tuesday" label="common year starting on Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="84" end="99" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264" start="137" end="147" title="January 17" label="January 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="177" end="186" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="191" end="205" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="211" end="219" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q37098" start="250" end="272" title="Michael IX Palaiologos" label="Michael IX Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q606457" start="339" end="351" title="Athanasius I of Constantinople" label="Athanasius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273" start="428" end="438" title="January 21" label="January 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361770" start="441" end="449" title="John XII of Constantinople" label="John XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285" start="590" end="600" title="January 28" label="January 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q48724683" start="617" end="637" title="Siege of Chittorgarh (1303)" label="siege of Chittorgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518229" start="654" end="662" title="Medapata" label="Medapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="718" end="733" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Sultan of Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q335362" start="735" end="750" title="Alauddin Khalji" label="Alauddin Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296917" start="808" end="818" title="Ratnasimha" label="Ratnasimha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355" start="822" end="833" title="February 24" label="February 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613521" start="836" end="852" title="Battle of Roslin" label="Battle of Roslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351307" start="894" end="928" title="John Comyn III of Badenoch" label="John Comyn III &amp;quot;the Red&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518796" start="933" end="945" title="Simon Fraser (died 1306)" label="Simon Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528055" start="996" end="1008" title="John Segrave, 2nd Baron Segrave" label="John Segrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037998" start="1012" end="1018" title="Roslin, Midlothian" label="Roslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419" start="1301" end="1309" title="March 17" label="March 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q231760" start="1312" end="1319" title="Joan II, Countess of Burgundy" label="Joan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q852111" start="1327" end="1336" title="Anscarids" label="Anscarids"/>
<link wikidata="Q642314" start="1371" end="1379" title="County of Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1405" end="1422" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494018" start="1493" end="1500" title="Otto IV, Count of Burgundy" label="Otto IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508" start="1522" end="1529" title="April 4" label="April 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092043" start="1532" end="1548" title="Battle of Arques (1303)" label="Battle of Arques"/>
<link wikidata="Q195942" start="1590" end="1607" title="William of Jülich" label="William of Jülich"/>
<link wikidata="Q851278" start="1659" end="1665" title="Arques, Pas-de-Calais" label="Arques"/>
<link wikidata="Q157070" start="1669" end="1677" title="County of Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q208793" start="1834" end="1844" title="Saint-Omer" label="Saint-Omer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="1915" end="1921" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524" start="1947" end="1955" title="April 20" label="April 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="1963" end="1976" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q209344" start="1988" end="2006" title="Sapienza University of Rome" label="University of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526" start="2192" end="2200" title="April 22" label="April 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732255" start="2203" end="2227" title="Battle of Marj al-Saffar (1303)" label="Battle of Marj al-Saffar"/>
<link wikidata="Q293505" start="2274" end="2291" title="Al-Nasir Muhammad" label="Al-Nasir Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414799" start="2346" end="2358" title="Qutlugh-Shah" label="Qutlugh-Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766150" start="2376" end="2390" title="Marj al-Saffar" label="Marj al-Saffar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="2426" end="2434" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703079" start="2468" end="2480" title="Al-Qaryatayn" label="Al-Qaryatayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="2484" end="2489" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="2505" end="2510" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119350" start="2534" end="2545" title="Bab al-Nasr (Cairo)" label="Bab al-Nasr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574" start="2606" end="2612" title="May 16" label="May 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714424" start="2666" end="2674" title="Roxburgh" label="Roxburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="2731" end="2750" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q708175" start="3058" end="3103" title="Richard Óg de Burgh, 2nd Earl of Ulster" label="Richard Óg de Burgh, &amp;quot;the Red Earl&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="3121" end="3128" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q866902" start="3152" end="3160" title="Rothesay Castle" label="Rothesay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788023" start="3165" end="3173" title="Ardgowan Castle" label="Inverkip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579" start="3177" end="3183" title="May 20" label="May 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964075" start="3186" end="3201" title="Treaty of Paris (1303)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="3208" end="3223" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip the Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3227" end="3233" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="3260" end="3294" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward Longshanks, King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="3334" end="3341" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="3357" end="3364" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="3392" end="3400" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q134674" start="3405" end="3412" title="Bayonne" label="Bayonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q228642" start="3515" end="3533" title="Isabella of France" label="Isabella of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="3557" end="3577" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward of Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586" start="3606" end="3612" title="May 26" label="May 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q259040" start="3615" end="3632" title="Elizabeth Richeza of Poland" label="Elizabeth Richeza"/>
<link wikidata="Q54017" start="3667" end="3683" title="Przemysł II" label="King Przemysl II"/>
<link wikidata="Q155581" start="3762" end="3791" title="Wenceslaus II of Bohemia" label="King Wenceslaus II of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5949" start="3825" end="3841" title="Prague Cathedral" label="Prague Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="3865" end="3879" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591" start="3937" end="3943" title="May 31" label="May 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="3946" end="3964" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="4058" end="4071" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="Károly Róbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q359237" start="4104" end="4127" title="Charles Martel of Anjou" label="Charles Martel of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670" start="4430" end="4437" title="June 18" label="June 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323298" start="4456" end="4468" title="Edmund Comyn" label="Edmund Comyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518796" start="4473" end="4485" title="Simon Fraser (died 1306)" label="Simon Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247384" start="4508" end="4521" title="Dumfriesshire" label="Dumfriesshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23360" start="4571" end="4581" title="Cumberland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192896" start="4602" end="4610" title="Carlisle" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668" start="4639" end="4646" title="June 23" label="June 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q606457" start="4649" end="4661" title="Athanasius I of Constantinople" label="Athanasius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="4718" end="4727" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="4758" end="4796" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780" start="4877" end="4885" title="August 8" label="August 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485683" start="4888" end="4909" title="1303 Crete earthquake" label="1303 Crete earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q43244" start="4938" end="4962" title="Lighthouse of Alexandria" label="Lighthouse of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696332" start="4966" end="4971" title="Egypt in the Middle Ages" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q209287" start="4984" end="5010" title="Wonders of the World" label="Seven wonders of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820" start="5014" end="5023" title="August 26" label="August 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q48724683" start="5026" end="5046" title="Siege of Chittorgarh (1303)" label="Siege of Chittorgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q335362" start="5075" end="5090" title="Alauddin Khalji" label="Alauddin Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695769" start="5111" end="5123" title="Chittor Fort" label="Chittor Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="5136" end="5141" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q122" start="5240" end="5246" title="August" label="August"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="5270" end="5292" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="Ferdinand the Summoned"/>
<link wikidata="Q266025" start="5333" end="5348" title="María de Molina" label="María de Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="5374" end="5381" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="5387" end="5394" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q704786" start="5423" end="5435" title="Muhammad III of Granada" label="Muhammad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="5462" end="5469" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q312110" start="5534" end="5550" title="Sancho IV of Castile" label="Sancho the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q222702" start="5579" end="5585" title="Tarifa" label="Tarifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852" start="5617" end="5628" title="September 7" label="September 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q726980" start="5662" end="5682" title="Guillaume de Nogaret" label="Guillaume de Nogaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q116404" start="5764" end="5770" title="Anagni" label="Anagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q794627" start="5793" end="5808" title="Gregory Bicskei" label="Gregory Bicskei"/>
<link wikidata="Q734693" start="5824" end="5833" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Esztergom–Budapest" label="Esztergom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897" start="5944" end="5956" title="September 16" label="September 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886" start="6031" end="6043" title="September 25" label="September 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q24231977" start="6046" end="6070" title="1303 Hongdong earthquake" label="1303 Hongdong earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q72778" start="6109" end="6116" title="Taiyuan" label="Taiyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q73156" start="6121" end="6129" title="Linfen" label="Pingyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q123" start="6165" end="6174" title="September" label="September"/>
<link wikidata="Q37067" start="6185" end="6210" title="Andronikos II Palaiologos" label="Andronikos II Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="6239" end="6253" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q436817" start="6332" end="6345" title="Roger de Flor" label="Roger de Flor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501196" start="6475" end="6490" title="Catalan Company" label="Catalan Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="6505" end="6512" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q136578" start="6667" end="6677" title="megas doux" label="megas doux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927" start="6767" end="6777" title="October 11" label="October 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="6780" end="6798" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q116404" start="6824" end="6830" title="Anagni" label="Anagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q12799209" start="6840" end="6851" title="pontificate" label="pontificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957" start="6867" end="6877" title="October 22" label="October 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065653" start="6887" end="6909" title="1303 papal conclave" label="papal conclave in Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956" start="7020" end="7030" title="October 27" label="October 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q169301" start="7073" end="7089" title="Pope Benedict XI" label="Pope Benedict XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7109" end="7130" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894225" start="7177" end="7205" title="Matteo Rosso Orsini (cardinal)" label="Cardinal Matteo Rosso Orsini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991" start="7209" end="7219" title="November 9" label="November 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044924" start="7280" end="7297" title="Dunfermline Abbey" label="Dunfermline Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="7327" end="7342" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591828" start="7481" end="7487" title="The Lennox" label="Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009428" start="7498" end="7504" title="Drymen" label="Drymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487726" start="7522" end="7536" title="John Botetourt, 1st Baron Botetourt" label="John Botetourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342092" start="7543" end="7551" title="Galloway" label="Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q385010" start="7575" end="7583" title="Knight banneret" label="banneret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438" start="7605" end="7616" title="December 18" label="December 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q169301" start="7619" end="7635" title="Pope Benedict XI" label="Pope Benedict XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q721081" start="7691" end="7703" title="Jean Lemoine" label="Jean Lemoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="7707" end="7713" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q740369" start="7811" end="7823" title="papal legate" label="papal legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414195" start="7878" end="7894" title="Battle of Dimbos" label="Battle of Dimbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036539" start="7927" end="7933" title="tekfur" label="tekfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228826" start="7945" end="7950" title="Prusa (Bithynia)" label="Prusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948420" start="7952" end="7959" title="Orhaneli" label="Adranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607431" start="7961" end="7967" title="Kestel, Bursa" label="Kestel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4474843" start="7973" end="7979" title="Ulubat" label="Ulubat"/>
<link wikidata="Q83100" start="8051" end="8058" title="Osman I" label="Osman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994764" start="8100" end="8109" title="Yenişehir, Bursa" label="Yenişehir"/>
<link wikidata="Q739037" start="8133" end="8139" title="Nicaea" label="Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251546" start="8295" end="8319" title="Mongol invasion of India (1303)" label="Mongol invasion of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="8350" end="8355" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q255546" start="8417" end="8425" title="vanguard" label="vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578" start="8743" end="8749" title="May 19" label="May 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116577" start="8752" end="8760" title="Saw Zein" label="Saw Zein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5996" start="8799" end="8803" title="1330" label="1330"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688" start="8807" end="8814" title="July 12" label="July 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q76884" start="8817" end="8834" title="Hugh de Courtenay, 2nd/10th Earl of Devon" label="Hugh de Courtenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="8844" end="8852" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289" start="8868" end="8872" title="1377" label="1377"/>
<link wikidata="Q204996" start="8876" end="8893" title="Bridget of Sweden" label="Bridget of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261" start="8936" end="8940" title="1373" label="1373"/>
<link wikidata="Q260269" start="8944" end="8956" title="Catherine of Valois–Courtenay" label="Catherine II"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="8981" end="8987" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6080" start="9005" end="9009" title="1346" label="1346"/>
<link wikidata="Q18954241" start="9013" end="9026" title="Henry Ferrers, 2nd Baron Ferrers of Groby" label="Henry Ferrers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072" start="9071" end="9075" title="1343" label="1343"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269688" start="9079" end="9093" title="Hōjō Shigetoki (born 1303)" label="Hōjō Shigetoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q497960" start="9120" end="9126" title="rensho" label="rensho"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004" start="9151" end="9155" title="1333" label="1333"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016555" start="9159" end="9174" title="Marie of Évreux" label="Marie of Évreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937731" start="9195" end="9209" title="House of Capet" label="House of Capet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011" start="9215" end="9219" title="1335" label="1335"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886284" start="9223" end="9241" title="Willem IV of Horne" label="Willem IV of Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396" start="9305" end="9312" title="March 4" label="March 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q295186" start="9316" end="9332" title="Daniel of Moscow" label="Daniel of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509" start="9366" end="9370" title="1261" label="1261"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622656" start="9375" end="9396" title="Theodora Palaiologina (Byzantine empress)" label="Theodora Palaiologina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435" start="9428" end="9432" title="1240" label="1240"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419" start="9436" end="9444" title="March 17" label="March 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494018" start="9447" end="9454" title="Otto IV, Count of Burgundy" label="Otto IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q852111" start="9486" end="9500" title="Anscarids" label="House of Ivrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578" start="9504" end="9510" title="May 19" label="May 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q358325" start="9513" end="9529" title="Ivo of Kermartin" label="Ivo of Kermartin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498" start="9566" end="9570" title="1253" label="1253"/>
<link wikidata="Q2692" start="9574" end="9580" title="July 8" label="July 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q86961" start="9583" end="9602" title="Procopius of Ustyug" label="Procopius of Ustyug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780" start="9639" end="9647" title="August 8" label="August 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357700" start="9650" end="9666" title="Henry of Castile the Senator" label="Henry of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412" start="9701" end="9705" title="1230" label="1230"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782" start="9709" end="9717" title="August 9" label="August 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529201" start="9720" end="9732" title="Sir Thomas Maule" label="Thomas Maule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819" start="9774" end="9783" title="August 25" label="August 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080889" start="9786" end="9792" title="Ninshō" label="Ninshō"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379" start="9833" end="9837" title="1217" label="1217"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852" start="9841" end="9852" title="September 7" label="September 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q794627" start="9855" end="9870" title="Gregory Bicskei" label="Gregory Bicskei"/>
<link wikidata="Q725440" start="9882" end="9889" title="prelate" label="prelate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927" start="9907" end="9917" title="October 11" label="October 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="9920" end="9933" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9947" end="9962" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956" start="9975" end="9985" title="October 27" label="October 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q236970" start="9988" end="10007" title="Beatrice of Castile (1242–1303)" label="Beatrice of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="10026" end="10034" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437" start="10039" end="10043" title="1242" label="1242"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997" start="10047" end="10057" title="November 1" label="November 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q432467" start="10060" end="10081" title="Hugh XIII of Lusignan" label="Hugh XIII of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507" start="10103" end="10107" title="1259" label="1259"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304" start="10111" end="10121" title="December 9" label="December 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326032" start="10124" end="10141" title="Richard Gravesend" label="Richard Gravesend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255226" start="10175" end="10187" title="Drakpa Odzer" label="Drakpa Odzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="10203" end="10208" title="abbot" label="abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236141" start="10213" end="10231" title="Imperial Preceptor" label="Imperial Preceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441" start="10236" end="10240" title="1246" label="1246"/>
<link wikidata="Q447337" start="10244" end="10263" title="Elizabeth of Sicily, Queen of Hungary" label="Elizabeth of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056854" start="10282" end="10289" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1301–1526)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789596" start="10294" end="10301" title="Croatia in personal union with Hungary" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q113644482" start="10314" end="10336" title="Erik Knudsen Skarsholm" label="Erik Knudsen Skarsholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425" start="10369" end="10373" title="1235" label="1235"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639944" start="10377" end="10392" title="Hajib Shakarbar" label="Hajib Shakarbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261" start="10438" end="10442" title="1213" label="1213"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984286" start="10446" end="10462" title="Ibn Abd al-Malik al-Marrakushi" label="Ibn Abd al-Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430" start="10509" end="10513" title="1237" label="1237"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585538" start="10517" end="10534" title="John of St Amand" label="John of St. Amand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937866" start="10582" end="10589" title="Otto VI, Margrave of Brandenburg-Salzwedel" label="Otto VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501" start="10636" end="10640" title="1255" label="1255"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39951" wikidata="Q5619" url="?curid=39951" title="1304">
<text>Year 1304 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCIV]]) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
===January – March===
* January 11 – Messengers from King Edward of England arrive at Kinclaven Castle in Scotland to discuss peace with Scottish noble John Comyn.
* January 18 – In France, King Philip the Fair issues a mandate at Toulouse to halt the threat of a civil war, declaring that &quot;For the good of our realm... we expressly forbid and most strictly prohibit wars, battles, homicides, the burning of towns or houses, assaults or attacks on peasants or those who plow, or doing anything similar to our vassals and subjects, regardless of status or condition, in any place, or in any part of the realm,&quot; and adds that &quot;the rash transgressors of these statutes and inhibitions ought to be punished as disturbers of the peace, regardless of contrary custom, or rather corruption allegedly followed in any part of the said realm.&quot; The action comes after Philip&#x27;s meeting with Franciscan friar Bernard Délicieux concerning the Dominican Inquisition, but the King stops short of halting the Inquisition entirely despite Delicieux&#x27;s claim that there had not been a single heretic among all the Albigensians for many years.
* January 31 – Cardinal Nicolò Albertini de Prato is dispatched by Pope Benedict XI as the papal legate to oversee negotiation of peace between Tuscany, Romagna and the Marca Trevigiana.
* February 9 – War of Scottish Independence: Scottish nobles led by Robert the Bruce and John Comyn (&quot;John the Red&quot;), negotiate a peace treaty with King Edward I of England (&quot;Edward Longshanks&quot;). His terms are accepted, and the Scots submit to English rule. In return, they are granted life and liberty under their old laws and freedom from the forfeiture of their lands. A few prominent nobles are singled out for temporary banishment – among them John de Soules, guardian of Scotland, who is exiled to France. No terms are offered to William Wallace, Edward&#x27;s most wanted enemy, who remains defiantly at large despite every effort of Edward to capture him.
* February 20 – Battle of Happrew: Scottish rebels led by William Wallace and Simon Fraser fight guerilla warfare against King Edward I of England. They defend themselves against a vanguard of English knights at Peebles, in the Scottish Borders. During the skirmish, the Scots are defeated and routed. Wallace and Fraser narrowly escape being captured.
* March 17 – Cardinal Albertini, the papal legate and peacemaker, enters Florence and is granted special powers by the government to facilitate his mission.
* March 23 – John I of Arborea, nicknamed &quot;Chiano&quot; and the ruler of western Sardinia as Judge of Arborea dies. He is succeeded by his sons Marianus III and Andrew

===April – June===
* April 1 – Count Albert I of Gorizia dies and is succeeded by his son Henry III.
* May 11 – Mahmud Ghazan, Mongol ruler of the Ilkhanate in the Middle East, dies and is succeeded by his brother Öljaitü Qaghan.
* June 5 – Abu Said Uthman I, Zenata Berber ruler of Tlemcen, dies and is succeeded by his son Abu Zayyan I.

===July – September===
* July 7 – Pope Benedict XI dies after an 8-month pontificate in Perugia.
* July 17 – A papal conclave, with 15 of the 19 living Roman Catholic cardinals, assembles at Perugia to elect a successor to Pope Benedict XI, who had died 10 days earlier. The conclave will be deadlocked for almost a year until Clement V receives the necessary two-thirds majority on June 5, 1305.
* July 24 – Siege of Stirling Castle: King Edward I of England captures the Scottish rebel stronghold at Stirling. The castle is for four months bombarded by twelve siege engines. During the siege, Edward orders his engineer, Master James of St. George, to build a massive engine called the Warwolf. Eventually, William Oliphant and his garrison surrender.
* July 27 – Andrey III Aleksandorovich, Kievan nobleman and Grand Prince of the Principality of Grand Duchy of Vladimir dies and is succeeded by his uncle Mikhail of Tver.
* August 8 – Treaty of Torrellas: The 18-year-old King Ferdinand IV of Castile signs a peace with King James II of Aragon (&quot;James the Just&quot;). In the terms, James agrees to restore the Kingdom of Murcia to Castile, except for Alicante, Elche, Orihuela, and lands north of the Segura River. In return for extensive patrimony, Prince Alfonso de la Cerda renounces his claim to the Castilian throne, ending a conflict that has disturbed the tranquility of the realm for nearly 30 years. 
* August 11 – Battle of Zierikzee: A French-Hollandic fleet (some 50 galleys) supported by Genoese ships led by Admiral Rainier I defeats the Flemish ships near Zierikzee. During the battle, the Flemish commander Guy of Namur is captured, and his fleet (which consists of Flemish, English, Hanseatic, Spanish and Swedish ships) is annihilated.
* August 18 – Battle of Mons-en-Pévèle: French forces (some 13,000 men) led by King Philip IV of France (&quot;Philip the Fair&quot;) defeat a Flemish army at Mons-en-Pévèle. During the battle, the Flemish, led by William of Jülich &quot;the Younger&quot;) are forced to retreat to Lille. William is killed, and the French lose the Oriflamme (&quot;Golden Flame&quot;), the battle standard of Philip.
* August
** Flemish forces under John II, Duke of Brabant (&quot;the Peaceful&quot;) and Guy of Dampierre occupy Zeeland and Holland. In response, John II, Count of Holland, count of Holland, recovers the Zeeland and Holland, and restores his authority, but dies on August 22.
** Sultan Alauddin Khalji orders a second invasion of Gujarat, which results in the annexation of the Kingdom of Vaghela into the Delhi Sultanate.
* September 2 – Brinolfo Algotsson, the Swedish Catholic Bishop of Skara is rewarded for his financial assistance in rebuilding Norway&#x27;s Stavanger Cathedral, as a Norwegian ship arrives at Skara. He is presented a holy relic, what is purported to be a thorn from the crown of thorns worn by Jesus Christ at the Crucifixion. In a solemn profession led by Algotsson, the thorn is transported to the Skara Cathedral. 
* September 22 – Thomas of Corbridge, England&#x27;s powerful Archbishop of York, dies after a little more than four years in office. The office is vacant for several months, and leads to the resignation of Lord Chancellor William Greenfield to become the new Bishop.

===October – December===
* October 5 – Treaty of Treviso: After a dispute over salt works, the Italian commune of Padua and Venice sign a peace treaty, ending the Salt War. Venice establishes a salt monopoly and sells salt rights to merchants.
* October 24 – Ottoman-Turkish forces led by Sultan Osman I conquer the ancient city of Ephesus from the Byzantine Empire, massacring and deporting its native population.
* November 12 – King Edward I summons the English Parliament for the first time in more than two years.
* December 4 – William Greenfield, Lord Chancellor of England, is elected Archbishop of York by the church leaders in the diocese, then sets off for Rome to receive the consecration of the office by the Pope.
* December 29 – William de Hamilton is nominated Lord Chancellor of England, the highest office at the time for a member of Parliament, by King Edward I. He takes office on January 16.
* December – Roger de Flor, Italian nobleman and adventurer, settles with the Catalan Company in Gallipoli and other towns in the southern part of Thrace and visits Constantinople to demand payment for his forces. He lives at the expense of the local population and uses the city as a base for his marauding raids in the surrounding area.

=== By place ===
==== Byzantine Empire ====
* Battle of Skafida: Emperor Michael IX Palaiologos sends a Byzantine expeditionary force (some 10,000 men) to halt the expansion of the Bulgarians in Thrace. The two armies meet near Sozopol on the Bulgarian Black Sea Coast. During the battle, the Bulgarian army led by Tsar Theodore Svetoslav is defeated and routed. The Byzantines, infatuated with the chase of the retreating enemy, crowd on a bridge – which possibly is sabotaged, and break down. The Bulgarians capture many Byzantine soldiers and some nobles are held for ransom. Svetoslav secures his territorial gains and stabilizes himself as the sole ruler of the Bulgarian Empire (until 1322).
* The Byzantines lose the island of Chios, in the Aegean Sea, to the Genoese under Admiral Benedetto I Zaccaria. He establishes an autonomous lordship and justifies the act to the Byzantine court as necessary to prevent the island from being captured by Turkish pirates. Benedetto is granted the island as a fief for a period of 10 years.

==== Asia ====
* Ambassadors from the Mongol rulers of Central Asia and the Yuan Dynasty announce to Toqta Khan, Mongol ruler of the Golden Horde, their general peace proposal. Toqta accepts the supremacy of Emperor Temür Khan and all yams (postal relays) and commercial networks across the Mongol khanates reopen. In response, Toqta solidifies his rule upon the Rus&#x27; princes, who pledge allegiance to him at an assembly in Pereyaslavl.

=== By topic ===

==== Architecture ====
* The construction of Ypres Cloth Hall, in Ypres (modern Belgium), is completed.

== Births ==
* January 9 – Hōjō Takatoki, Japanese nobleman and regent (d. 1333)
* February 16 – Tugh Temür (or Wenzong), Mongol emperor (d. 1332)
* February 24 – Ibn Battuta, Moroccan scholar and explorer (d. 1369)
* May 2 – Margaret Mortimer, Anglo-Norman noblewoman (d. 1337)
* April 9 – Venturino of Bergamo, Italian Dominican friar and preacher (d. 1346)
* June 6 – Francesco Albergotti, Italian nobleman and jurist (d. 1376)
* July 20 – Francesco Petrarca, Italian historian and poet (d. 1374)
* October 4 – John Beauchamp, English peer and knight (d. 1343)
* October 17 
** Eleanor de Bohun, English noblewoman (d. 1363)
** James Butler, Irish nobleman and knight (d. 1338)
* Engelbert III, German archbishop (House of La Marck) (d. 1368)
* Gerard II de Lisle, English nobleman, peer and knight (d. 1360)
* Ibn al-Shatir, Syrian astronomer, engineer and writer (d. 1375)
* Joan of Valois, French noblewoman and princess (d. 1363)
* John of Aragon, Aragonese archbishop and patriarch (d. 1334)
* Lodewijk Heyligen, Flemish monk and music theorist (d. 1361)
* Magnus I (&quot;Magnus the Pious&quot;), German nobleman and knight (d. 1369)
* Marcus of Viterbo, Italian cardinal and papal legate (d. 1369)
* Marie of Luxemburg, queen of France and Navarre (d. 1324)
* Walram of Jülich, Dutch nobleman and archbishop (d. 1349)
* Walter VI, French nobleman, knight and constable (d. 1356)
* William de Clinton, English nobleman and admiral (d. 1354)

== Deaths ==
* January 13 – Ichijō Uchisane, Japanese nobleman (b. 1276) 
* February 14 – Guy of Ibelin, Outremer nobleman (House of Ibelin)
* March 6 – Fujiwara no Kimiko, Japanese empress consort (b. 1232)
* March 7 – Bartolomeo I della Scala, Italian nobleman and knight
* March 23 – John I (&quot;Chiano&quot;), Sardinian ruler (Judge of Arborea)
* March 26 – Wigbold von Holte, German archbishop and diplomat 
* April 1 – Albert I, Austrian nobleman, knight and co-ruler (b. 1240)
* April 11 – Maud de Lacy, Norman noblewoman (&quot;suo jure&quot;) (b. 1230)
* April 27 – Pedro Armengol, Spanish nobleman and priest (b. 1238)
* May 11 – Ghazan Khan, Mongol ruler of the Ilkhanate (b. 1271)
* May 23 – Jehan de Lescurel, French composer-poet and writer
* June 1 – Giovanni Pelingotto, Italian Third order Franciscan and hermit (b. 1240)
* June 5 – Abu Said Uthman I, Zenata Berber ruler of Tlemcen 
* July 7 – Benedict XI, pope of the Catholic Church (b. 1240)
* July 17 – Edmund Mortimer, English nobleman (b. 1251)
* July 27 – Andrey III, Kievan nobleman and Grand Prince
* August 10 – Martin of Dacia, Danish theologian (b. 1240)
* August 16 – John III, Dutch nobleman and knight (b. 1249)
* August 17 – Go-Fukakusa, Japanese emperor (b. 1243)
* August 18 – William of Jülich, Flemish nobleman (b. 1275)
* August 22 – John II, Dutch nobleman and knight (b. 1247)
* September 22 – Thomas of Corbridge, English archbishop
* September 27 – John de Warenne, English nobleman (b. 1231)
* September 28 – Elisabeth of Kalisz, Polish noblewoman (b. 1259)
* September 29 – Agnes of Brandenburg, Danish queen (b. 1257)
* December 5 – John of Pontoise, English archdeacon and bishop
* December 23 – Matilda of Habsburg, German co-ruler (b. 1253)
* Fernando Rodríguez de Castro, Spanish nobleman and knight
* Henry I, German nobleman and knight (House of Schaumburg)
* Henry II of Rodez, French nobleman and troubadour (b. 1236)
* João Afonso Telo, Portuguese nobleman, knight and diplomat
* Peter of Auvergne, French philosopher, theologian and writer
* Robert de Brus, Scoto-Norman nobleman and knight (b. 1243)
* Wang Yun, Chinese official, politician, poet and writer (b. 1228)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5619" start="5" end="9" title="1304" label="1304"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619" start="11" end="36" title="1304" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCIV]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q217015" start="44" end="75" title="leap year starting on Wednesday" label="leap year starting on Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="83" end="98" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247" start="138" end="148" title="January 11" label="January 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q17844440" start="200" end="216" title="Kinclaven Castle" label="Kinclaven Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="220" end="228" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351307" start="266" end="276" title="John Comyn III of Badenoch" label="John Comyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265" start="280" end="290" title="January 18" label="January 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="304" end="324" title="Philip IV of France" label="King Philip the Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="345" end="353" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759654" start="1035" end="1052" title="Bernard Délicieux" label="Bernard Délicieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289" start="1269" end="1279" title="January 31" label="January 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q574420" start="1291" end="1307" title="Nicolò Albertini" label="Nicolò Albertini"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377" start="1311" end="1316" title="Prato" label="Prato"/>
<link wikidata="Q169301" start="1334" end="1350" title="Pope Benedict XI" label="Pope Benedict XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q740369" start="1358" end="1370" title="papal legate" label="papal legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324" start="1456" end="1466" title="February 9" label="February 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242848" start="1469" end="1497" title="First War of Scottish Independence" label="War of Scottish Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="1522" end="1538" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351307" start="1543" end="1553" title="John Comyn III of Badenoch" label="John Comyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="1617" end="1636" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702247" start="1923" end="1937" title="John de Soules (Guardian of Scotland)" label="John de Soules"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="1951" end="1959" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q237131" start="1978" end="1984" title="France in the Middle Ages" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="2010" end="2025" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344" start="2140" end="2151" title="February 20" label="February 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888767" start="2154" end="2171" title="Battle of Happrew" label="Battle of Happrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518796" start="2216" end="2228" title="Simon Fraser (died 1306)" label="Simon Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="2265" end="2284" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011507" start="2350" end="2357" title="Peebles" label="Peebles"/>
<link wikidata="Q211113" start="2366" end="2382" title="Scottish Borders" label="Scottish Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419" start="2493" end="2501" title="March 17" label="March 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="2564" end="2572" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445" start="2650" end="2658" title="March 23" label="March 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437288" start="2661" end="2678" title="John of Arborea" label="John I of Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279624" start="2746" end="2762" title="Judge of Arborea" label="Judge of Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437373" start="2797" end="2809" title="Marianus III of Arborea" label="Marianus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155335" start="2814" end="2820" title="Andrew of Arborea" label="Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510" start="2843" end="2850" title="April 1" label="April 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q677836" start="2859" end="2878" title="Albert I of Gorizia" label="Albert I of Gorizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408343" start="2912" end="2921" title="Henry III, Count of Gorizia" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558" start="2925" end="2931" title="May 11" label="May 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q334496" start="2934" end="2947" title="Ghazan" label="Mahmud Ghazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="2969" end="2978" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q297065" start="3036" end="3050" title="Öljaitü" label="Öljaitü Qaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622" start="3054" end="3060" title="June 5" label="June 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q335327" start="3063" end="3080" title="Abu Said Uthman I" label="Abu Said Uthman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030701" start="3105" end="3112" title="Kingdom of Tlemcen" label="Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11903919" start="3147" end="3159" title="Abu Zayyan I" label="Abu Zayyan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2694" start="3187" end="3193" title="July 7" label="July 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q169301" start="3196" end="3212" title="Pope Benedict XI" label="Pope Benedict XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q12799209" start="3235" end="3246" title="pontificate" label="pontificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437" start="3250" end="3257" title="Perugia" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729" start="3261" end="3268" title="July 17" label="July 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445978" start="3273" end="3287" title="1304–1305 papal conclave" label="papal conclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437" start="3353" end="3360" title="Perugia" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="3489" end="3498" title="Pope Clement V" label="Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721" start="3561" end="3568" title="July 24" label="July 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q11960495" start="3571" end="3595" title="Sieges of Stirling Castle" label="Siege of Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="3602" end="3621" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q182923" start="3664" end="3672" title="Stirling" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="3724" end="3736" title="siege engine" label="siege engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681343" start="3792" end="3811" title="James of Saint George" label="James of St. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681822" start="3850" end="3857" title="Warwolf" label="Warwolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016336" start="3871" end="3887" title="William Oliphant (governor of Stirling Castle)" label="William Oliphant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719" start="3918" end="3925" title="July 27" label="July 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296177" start="3928" end="3954" title="Andrey of Gorodets" label="Andrey III Aleksandorovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q83546" start="4012" end="4035" title="Vladimir-Suzdal" label="Grand Duchy of Vladimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q380373" start="4071" end="4086" title="Mikhail of Tver" label="Mikhail of Tver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780" start="4090" end="4098" title="August 8" label="August 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469708" start="4101" end="4120" title="Treaty of Torrellas" label="Treaty of Torrellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="4143" end="4166" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="Ferdinand IV of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q312735" start="4191" end="4209" title="James II of Aragon" label="James II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164500" start="4282" end="4299" title="Kingdom of Murcia" label="Kingdom of Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="4303" end="4310" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11959" start="4323" end="4331" title="Alicante" label="Alicante"/>
<link wikidata="Q10509" start="4333" end="4338" title="Elche" label="Elche"/>
<link wikidata="Q487786" start="4340" end="4348" title="Orihuela" label="Orihuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q18612" start="4373" end="4385" title="Segura River" label="Segura River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156930" start="4429" end="4448" title="Alfonso de la Cerda" label="Alfonso de la Cerda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778" start="4584" end="4593" title="August 11" label="August 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431866" start="4596" end="4615" title="Battle of Zierikzee" label="Battle of Zierikzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q950631" start="4702" end="4711" title="Rainier I of Monaco, Lord of Cagnes" label="Rainier I"/>
<link wikidata="Q81076" start="4743" end="4752" title="Zierikzee" label="Zierikzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q328005" start="4795" end="4807" title="Guy of Namur" label="Guy of Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826" start="4928" end="4937" title="August 18" label="August 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007565" start="4940" end="4964" title="Battle of Mons-en-Pévèle" label="Battle of Mons-en-Pévèle"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="5010" end="5029" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q744082" start="5085" end="5099" title="Mons-en-Pévèle" label="Mons-en-Pévèle"/>
<link wikidata="Q195942" start="5140" end="5157" title="William of Jülich" label="William of Jülich"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="5208" end="5213" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q843290" start="5258" end="5267" title="Oriflamme" label="Oriflamme"/>
<link wikidata="Q602300" start="5300" end="5315" title="War flag" label="battle standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q122" start="5329" end="5335" title="August" label="August"/>
<link wikidata="Q703470" start="5360" end="5384" title="John II, Duke of Brabant" label="John II, Duke of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q28531" start="5416" end="5432" title="Guy, Count of Flanders" label="Guy of Dampierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945565" start="5440" end="5447" title="County of Zeeland" label="Zeeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q762943" start="5452" end="5459" title="County of Holland" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q182028" start="5474" end="5499" title="John II, Count of Holland" label="John II, Count of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828" start="5593" end="5602" title="August 22" label="August 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q335362" start="5614" end="5629" title="Alauddin Khalji" label="Alauddin Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5639" end="5665" title="Alauddin Khalji&amp;#x27;s conquest of Gujarat#1304 invasion" label="second invasion of Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908475" start="5706" end="5724" title="Vaghela dynasty" label="Kingdom of Vaghela"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="5734" end="5749" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857" start="5753" end="5764" title="September 2" label="September 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q332860" start="5767" end="5785" title="Brinolfo Algotsson" label="Brinolfo Algotsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q876632" start="5808" end="5823" title="Bishop of Skara" label="Bishop of Skara"/>
<link wikidata="Q124504" start="5893" end="5912" title="Stavanger Cathedral" label="Stavanger Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5970" end="5980" title="relic#Christianity" label="holy relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q201851" start="6008" end="6013" title="Thorns, spines, and prickles" label="thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127583" start="6023" end="6038" title="crown of thorns" label="crown of thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="6047" end="6059" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="6067" end="6078" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="Crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q648054" start="6153" end="6168" title="Skara Cathedral" label="Skara Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889" start="6173" end="6185" title="September 22" label="September 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795515" start="6188" end="6207" title="Thomas of Corbridge" label="Thomas of Corbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363910" start="6233" end="6251" title="Archbishop of York" label="Archbishop of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930" start="6467" end="6476" title="October 5" label="October 5"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6479" end="6496" title="Salt War (1304)#War and treaty" label="Treaty of Treviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q244326" start="6519" end="6529" title="Salt evaporation pond" label="salt works"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="6554" end="6559" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="6564" end="6570" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468818" start="6603" end="6611" title="Salt War (1304)" label="Salt War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2955" start="6686" end="6696" title="October 24" label="October 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q83100" start="6736" end="6743" title="Osman I" label="Osman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q47611" start="6772" end="6779" title="Ephesus" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="6789" end="6805" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986" start="6857" end="6868" title="November 12" label="November 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="6871" end="6884" title="Edward I of England" label="King Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310" start="6961" end="6971" title="December 4" label="December 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010166" start="6974" end="6992" title="William Greenfield" label="William Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="6994" end="7020" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363910" start="7033" end="7051" title="Archbishop of York" label="Archbishop of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862" start="7170" end="7181" title="December 29" label="December 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010754" start="7184" end="7203" title="William Hamilton (Lord Chancellor)" label="William de Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="7217" end="7243" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="7307" end="7320" title="Edward I of England" label="King Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q126" start="7355" end="7363" title="December" label="December"/>
<link wikidata="Q436817" start="7366" end="7379" title="Roger de Flor" label="Roger de Flor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501196" start="7431" end="7446" title="Catalan Company" label="Catalan Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="7450" end="7459" title="Gallipoli" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="7500" end="7506" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="7518" end="7532" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094999" start="7739" end="7756" title="Battle of Skafida" label="Battle of Skafida"/>
<link wikidata="Q37098" start="7766" end="7788" title="Michael IX Palaiologos" label="Michael IX Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="7888" end="7894" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q271925" start="7921" end="7928" title="Sozopol" label="Sozopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142729" start="7936" end="7961" title="Bulgarian Black Sea Coast" label="Bulgarian Black Sea Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q703842" start="8013" end="8031" title="Theodore Svetoslav of Bulgaria" label="Theodore Svetoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q420759" start="8360" end="8376" title="Second Bulgarian Empire" label="Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5770" start="8384" end="8388" title="1322" label="1322"/>
<link wikidata="Q160483" start="8427" end="8432" title="Chios" label="Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="8441" end="8451" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618802" start="8482" end="8502" title="Benedetto I Zaccaria" label="Benedetto I Zaccaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680233" start="8522" end="8541" title="Lordship of Chios" label="autonomous lordship"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="8786" end="8798" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="8807" end="8819" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q470312" start="8832" end="8842" title="Toqta" label="Toqta Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="8864" end="8876" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q8468" start="8947" end="8957" title="Temür Khan" label="Temür Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369507" start="8966" end="8986" title="Yam (route)" label="yams (postal relays)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261908" start="9160" end="9171" title="Principality of Pereyaslavl" label="Pereyaslavl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923610" start="9237" end="9253" title="Ypres Cloth Hall" label="Ypres Cloth Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q102728" start="9258" end="9263" title="Ypres" label="Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="9272" end="9279" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238" start="9312" end="9321" title="January 9" label="January 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355334" start="9324" end="9337" title="Hōjō Takatoki" label="Hōjō Takatoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="9348" end="9356" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="9361" end="9367" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004" start="9372" end="9376" title="1333" label="1333"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342" start="9380" end="9391" title="February 16" label="February 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q8655" start="9394" end="9404" title="Jayaatu Khan Tugh Temür" label="Tugh Temür"/>
<link wikidata="Q6001" start="9438" end="9442" title="1332" label="1332"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355" start="9446" end="9457" title="February 24" label="February 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="9460" end="9471" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Battuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211" start="9507" end="9511" title="1369" label="1369"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545" start="9515" end="9520" title="May 2" label="May 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759745" start="9523" end="9540" title="Margaret Mortimer, Baroness Berkeley" label="Margaret Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039" start="9570" end="9574" title="1337" label="1337"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504" start="9578" end="9585" title="April 9" label="April 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q4009777" start="9588" end="9608" title="Venturino of Bergamo" label="Venturino of Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6080" start="9651" end="9655" title="1346" label="1346"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620" start="9659" end="9665" title="June 6" label="June 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q94875312" start="9668" end="9688" title="Francesco Albergotti" label="Francesco Albergotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282" start="9722" end="9726" title="1376" label="1376"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728" start="9730" end="9737" title="July 20" label="July 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401" start="9740" end="9758" title="Petrarch" label="Francesco Petrarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269" start="9791" end="9795" title="1374" label="1374"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929" start="9799" end="9808" title="October 4" label="October 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265481" start="9811" end="9825" title="John Beauchamp, 2nd Baron Beauchamp of Somerset" label="John Beauchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072" start="9855" end="9859" title="1343" label="1343"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962" start="9863" end="9873" title="October 17" label="October 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354426" start="9878" end="9894" title="Eleanor de Bohun, Countess of Ormonde" label="Eleanor de Bohun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176" start="9919" end="9923" title="1363" label="1363"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130586" start="9928" end="9940" title="James Butler, 1st Earl of Ormond" label="James Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044" start="9972" end="9976" title="1338" label="1338"/>
<link wikidata="Q69947" start="9980" end="9993" title="Engelbert III of the Marck, Archbishop of Cologne" label="Engelbert III"/>
<link wikidata="Q567658" start="10014" end="10031" title="House of La Marck" label="House of La Marck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207" start="10037" end="10041" title="1368" label="1368"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550209" start="10045" end="10063" title="Gerard Lisle, 1st Baron Lisle" label="Gerard II de Lisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150" start="10103" end="10107" title="1360" label="1360"/>
<link wikidata="Q718169" start="10111" end="10124" title="Ibn al-Shatir" label="Ibn al-Shatir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277" start="10169" end="10173" title="1375" label="1375"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087225" start="10177" end="10191" title="Joan of Valois, Countess of Beaumont" label="Joan of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010109" start="10236" end="10250" title="John of Aragon (patriarch)" label="John of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007" start="10291" end="10295" title="1334" label="1334"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324856" start="10299" end="10316" title="Lodewijk Heyligen" label="Lodewijk Heyligen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159" start="10354" end="10358" title="1361" label="1361"/>
<link wikidata="Q658249" start="10362" end="10370" title="Magnus I, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Magnus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756219" start="10442" end="10459" title="Marcus of Viterbo" label="Marcus of Viterbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q740369" start="10482" end="10494" title="papal legate" label="papal legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q231798" start="10507" end="10525" title="Marie of Luxembourg, Queen of France" label="Marie of Luxemburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q237131" start="10536" end="10542" title="France in the Middle Ages" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="10547" end="10554" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773" start="10559" end="10563" title="1324" label="1324"/>
<link wikidata="Q95402" start="10567" end="10583" title="Walram of Jülich" label="Walram of Jülich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090" start="10619" end="10623" title="1349" label="1349"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335401" start="10627" end="10636" title="Walter VI, Count of Brienne" label="Walter VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130" start="10680" end="10684" title="1356" label="1356"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610117" start="10688" end="10706" title="William de Clinton, Earl of Huntingdon" label="William de Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118" start="10741" end="10745" title="1354" label="1354"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255" start="10763" end="10773" title="January 13" label="January 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147662" start="10776" end="10791" title="Ichijō Uchisane" label="Ichijō Uchisane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530" start="10815" end="10819" title="1276" label="1276"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332" start="10824" end="10835" title="February 14" label="February 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553728" start="10838" end="10851" title="Guy of Ibelin (died 1304)" label="Guy of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142429" start="10872" end="10887" title="House of Ibelin" label="House of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399" start="10891" end="10898" title="March 6" label="March 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507518" start="10901" end="10919" title="Fujiwara no Kimiko" label="Fujiwara no Kimiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418" start="10950" end="10954" title="1232" label="1232"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394" start="10958" end="10965" title="March 7" label="March 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q733418" start="10968" end="10992" title="Bartolomeo I della Scala" label="Bartolomeo I della Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445" start="11024" end="11032" title="March 23" label="March 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437288" start="11035" end="11041" title="John of Arborea" label="John I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279624" start="11081" end="11097" title="Judge of Arborea" label="Judge of Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456" start="11101" end="11109" title="March 26" label="March 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q896389" start="11112" end="11129" title="Wigbold von Holte" label="Wigbold von Holte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510" start="11165" end="11172" title="April 1" label="April 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q677836" start="11175" end="11183" title="Albert I of Gorizia" label="Albert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435" start="11228" end="11232" title="1240" label="1240"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501" start="11236" end="11244" title="April 11" label="April 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851875" start="11247" end="11259" title="Maud de Lacy, Baroness Geneville" label="Maud de Lacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699324" start="11286" end="11294" title="suo jure" label="suo jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412" start="11306" end="11310" title="1230" label="1230"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533" start="11314" end="11322" title="April 27" label="April 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931293" start="11325" end="11339" title="Pedro Armengol" label="Pedro Armengol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433" start="11373" end="11377" title="1238" label="1238"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558" start="11381" end="11387" title="May 11" label="May 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q334496" start="11390" end="11401" title="Ghazan" label="Ghazan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="11423" end="11432" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523" start="11437" end="11441" title="1271" label="1271"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583" start="11445" end="11451" title="May 23" label="May 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q864596" start="11454" end="11471" title="Jehan de Lescurel" label="Jehan de Lescurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625" start="11507" end="11513" title="June 1" label="June 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q26246968" start="11516" end="11535" title="Giovanni Pelingotto" label="Giovanni Pelingotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="11572" end="11578" title="hermit" label="hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622" start="11591" end="11597" title="June 5" label="June 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q335327" start="11600" end="11617" title="Abu Said Uthman I" label="Abu Said Uthman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030701" start="11642" end="11649" title="Kingdom of Tlemcen" label="Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2694" start="11653" end="11659" title="July 7" label="July 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q169301" start="11662" end="11673" title="Pope Benedict XI" label="Benedict XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="11687" end="11702" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729" start="11715" end="11722" title="July 17" label="July 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240022" start="11725" end="11740" title="Edmund Mortimer, 2nd Baron Mortimer of Wigmore" label="Edmund Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494" start="11763" end="11767" title="1251" label="1251"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719" start="11771" end="11778" title="July 27" label="July 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296177" start="11781" end="11791" title="Andrey of Gorodets" label="Andrey III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779" start="11828" end="11837" title="August 10" label="August 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777109" start="11840" end="11855" title="Martin of Dacia" label="Martin of Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812" start="11887" end="11896" title="August 16" label="August 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305573" start="11899" end="11907" title="John III, Lord of Renesse" label="John III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485" start="11939" end="11943" title="1249" label="1249"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827" start="11947" end="11956" title="August 17" label="August 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q349246" start="11959" end="11970" title="Emperor Go-Fukakusa" label="Go-Fukakusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438" start="11993" end="11997" title="1243" label="1243"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826" start="12001" end="12010" title="August 18" label="August 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q195942" start="12013" end="12030" title="William of Jülich" label="William of Jülich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529" start="12053" end="12057" title="1275" label="1275"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828" start="12061" end="12070" title="August 22" label="August 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q182028" start="12073" end="12080" title="John II, Count of Hainaut" label="John II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482" start="12112" end="12116" title="1247" label="1247"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889" start="12120" end="12132" title="September 22" label="September 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795515" start="12135" end="12154" title="Thomas of Corbridge" label="Thomas of Corbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884" start="12177" end="12189" title="September 27" label="September 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q976367" start="12192" end="12207" title="John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey" label="John de Warenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417" start="12230" end="12234" title="1231" label="1231"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883" start="12238" end="12250" title="September 28" label="September 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361596" start="12253" end="12272" title="Elisabeth of Kalisz" label="Elisabeth of Kalisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507" start="12296" end="12300" title="1259" label="1259"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882" start="12304" end="12316" title="September 29" label="September 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q262204" start="12319" end="12339" title="Agnes of Brandenburg" label="Agnes of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504" start="12358" end="12362" title="1257" label="1257"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300" start="12366" end="12376" title="December 5" label="December 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265823" start="12379" end="12395" title="John of Pontoise" label="John of Pontoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2676" start="12429" end="12440" title="December 23" label="December 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635513" start="12443" end="12462" title="Matilda of Habsburg" label="Matilda of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498" start="12484" end="12488" title="1253" label="1253"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006087" start="12492" end="12520" title="Fernando Rodríguez de Castro (died 1304)" label="Fernando Rodríguez de Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q822831" start="12552" end="12559" title="Henry I, Count of Holstein-Rendsburg" label="Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915398" start="12589" end="12608" title="House of Schaumburg" label="House of Schaumburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q681049" start="12612" end="12629" title="Henry II of Rodez" label="Henry II of Rodez"/>
<link wikidata="Q186370" start="12651" end="12661" title="troubadour" label="troubadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427" start="12666" end="12670" title="1236" label="1236"/>
<link wikidata="Q15354395" start="12674" end="12690" title="João Afonso Telo, 1st Count of Barcelos" label="João Afonso Telo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081039" start="12735" end="12752" title="Peter of Auvergne" label="Peter of Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772833" start="12798" end="12812" title="Robert de Brus, 6th Lord of Annandale" label="Robert de Brus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967749" start="12859" end="12867" title="Wang Yun (Yuan dynasty)" label="Wang Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410" start="12919" end="12923" title="1228" label="1228"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39952" wikidata="Q5624" url="?curid=39952" title="1305">
<text>Year 1305 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCV]]) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
===January – March===
* January 12 – The marriage of Bastam, the 8-year-old son (and eldest child) of the Ikhanate ruler of Iran, Oljaitu Khan, to Uljay Qutlugh Khatun, the 7-year-old daughter and the only surviving child of the previous Ikhanate, the late Ghazan Khan, takes place in Tabriz. The betrothal of the two children had been arranged by Ghazan and Öljaitü on September 17, 1303. 
* January 16 – William de Hamilton is formally invested as Lord Chancellor, the highest-ranking elected official at the time in England.
* January 23 – Henry II Kőszegi, the Ban of Slavonia, completes his conquest of Croatian territory in Požega and Valkó, and issues a charter of annexation from his encampment at Valkószentgyörgy.
* February 26 – In Spain, King James II of Aragon and King Ferdinand IV of Castile have a summit at the Monastery of Santa María de Huerta in Castile. Attending also from Castile are Ferdinand&#x27;s uncle, Prince John; Juan Núñez II de Lara of the House of Lara; Ferdinand&#x27;s cousin Juan Manuel; and Prince Afonso of Portugal.
* February 28 – The 52nd English Parliament assembles.
* March 19 – Amir Chupan, the Duke of Yi, is betrothed to Dowlandi Khatun, the daughter of Öljaitü.
* March 20 – King Edward dissolves the 52nd Parliament.
* March 25 – Juan Manuel of Castile is made Lord of Alarcón.

===April – June===
* April 30 – Byzantine Emperor Michael IX Palaiologos invites Roger de Flor, Italian nobleman and adventurer, to Adrianople and has him assassinated there. Along with de Flor, 300 horsemen and some 1,000 foot soldiers who accompanied him are killed. The plan is executed by Alan mercenaries, who at that time are enlisted in the Byzantine army. The murder of the commander of the Catalan Company does not have the expected results. Not only is the Company not disbanded, but its attacks on Byzantine territory becomes more severe. The period of destruction in Macedonia and Thrace after the murder of de Flor becomes known as the &quot;Catalan Revenge&quot;. 
* May 19 – In Spain, the Treaty of Elche is signed between King James II of Aragon and King Ferdinand IV of Castile to revise the borders set out nine months earlier in the Treaty of Torrellas.
* June 5 – Pope Clement V, formerly the Archbishop of Bordeaux, succeeds Pope Benedict XI as the 195th pontiff of the Catholic Church. He will reign until 1314. 
* June 20 – Öljaitü, the new Mongol Ikhanate, marries Qutlughshah Khatun, daughter of the Kerait Emir Irinjin. 
* June 21 – At 14 years old, Wenceslaus III becomes ruler of Hungary, Bohemia, and Poland upon the death at age 33 of his father, King Wenceslaus II. 
* June 27 – In recognition of the marriage of his daughter to Öljaitü the Mongol Ikhanate, Mongol Irinjin is appointed Viceroy of Anatolia.

===July – September===
* July 10 – Battle of Apros: Byzantine forces (some 6,000 men) under Michael IX Palaiologos, consisting of a large contingent of Alans and Turcopoles (Christianized Turks), attack the Catalan Company near Apros. Michael orders a general cavalry charge, but the Turcopoles desert &quot;en bloc&quot; to the Catalans. During the battle, the Byzantines are defeated (with many losses from the crossbowmen) and Michael is injured but escapes the field.
* July 15 – King Edward of England summons a new Parliament, to assemble on September 15.
* August 3 – William Wallace, Scottish rebel leader and knight, is captured near Glasgow at Robroyston, by English troops led by John de Menteith. He is transported to London and led, crowned mockingly with laurel, in procession to Westminster Hall. 
* August 23 – After a three-week trial at Westminster, William Wallace is convicted of treason and of atrocities against civilians in war. After the trial, he is dragged through the streets of Smithfield in London and hanged, drawn and quartered – strangled by hanging – but cut down while still alive, emasculated, disemboweled (with his bowels burned before him), beheaded, and then cut into four parts. Wallace&#x27;s head is placed on a spike above the London Bridge, and his limbs are displayed separately, in Newcastle, Berwick, Stirling, and Perth.
* September 15 – King Edward I of England issues ordinances for the government of the Kingdom of Scotland. King Edward issues the first commission of Trailbaston – which empowers him to appoint judicial commissions to punish crimes (such as homicide, theft, arson, and rape) and certain trespasses. Edward adds also conspiracy to the list of presentments.
* September 19 – At Tabriz (now in Iran) Öljaitü the Mongol Ikhanate, receives the Mongol ambassador from Yuan dynasty China.

===October – December===
* October 9 – King Wenceslaus III marries Viola Elizabeth of Teschen, daughter of Duke Mieszko I, and abandons his claim to Hungary in favor of Otto III of Bavaria. Meanwhile, Wladyslaw II the Elbow-High, claimant to the Polish throne, begins conquering Polish territories.
* November 24 – In India, Mahalakadeva, King of Malwa, is killed while attempting to flee the invaders from the Delhi Sultanate. Ayn al-Mulk Multani takes control of the kingdom as the Sultanate&#x27;s Governor of Malwa. 
* December 8 – At Tabriz, the Mongol Ikhanate Öljaitü receives the ambassador sent by Toqta, Khan of the Golden Horde that rules territory comprising much of what is now Russia. 
* December 20 – Battle of Amroha: Mongol forces (some 30,000 men) invade the Delhi Sultanate again in northern India. Sultan Alauddin Khalji dispatches a cavalry force led by Vizier Ghazi Malik, to repulse the Mongols. During the battle (somewhere in the Amroha district), the Delhi forces inflict a crushing defeat upon the invaders. Many Mongols are taken prisoner and incorporated into the Delhi army.

=== By place ===

== Births ==
* June 2 – Abu Sa&#x27;id Bahadur (or &quot;Abu Sa&#x27;id&quot;), Mongol ruler (d. 1335)
* August 18 – Ashikaga Takauji, Japanese general (&quot;shogun&quot;) (d. 1358)
* September 25 – Al-Mahdi Ali, Yemeni imam and politician (d. 1372)
* September 29 – Henry XIV, German nobleman and co-ruler (d. 1339)
* October 28 – Minbyauk Thihapate, Burmese ruler of Sagaing (d. 1364)
* November 5 – Robert Clifford, English nobleman and knight (d. 1344)
* Agnes of Bohemia, Bohemian princess (House of Přemyslid) (d. 1337)
* Arnoul d&#x27;Audrehem, French nobleman, knight and marshal (d. 1370) 
* Elizabeth of Poland, queen consort of Hungary and Croatia (d. 1380)
* Gao Ming (or &quot;Gao Zecheng&quot;), Chinese poet and playwright (d. 1370)
* Isabella of Aragon (or &quot;Elisabeth&quot;), German queen consort (d. 1330)
* Khatsun Namkha Lekpa Gyaltsen, Tibetan religious leader (d. 1343)
* Konoe Mototsugu, Japanese nobleman (&quot;kugyō&quot;) and regent (d. 1354)
* Louis the Junker, German nobleman, knight and co-ruler (d. 1345)
* Peter of Aragon, Spanish prince (&quot;infante&quot;) and counsellor (d. 1381)
* Peter Thomas, French monk, archbishop and theologian (d. 1366)
* Philippe de Cabassoles, French bishop and papal legate (d. 1372)
* Shiba Takatsune, Japanese general and warlord (&quot;daimyo&quot;) (d. 1367)
* Thomas of Frignano, Italian cardinal and Minister General (d. 1381)
* Yi Ja-heung, Korean nobleman, official and Grand Prince (d. 1371)

== Deaths ==
* January 17 – Roger of Lauria, Italian nobleman and admiral (b. 1245)
* March 1 – Blanche of France, French princess and duchess (b. 1278)
* March 7 – Guy of Dampierre, French nobleman and knight (b. 1226)
* April 2 – Joan I of Navarre, French queen consort and regent (b. 1273)
* April 10 – Joachim Piccolomini, Italian monk and altar server (b. 1258)
* April 30 – Roger de Flor, Italian nobleman and adventurer (b. 1267)
* May 17 – Hōjō Tokimura, Japanese nobleman (&quot;rensho&quot;) (b. 1242)
* June 21 – Wenceslaus II, king of Bohemia and Poland (b. 1271)
* August 23 – William Wallace, Scottish rebel leader and knight
* August 26 – Walter of Winterburn, English cardinal and writer
* September 4 – Matteo Rosso Orsini, Italian cardinal (b. 1230)
* September 10 – Nicholas of Tolentino, Italian friar and mystic
* October 4 
** Dietrich VII, German nobleman and knight (b. 1256)
** Kameyama, Japanese emperor and priest (b. 1249)
* October 9 – Robert de Pontigny, French abbot and cardinal 
* November 11 – Otto I, German nobleman and knight (b. 1262)
* November 16 – Albertino Morosini, Venetian nobleman and governor
* November 18 – John II, French nobleman and knight (b. 1239)
* November 24 – Mahalakadeva, ruler of India&#x27;s Malwa Kingdom (killed in battle)
* Guillaume de Villaret, French knight and Grand Master (b. 1235)
* John I, Piedmontese nobleman (House of Aleramici) (b. 1275)
* John II van Sierck (or &quot;Zyrick&quot;), Dutch archdeacon and bishop 
* Qian Xuan (or &quot;Shun Ju&quot;), Chinese official and painter (b. 1235)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5624" start="5" end="9" title="1305" label="1305"/>
<link wikidata="Q5624" start="11" end="35" title="1305" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCV]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235680" start="43" end="73" title="common year starting on Friday" label="common year starting on Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="81" end="96" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248" start="136" end="146" title="January 12" label="January 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q297065" start="242" end="254" title="Öljaitü" label="Oljaitu Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50376049" start="259" end="279" title="Uljay Qutlugh Khatun" label="Uljay Qutlugh Khatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q334496" start="369" end="380" title="Ghazan" label="Ghazan Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80053" start="397" end="403" title="Tabriz" label="Tabriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261" start="505" end="515" title="January 16" label="January 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010754" start="518" end="537" title="William Hamilton (Lord Chancellor)" label="William de Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="562" end="577" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276" start="642" end="652" title="January 23" label="January 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126755" start="655" end="671" title="Henry II Kőszegi" label="Henry II Kőszegi"/>
<link wikidata="Q117814546" start="677" end="692" title="Ban of Slavonia" label="Ban of Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q247355" start="742" end="748" title="Požega County" label="Požega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401261" start="753" end="758" title="Valkó County" label="Valkó"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359" start="838" end="849" title="February 26" label="February 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q312735" start="867" end="885" title="James II of Aragon" label="James II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="895" end="918" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="Ferdinand IV of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q939186" start="940" end="974" title="Monastery of Santa María de Huerta" label="Monastery of Santa María de Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739" start="978" end="985" title="Castile and León" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q926544" start="1043" end="1054" title="John of Castile, Lord of Valencia de Campos" label="Prince John"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892044" start="1056" end="1077" title="Juan Núñez II de Lara" label="Juan Núñez II de Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502286" start="1085" end="1098" title="House of Lara" label="House of Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q373007" start="1124" end="1135" title="Juan Manuel" label="Juan Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840038" start="1141" end="1166" title="Afonso of Portugal, Lord of Portalegre" label="Prince Afonso of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362" start="1170" end="1181" title="February 28" label="February 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424" start="1225" end="1233" title="March 19" label="March 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q471985" start="1236" end="1247" title="Chupan" label="Amir Chupan"/>
<link wikidata="Q297065" start="1314" end="1321" title="Öljaitü" label="Öljaitü"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427" start="1325" end="1333" title="March 20" label="March 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454" start="1381" end="1389" title="March 25" label="March 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q373007" start="1392" end="1403" title="Juan Manuel" label="Juan Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536" start="1462" end="1470" title="April 30" label="April 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q37098" start="1491" end="1513" title="Michael IX Palaiologos" label="Michael IX Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q436817" start="1522" end="1535" title="Roger de Flor" label="Roger de Flor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="1573" end="1583" title="Edirne" label="Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501196" start="1840" end="1855" title="Catalan Company" label="Catalan Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="2020" end="2029" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="2034" end="2040" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578" start="2122" end="2128" title="May 19" label="May 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099920" start="2145" end="2160" title="Treaty of Elche" label="Treaty of Elche"/>
<link wikidata="Q312735" start="2184" end="2202" title="James II of Aragon" label="James II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="2212" end="2235" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="Ferdinand IV of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469708" start="2293" end="2312" title="Treaty of Torrellas" label="Treaty of Torrellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622" start="2316" end="2322" title="June 5" label="June 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="2325" end="2339" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364185" start="2354" end="2376" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bordeaux" label="Archbishop of Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q169301" start="2387" end="2403" title="Pope Benedict XI" label="Pope Benedict XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2432" end="2447" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5740" start="2469" end="2473" title="1314" label="1314"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666" start="2478" end="2485" title="June 20" label="June 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q297065" start="2488" end="2495" title="Öljaitü" label="Öljaitü"/>
<link wikidata="Q90055087" start="2578" end="2585" title="Irinjin" label="Irinjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671" start="2590" end="2597" title="June 21" label="June 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q54040" start="2617" end="2631" title="Wenceslaus III of Bohemia" label="Wenceslaus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056854" start="2649" end="2656" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1301–1526)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q42585" start="2658" end="2665" title="Kingdom of Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211371" start="2671" end="2677" title="Greater Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q155581" start="2718" end="2736" title="Wenceslaus II of Bohemia" label="King Wenceslaus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664" start="2741" end="2748" title="June 27" label="June 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q297065" start="2801" end="2808" title="Öljaitü" label="Öljaitü"/>
<link wikidata="Q90055087" start="2837" end="2844" title="Irinjin" label="Irinjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="2869" end="2877" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689" start="2905" end="2912" title="July 10" label="July 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q8243989" start="2915" end="2930" title="Battle of Apros" label="Battle of Apros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479646" start="3042" end="3051" title="Turcopole" label="Turcopole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896286" start="3108" end="3113" title="Aprus (Thrace)" label="Apros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686" start="3354" end="3361" title="July 15" label="July 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786" start="3444" end="3452" title="August 3" label="August 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="3455" end="3470" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="3523" end="3530" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353484" start="3534" end="3544" title="Robroyston" label="Robroyston"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858658" start="3571" end="3587" title="John de Menteith" label="John de Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3610" end="3616" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="3674" end="3690" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Westminster Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821" start="3695" end="3704" title="August 23" label="August 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="3780" end="3787" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182018" start="3886" end="3896" title="Smithfield, London" label="Smithfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3900" end="3906" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q877524" start="3911" end="3938" title="hanged, drawn and quartered" label="hanged, drawn and quartered"/>
<link wikidata="Q175111" start="3954" end="3961" title="hanging" label="hanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345015" start="3996" end="4007" title="Emasculation" label="emasculated"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325198" start="4129" end="4139" title="Head on a spike" label="on a spike"/>
<link wikidata="Q130206" start="4150" end="4163" title="London Bridge" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="4208" end="4217" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q504678" start="4219" end="4226" title="Berwick-upon-Tweed" label="Berwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q182923" start="4228" end="4236" title="Stirling" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q203000" start="4242" end="4247" title="Perth, Scotland" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846" start="4251" end="4263" title="September 15" label="September 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="4271" end="4290" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="4335" end="4354" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832770" start="4399" end="4410" title="Trailbaston" label="Trailbaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q930164" start="4565" end="4575" title="conspiracy" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896" start="4607" end="4619" title="September 19" label="September 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q80053" start="4625" end="4631" title="Tabriz" label="Tabriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="4640" end="4644" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q297065" start="4646" end="4653" title="Öljaitü" label="Öljaitü"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="4711" end="4723" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923" start="4759" end="4768" title="October 9" label="October 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q438477" start="4799" end="4825" title="Viola of Teschen" label="Viola Elizabeth of Teschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q689152" start="4844" end="4853" title="Mieszko I, Duke of Cieszyn" label="Mieszko I"/>
<link wikidata="Q57323" start="4901" end="4920" title="Otto III, Duke of Bavaria" label="Otto III of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q54048" start="4933" end="4960" title="Władysław I Łokietek" label="Wladyslaw II the Elbow-High"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022" start="5033" end="5044" title="November 24" label="November 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q24952036" start="5057" end="5069" title="Mahalakadeva" label="Mahalakadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q550691" start="5079" end="5084" title="Malwa" label="Malwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="5143" end="5158" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43378579" start="5160" end="5179" title="Ayn al-Mulk Multani" label="Ayn al-Mulk Multani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301" start="5255" end="5265" title="December 8" label="December 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q80053" start="5271" end="5277" title="Tabriz" label="Tabriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q297065" start="5299" end="5306" title="Öljaitü" label="Öljaitü"/>
<link wikidata="Q470312" start="5339" end="5344" title="Toqta" label="Toqta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455" start="5434" end="5445" title="December 20" label="December 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870295" start="5448" end="5464" title="Battle of Amroha" label="Battle of Amroha"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="5509" end="5524" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q335362" start="5557" end="5572" title="Alauddin Khalji" label="Alauddin Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391172" start="5614" end="5625" title="Ghiyath al-Din Tughluq" label="Ghazi Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891677" start="5687" end="5702" title="Amroha district" label="Amroha district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624" start="5871" end="5877" title="June 2" label="June 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q335301" start="5880" end="5902" title="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Bahadur Khan" label="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Bahadur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011" start="5953" end="5957" title="1335" label="1335"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826" start="5961" end="5970" title="August 18" label="August 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q297107" start="5973" end="5989" title="Ashikaga Takauji" label="Ashikaga Takauji"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="6015" end="6021" title="shogun" label="shogun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140" start="6033" end="6037" title="1358" label="1358"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886" start="6041" end="6053" title="September 25" label="September 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702769" start="6056" end="6068" title="Al-Mahdi Ali" label="Al-Mahdi Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q125482" start="6077" end="6081" title="imam" label="imam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258" start="6101" end="6105" title="1372" label="1372"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882" start="6109" end="6121" title="September 29" label="September 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q62649" start="6124" end="6133" title="Henry XIV, Duke of Bavaria" label="Henry XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="6142" end="6150" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051" start="6168" end="6172" title="1339" label="1339"/>
<link wikidata="Q2952" start="6176" end="6186" title="October 28" label="October 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314758" start="6189" end="6207" title="Minbyauk Thihapate" label="Minbyauk Thihapate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446223" start="6226" end="6233" title="Sagaing Kingdom" label="Sagaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185" start="6238" end="6242" title="1364" label="1364"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993" start="6246" end="6256" title="November 5" label="November 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351393" start="6259" end="6274" title="Robert Clifford, 3rd Baron Clifford" label="Robert Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073" start="6308" end="6312" title="1344" label="1344"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269525" start="6316" end="6332" title="Agnes of Bohemia, Duchess of Jawor" label="Agnes of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q287652" start="6353" end="6371" title="Přemyslid dynasty" label="House of Přemyslid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039" start="6377" end="6381" title="1337" label="1337"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438499" start="6385" end="6407" title="Arnoul d&amp;#x27;Audrehem" label="Arnoul d&amp;#x27;Audrehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217" start="6449" end="6453" title="1370" label="1370"/>
<link wikidata="Q242825" start="6458" end="6477" title="Elizabeth of Poland, Queen of Hungary" label="Elizabeth of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056854" start="6496" end="6503" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1301–1526)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789596" start="6508" end="6515" title="Croatia in personal union with Hungary" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327" start="6520" end="6524" title="1380" label="1380"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716779" start="6528" end="6536" title="Gao Ming" label="Gao Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q441662" start="6607" end="6625" title="Isabella of Aragon, Queen of Germany" label="Isabella of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5996" start="6679" end="6683" title="1330" label="1330"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921025" start="6687" end="6716" title="Khatsun Namkha Lekpa Gyaltsen" label="Khatsun Namkha Lekpa Gyaltsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072" start="6747" end="6751" title="1343" label="1343"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198721" start="6755" end="6770" title="Konoe Mototsugu" label="Konoe Mototsugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138036" start="6797" end="6802" title="kugyō" label="kugyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="6814" end="6820" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118" start="6825" end="6829" title="1354" label="1354"/>
<link wikidata="Q103697" start="6833" end="6849" title="Louis the Junker" label="Louis the Junker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077" start="6892" end="6896" title="1345" label="1345"/>
<link wikidata="Q3903970" start="6900" end="6915" title="Peter, Count of Ribagorza" label="Peter of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q213594" start="6939" end="6946" title="infante" label="infante"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331" start="6973" end="6977" title="1381" label="1381"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623635" start="6981" end="6993" title="Peter Thomas (saint)" label="Peter Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194" start="7038" end="7042" title="1366" label="1366"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616583" start="7046" end="7068" title="Philippe de Cabassoles" label="Philippe de Cabassoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496005" start="7113" end="7128" title="Shiba Takatsune" label="Shiba Takatsune"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="7166" end="7172" title="daimyo" label="daimyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202" start="7184" end="7188" title="1367" label="1367"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383414" start="7192" end="7210" title="Thomas of Frignano" label="Thomas of Frignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q497438" start="7262" end="7273" title="Grand Prince Wanchang" label="Yi Ja-heung"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255" start="7322" end="7326" title="1371" label="1371"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264" start="7344" end="7354" title="January 17" label="January 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q283466" start="7357" end="7372" title="Roger of Lauria" label="Roger of Lauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440" start="7407" end="7411" title="1245" label="1245"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393" start="7415" end="7422" title="March 1" label="March 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q455035" start="7425" end="7442" title="Blanche of France, Duchess of Austria" label="Blanche of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533" start="7476" end="7480" title="1278" label="1278"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394" start="7484" end="7491" title="March 7" label="March 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q28531" start="7494" end="7510" title="Guy, Count of Flanders" label="Guy of Dampierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405" start="7543" end="7547" title="1226" label="1226"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511" start="7551" end="7558" title="April 2" label="April 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q229189" start="7561" end="7578" title="Joan I of Navarre" label="Joan I of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526" start="7616" end="7620" title="1273" label="1273"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502" start="7624" end="7632" title="April 10" label="April 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412722" start="7635" end="7654" title="Joachim Piccolomini" label="Joachim Piccolomini"/>
<link wikidata="Q139627" start="7673" end="7685" title="altar server" label="altar server"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506" start="7690" end="7694" title="1258" label="1258"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536" start="7698" end="7706" title="April 30" label="April 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q436817" start="7709" end="7722" title="Roger de Flor" label="Roger de Flor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519" start="7760" end="7764" title="1267" label="1267"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575" start="7768" end="7774" title="May 17" label="May 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785895" start="7777" end="7790" title="Hōjō Tokimura" label="Hōjō Tokimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q497960" start="7817" end="7823" title="rensho" label="rensho"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437" start="7835" end="7839" title="1242" label="1242"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671" start="7843" end="7850" title="June 21" label="June 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q155581" start="7853" end="7866" title="Wenceslaus II of Bohemia" label="Wenceslaus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q42585" start="7876" end="7883" title="Kingdom of Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211371" start="7888" end="7894" title="Greater Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523" start="7899" end="7903" title="1271" label="1271"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821" start="7907" end="7916" title="August 23" label="August 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="7919" end="7934" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820" start="7971" end="7980" title="August 26" label="August 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q734140" start="7983" end="8003" title="Walter of Winterburn" label="Walter of Winterburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855" start="8035" end="8046" title="September 4" label="September 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894225" start="8049" end="8068" title="Matteo Rosso Orsini (cardinal)" label="Matteo Rosso Orsini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412" start="8091" end="8095" title="1230" label="1230"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853" start="8099" end="8111" title="September 10" label="September 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q470855" start="8114" end="8135" title="Nicholas of Tolentino" label="Nicholas of Tolentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929" start="8164" end="8173" title="October 4" label="October 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q832610" start="8178" end="8190" title="Dietrich VII, Count of Cleves" label="Dietrich VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502" start="8223" end="8227" title="1256" label="1256"/>
<link wikidata="Q360972" start="8232" end="8240" title="Emperor Kameyama" label="Kameyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485" start="8274" end="8278" title="1249" label="1249"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923" start="8282" end="8291" title="October 9" label="October 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q647465" start="8294" end="8312" title="Robert de Pontigny" label="Robert de Pontigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="8321" end="8326" title="abbot" label="abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987" start="8343" end="8354" title="November 11" label="November 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039298" start="8357" end="8363" title="Otto I, Count of Waldeck" label="Otto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510" start="8396" end="8400" title="1262" label="1262"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029" start="8404" end="8415" title="November 16" label="November 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608098" start="8418" end="8436" title="Albertino Morosini" label="Albertino Morosini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027" start="8471" end="8482" title="November 18" label="November 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q453989" start="8485" end="8492" title="John II, Duke of Brittany" label="John II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434" start="8525" end="8529" title="1239" label="1239"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022" start="8533" end="8544" title="November 24" label="November 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q24952036" start="8547" end="8559" title="Mahalakadeva" label="Mahalakadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553972" start="8618" end="8639" title="Guillaume de Villaret" label="Guillaume de Villaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425" start="8676" end="8680" title="1235" label="1235"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252319" start="8684" end="8690" title="John I, Marquis of Montferrat" label="John I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032243" start="8714" end="8732" title="Aleramici" label="House of Aleramici"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529" start="8738" end="8742" title="1275" label="1275"/>
<link wikidata="Q1696857" start="8746" end="8764" title="John II van Sierck" label="John II van Sierck"/>
<link wikidata="Q951585" start="8821" end="8830" title="Qian Xuan" label="Qian Xuan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39953" wikidata="Q5716" url="?curid=39953" title="1306">
<text>Year 1306 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCVI]]) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.
== Events ==
===January – March===
* January 3 – Deshou Khan, the only son of Chinese Emperor Chengzong of the Yuan dynasty (Temür Khan) dies, leaving the Mongol Emperor without an heir. 
* January 27 – The University of Orléans is created by a papal bull issued by Pope Clement V endowing the Orléans institutes in France with the title and privileges of a university. 
* January 28 – After two hearings, Sunni Muslim theologian Ibn Taymiyyah is found innocent of charges of heresy by the Indian Qur&#x27;an scholar Safi al-Din al-Hindi. Taymiyyah is found guilty three months later by a panel of judges in the Mamluk state and imprisoned for four months. 
* February 10 – Robert the Bruce murders John Comyn III, Scottish nobleman and political rival, before the high altar of the Greyfriars Church at Dumfries. Bruce and Comyn meet to discuss their differences at the church (without their swords). An argument between the two ensues, and Bruce draws his dagger in anger and stabs Comyn. He flees the church, telling his followers outside what has occurred. Roger de Kirkpatrick, cousin of Bruce, goes back inside and finishes off the seriously wounded Comyn. In response, Bruce is excommunicated by Pope Clement V.
* March 21 – In France, Hugh V, at the age of 11, becomes the new Duke of Burgundy upon the death of his father, Robert II.
* March 25 – Robert the Bruce is crowned king of Scotland by Bishop William de Lamberton at Scone, near Perth. Despite lacking the traditional coronation stone, diadem and scepter, all of which have transferred to London. During the ceremony, the Scottish nobles of Atholl, Lennox, Mar and Menteith are present – while the 18-year-old Elizabeth de Burgh is crowned queen of Scots. The coronation takes place in defiance of the English claims of suzerainty after King Edward I of England, strips John de Baliol of his crown as King of Scots.

===April – June===
* April 26 – French knight Amalric, Lord of Tyre, with the aid of the Knights Templar, stages a Coup d&#x27;état against his older brother Henry II, King of Cyprus. Although Henry remains the nominal king, he is confined at the Cypriot city of Strovolos, and Amalric assumes all of the King&#x27;s powers. Amalric will be assassinated in 1310.
* May 5 – Charles the Lame, King of Naples, accuses Philip I of Piedmont and Isabella of Villehardouin of disloyalty, and deprives them of the right to rule the Principality of Achaea (located in southern Greece on the Peloponnese peninsula). King Charles awards Achaea to his son, Philip I, Prince of Taranto.
* May 13 – (29 Shawwal 705 AH) A Moorish Nasrid fleet sent by Sultan Sultan Muhammad III of the Emirate of Granada (now part of Spain) makes a surprise attack on Africa and captures Ceuta. Nasrid forces land in Ksar es-Seghir, Larache, and Asilah, occupying these Atlantic ports (→ Battle of the Strait). At the same time, Prince Uthman ibn Abi al-Ula of the Marinid Sultanate, leads a rebellion against Sultan Abu Yaqub Yusuf an-Nasr. He conquers a mountainous area in northern Morocco and allies himself with Granada. 
* May 22 – Feast of the Swans: At Westminster Abbey King Edward I of England proclaims that all squires, who agree to march in an invasion of Scotland, will be knighted. After the feast, the King has two swans brought in and swears &quot;before God and the swans&quot; to avenge the murder of John III Comyn, Lord of Badenoch, the desecration of Greyfriars Church in Dumfries by Robert Bruce, and to fight the infidels in the Holy Land. The King knights his son, Prince Edward of Caernarfon. The Prince knights 266 other men. King Edward then gives his &quot;Raise the Dragon&quot; orders, proclaiming that no mercy is to be granted to Scotland, and all Scots taken in arms are to be executed without trial. Among the persons knighted, the King appoints Aymer de Valance, lieutenant for Scotland. Valence will make his base at Perth, along with Henry Percy and Robert Clifford, to organize an army. 
* May 30 – The English Parliament meets at Westminster in a one-day session, on orders of King Edward I, a week after Whit Sunday and passes a five percent tax on &quot;citizens and burgesses and communities of all the cities and boroughs of the realm and the tenants of our demesne.&quot;
* June 8 – After bringing the Flemish War to a victorious conclusion, King Philip IV of France orders the silver content of new &quot;livre&quot; coins to be raised back to the 1285 level of 3.96 grams of silver, and orders the devaluation of the coins of 1303, 1304 and 1305 to one-third of their face value. The economic decree leads to rioting.
* June 19 – Battle of Methven: Scottish forces (some 5,000 men) under Robert the Bruce are defeated by the English army at Methven. During the battle, the Scots are overwhelmed by a surprise attack on their camp. They are outnumbered, but Bruce manages to form a phalanx to break free. Finally, he is forced to retreat, leaving many of his followers dead or soon to be executed.
* June 23 – The Knights Hospitaller, led by Grand Master Foulques de Villaret, land with 600 men on the island of Rhodes, one of the Dodecanese Islands off of the coast of Byzantium, and begin a four-year long war to capture the fortified city of Rhodes (which will not fall until August 15, 1310).

===July – September===
* July 22 – The Great Exile of 1306: King Philip IV of France turns his attentions to Italian bankers and orders the Jews to be exiled in France. The Jewish quarter in Paris is cleared and goods are confiscated – to regain money spent on expanding the domains of Flanders and Gascony. Meanwhile, rumors of a secret initiation ceremony of the Knights Templar create distrust, and Philip – while being deeply in debt to the Order for loans from his war against England, uses this distrust for political and religious motivations against the Templars.
* August 4 – King Wenceslaus III of Bohemia is assassinated at the age of 16 after a reign of only 14 months, being stabbed to death at Olomouc (now in the Czech Republic), bringing an end to the Přemyslid dynasty. His sister Anne of Bohemia administers the nation until her husband Henry of Carinthia is elected as the new King of Bohemia by the Bohemian nobles. 
* August 11 – Battle of Dalrigh: Robert the Bruce is defeated by rival Scottish forces (some 1,000 men) led by John the Lame of Argyll chieftain and uncle of John Comyn the Red of the Clan MacDougall at Dalrigh (known as &quot;King&#x27;s Field&quot;). (&quot;After the defeat which Robert Bruce experienced in Perthshire from Edward I, soon after his coronation at Scone, he was endeavoring to make his way toward the West Highlands with a few followers, when, on the 11th of August 1306, he was encountered at a place, since called Darligh (the King&#x27;s field) near Tyndrum, on the border of Argyllshire, by that powerful chief, or rather potentate, Allaster or Alexander MacDougall of Argyll...&quot;) During the battle, Bruce himself narrowly escapes capture and takes with the remnants refuge in the mountains of Atholl (Scottish Highlands).
* September 13 – In Scotland, English forces under Edward of Caernarfon capture and sack Kildrummy Castle in Aberdeenshire. Edward takes Elizabeth de Burgh, Christina Bruce and Mary Bruce (sisters of Robert the Bruce), and Princess Marjorie Bruce (daughter of Bruce) as prisoners. He executes Nigel de Brus (younger brother of Bruce) for high treason, who is later hanged, drawn and quartered at Berwick.
* September 20 – The Knights Hospitaller, besieging on the island of Rhodes, capture the Feraklos Castle.
* September 29 – The Hatuna Games are played in Sweden. Duke&#x27;s Eric Magnusson and Valdemar Magnusson, arrive at the estate of their brother, King Birger Magnusson, by Lake Malar. They are invited as guests at a feast, but during the night Birger and his wife, Martha of Denmark, are captured by the two brothers and are imprisoned in the dungeon at Nyköping Castle – while Eric and Valdemar jointly take over the Swedish throne.

===October – December===
* October 9 – Robert FitzWalter, 1st Baron FitzWalter is pardoned of all debts owed to King Edward I of England, in honor of his service in the war against the Scots.
* October 16 – In a ceremony at Prague, King Rudolf I of Bohemia marries Elizabeth Richeza, the widow of Rudolf&#x27;s predecessor, King Wenceslaus II of Bohemia.
* October 23 – James Stewart, 5th High Steward of Scotland, after having been defeated in battle by King Edward of England, swears fealty to King Edward again at Lanercost Priory. To render his oath inviolable, Stewart&#x27;s oath is taken upon the two crosses of Scotland most esteemed for their sanctity, the holy gospels and on various relics of saints. Stewart agrees to submit to instant excommunication if he should break his oath of allegiance to Edward. 
* November 3 – From Lanercost Prior, King Edward of England summons Parliament to meet in Carlisle, starting on January 20, &quot;to &quot;treat of the ordering and settling of the land of Scotland.&quot;
* December 6 – The monetary policy of King Philip IV of France triggers a revolt in Paris. The provost&#x27;s house is burned, and King Philip the Fair has to flee to the fortress of the Temple.

===By location===
* Winter – Robert the Bruce retires to the Isle of Rathlin with a small group of followers, including Bruce&#x27;s brothers Edward, Thomas and Alexander, as well James Douglas, Niall mac Cailein and Malcolm II. He is welcomed by the Irish Bissett family and stays at Rathlin Castle (or &quot;Bruce&#x27;s Castle&quot;). Robert reorganizes his resources and musters troops for the campaign in Scotland.

==== Asia ====
* Mongol invasion of India: Mongol forces invade the Delhi Sultanate, Sultan Alauddin Khalji sends an army under Malik Kafur to deal with the invaders and defeats them at the banks of the Ravi River. The Delhi army kills and captures many Mongols in their pursuit. Alauddin orders the survivors to be trampled under the feet of elephants.

=== By topic ===

==== Economy ====
* In London, a city ordinance decrees that heating with coal is forbidden when Parliament is in session (the ordinance is not particularly effective).

==== Religion ====
* Storkyrkan, the current cathedral of Stockholm, is consecrated by Birger Jarl Magnusson.

== Births ==
* August 8 – Rudolf the Blind, Duke of Bavaria (d. 1353)
* Ashikaga Tadayoshi, Japanese nobleman, samurai and general (d. 1352)
* Isabella of Brienne, Latin noblewoman (&quot;suo jure&quot;) and claimant (d. 1360)
* Sasaki Takauji, Japanese bureaucrat, warrior, poet and writer (d. 1373)

== Deaths ==
* February 10 – John Comyn the Red, Scottish nobleman (b. 1274)
* March – Araniko (&quot;Anige&quot;), Nepalese court architect and painter (b. 1245)
* March 21 – Robert II, French nobleman (House of Burgundy) (b. 1248).
* May 5 – Constantine Palaiologos, Byzantine prince and general (b. 1261)
* August 4 – Wenceslaus III, king of Hungary, Croatia and Poland (b. 1289)
* September 12 – An Hyang, Korean scholar and philosopher (b. 1243)
* September 21 – Wonbi Hong, Korean noblewoman and royal consort
* September 22 – John of Paris, French scholar, theologian and writer
* November 7 – John of Strathbogie, Scottish nobleman and Justiciar
* December 6 – Roger Bigod, English nobleman, knight and Marshal
* December 12 – Conrad of Offida, Italian monk and preacher (b. 1241)
* December 25 – Jacopone da Todi, Italian monk and mystic (b. 1230)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5716" start="5" end="9" title="1306" label="1306"/>
<link wikidata="Q5716" start="11" end="36" title="1306" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCVI]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235673" start="44" end="76" title="common year starting on Saturday" label="common year starting on Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="84" end="99" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156" start="138" end="147" title="January 3" label="January 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q8468" start="226" end="236" title="Temür Khan" label="Temür Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284" start="291" end="301" title="January 27" label="January 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q13334" start="308" end="329" title="University of Orléans" label="University of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="367" end="381" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285" start="474" end="484" title="January 28" label="January 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q491558" start="531" end="544" title="Ibn Taymiyyah" label="Ibn Taymiyyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108299" start="618" end="638" title="Safi al-Din al-Hindi" label="Safi al-Din al-Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325" start="761" end="772" title="February 10" label="February 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="775" end="791" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351307" start="800" end="814" title="John Comyn III of Badenoch" label="John Comyn III"/>
<link wikidata="Q17570292" start="884" end="901" title="Greyfriars Church, Dumfries" label="Greyfriars Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q652035" start="905" end="913" title="Dumfries" label="Dumfries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359196" start="1162" end="1182" title="Roger de Kirkpatrick" label="Roger de Kirkpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="1309" end="1318" title="Pope Clement V" label="Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433" start="1322" end="1330" title="March 21" label="March 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1336" end="1342" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q707654" start="1344" end="1350" title="Hugh V, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh V"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="1386" end="1402" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q503063" start="1433" end="1442" title="Robert II, Duke of Burgundy" label="Robert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454" start="1446" end="1454" title="March 25" label="March 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="1493" end="1501" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q981395" start="1512" end="1532" title="William de Lamberton" label="William de Lamberton"/>
<link wikidata="Q852883" start="1536" end="1541" title="Scone, Scotland" label="Scone"/>
<link wikidata="Q203000" start="1548" end="1553" title="Perth, Scotland" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1658" end="1664" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277207" start="1710" end="1716" title="Earl of Atholl" label="Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277334" start="1718" end="1724" title="Earl of Lennox" label="Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277359" start="1726" end="1729" title="Earl of Mar" label="Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991029" start="1734" end="1742" title="Earl of Menteith" label="Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q262059" start="1779" end="1797" title="Elizabeth de Burgh" label="Elizabeth de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="1911" end="1919" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q310065" start="1939" end="1953" title="John de Baliol" label="John de Baliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q214188" start="1970" end="1983" title="List of Scottish monarchs" label="King of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532" start="2007" end="2015" title="April 26" label="April 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q453370" start="2032" end="2053" title="Amalric, Lord of Tyre" label="Amalric, Lord of Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="2075" end="2090" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="2101" end="2117" title="Coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="Coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q546497" start="2144" end="2152" title="Henry II of Cyprus" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2154" end="2168" title="Kingdom of Cyprus#List of monarchs of Cyprus" label="King of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q668370" start="2249" end="2258" title="Strovolos" label="Strovolos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550" start="2351" end="2356" title="May 5" label="May 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q314331" start="2359" end="2391" title="Charles II of Naples" label="Charles the Lame, King of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365386" start="2401" end="2421" title="Philip I of Piedmont" label="Philip I of Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q261720" start="2426" end="2451" title="Isabella of Villehardouin" label="Isabella of Villehardouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q332005" start="2510" end="2532" title="Principality of Achaea" label="Principality of Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="2568" end="2579" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q712759" start="2631" end="2658" title="Philip I, Prince of Taranto" label="Philip I, Prince of Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560" start="2662" end="2668" title="May 13" label="May 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q704786" start="2729" end="2748" title="Muhammad III of Granada" label="Sultan Muhammad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="2756" end="2774" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Emirate of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="2842" end="2847" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383366" start="2871" end="2885" title="Ksar es-Seghir" label="Ksar es-Seghir"/>
<link wikidata="Q606775" start="2887" end="2894" title="Larache" label="Larache"/>
<link wikidata="Q730328" start="2900" end="2906" title="Asilah" label="Asilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q21081322" start="2942" end="2962" title="Battle of the Strait" label="Battle of the Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q67440005" start="2990" end="3011" title="Uthman ibn Abi al-Ula" label="Uthman ibn Abi al-Ula"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="3019" end="3036" title="Marinid Sultanate" label="Marinid Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q335476" start="3071" end="3094" title="Abu Yaqub Yusuf an-Nasr" label="Abu Yaqub Yusuf an-Nasr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="3139" end="3146" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581" start="3183" end="3189" title="May 22" label="May 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439558" start="3192" end="3210" title="Feast of the Swans" label="Feast of the Swans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="3215" end="3232" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="3323" end="3331" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564928" start="3385" end="3389" title="swan" label="swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351307" start="3474" end="3506" title="John III Comyn, Lord of Badenoch" label="John III Comyn, Lord of Badenoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="3644" end="3671" title="Edward II of England" label="Prince Edward of Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247422" start="3935" end="3951" title="Aymer de Valence, 2nd Earl of Pembroke" label="Aymer de Valance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785021" start="4026" end="4037" title="Henry Percy, 1st Baron Percy" label="Henry Percy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351392" start="4042" end="4057" title="Robert Clifford, 1st Baron Clifford" label="Robert Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590" start="4083" end="4089" title="May 30" label="May 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="4124" end="4135" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446130" start="4199" end="4210" title="Whitsun" label="Whit Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621" start="4373" end="4379" title="June 8" label="June 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="4446" end="4465" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669" start="4721" end="4728" title="June 19" label="June 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968883" start="4731" end="4748" title="Battle of Methven" label="Battle of Methven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778610" start="4842" end="4849" title="Methven, Perth and Kinross" label="Methven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668" start="5100" end="5107" title="June 23" label="June 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="5114" end="5133" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439825" start="5155" end="5175" title="Foulques de Villaret" label="Foulques de Villaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="5212" end="5218" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131555" start="5231" end="5249" title="Dodecanese" label="Dodecanese Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="5270" end="5279" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q28746090" start="5291" end="5311" title="Hospitaller conquest of Rhodes" label="a four-year long war"/>
<link wikidata="Q188731" start="5337" end="5351" title="city of Rhodes" label="city of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725" start="5423" end="5430" title="July 22" label="July 22"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5433" end="5456" title="History of the Jews in France#The Great Exile of 1306" label="The Great Exile of 1306"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="5463" end="5482" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q237131" start="5559" end="5565" title="France during the Middle Ages" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="5589" end="5594" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q157070" start="5684" end="5692" title="County of Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295939" start="5697" end="5704" title="Duchy of Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="5763" end="5778" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="5880" end="5887" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784" start="5972" end="5980" title="August 4" label="August 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q54040" start="5988" end="6013" title="Wenceslaus III of Bohemia" label="Wenceslaus III of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81137" start="6106" end="6113" title="Olomouc" label="Olomouc"/>
<link wikidata="Q287652" start="6166" end="6183" title="Přemyslid dynasty" label="Přemyslid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q269565" start="6196" end="6211" title="Anne of Bohemia (1290–1313)" label="Anne of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q275408" start="6253" end="6271" title="Henry of Bohemia" label="Henry of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44330" start="6294" end="6309" title="List of Bohemian monarchs" label="King of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778" start="6337" end="6346" title="August 11" label="August 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870837" start="6349" end="6366" title="Battle of Dalrigh" label="Battle of Dalrigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275635" start="6446" end="6469" title="John of Argyll" label="John the Lame of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q912664" start="6519" end="6534" title="Clan MacDougall" label="Clan MacDougall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211606" start="6538" end="6545" title="Dalrigh" label="Dalrigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q331254" start="7156" end="7162" title="Atholl" label="Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="7164" end="7182" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848" start="7187" end="7199" title="September 13" label="September 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="7205" end="7213" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="7236" end="7256" title="Edward of Caernarfon" label="Edward of Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741270" start="7274" end="7290" title="Kildrummy Castle" label="Kildrummy Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q189912" start="7294" end="7307" title="Aberdeenshire" label="Aberdeenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110758" start="7342" end="7357" title="Christina Bruce" label="Christina Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779128" start="7362" end="7372" title="Mary Bruce" label="Mary Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q291049" start="7417" end="7431" title="Marjorie Bruce" label="Marjorie Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032743" start="7478" end="7491" title="Nigel de Brus" label="Nigel de Brus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="7523" end="7535" title="Treason" label="high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q877524" start="7550" end="7577" title="hanged, drawn and quartered" label="hanged, drawn and quartered"/>
<link wikidata="Q504678" start="7581" end="7588" title="Berwick-upon-Tweed" label="Berwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892" start="7592" end="7604" title="September 20" label="September 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="7611" end="7630" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="7659" end="7665" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27061866" start="7679" end="7694" title="Feraklos Castle" label="Feraklos Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882" start="7698" end="7710" title="September 29" label="September 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573051" start="7717" end="7729" title="Håtuna games" label="Hatuna Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="7744" end="7750" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q547911" start="7764" end="7778" title="Eric Magnusson (duke)" label="Eric Magnusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369581" start="7783" end="7801" title="Valdemar, Duke of Finland" label="Valdemar Magnusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q434782" start="7847" end="7863" title="Birger, King of Sweden" label="Birger Magnusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q184492" start="7868" end="7878" title="Mälaren" label="Lake Malar"/>
<link wikidata="Q291409" start="7961" end="7978" title="Martha of Denmark" label="Martha of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779071" start="8050" end="8065" title="Nyköping Castle" label="Nyköping Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923" start="8158" end="8167" title="October 9" label="October 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344364" start="8170" end="8209" title="Robert FitzWalter, 1st Baron FitzWalter" label="Robert FitzWalter, 1st Baron FitzWalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963" start="8325" end="8335" title="October 16" label="October 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="8355" end="8361" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q168254" start="8368" end="8387" title="Rudolf I of Bohemia" label="Rudolf I of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q259040" start="8396" end="8413" title="Elizabeth Richeza of Poland" label="Elizabeth Richeza"/>
<link wikidata="Q155581" start="8455" end="8484" title="Wenceslaus II of Bohemia" label="King Wenceslaus II of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958" start="8488" end="8498" title="October 23" label="October 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q361611" start="8501" end="8544" title="James Stewart, 5th High Steward of Scotland" label="James Stewart, 5th High Steward of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403001" start="8648" end="8664" title="Lanercost Priory" label="Lanercost Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995" start="8951" end="8961" title="November 3" label="November 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q192896" start="9039" end="9047" title="Carlisle" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303" start="9156" end="9166" title="December 6" label="December 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="9197" end="9216" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252809" start="9249" end="9256" title="Provost (civil)" label="provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495070" start="9341" end="9347" title="Temple (Paris)" label="Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136111" start="9411" end="9426" title="Rathlin Island" label="Isle of Rathlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q385362" start="9492" end="9498" title="Edward Bruce" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239560" start="9500" end="9506" title="Thomas de Brus" label="Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720472" start="9511" end="9520" title="Alexander de Brus" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q648516" start="9530" end="9543" title="James Douglas, Lord of Douglas" label="James Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202302" start="9545" end="9562" title="Niall mac Cailein" label="Niall mac Cailein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753630" start="9567" end="9577" title="Maol Choluim II, Earl of Lennox" label="Malcolm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722267" start="9607" end="9621" title="Mac Eoin Bissett family" label="Bissett family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295653" start="9635" end="9649" title="Rathlin Castle" label="Rathlin Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963774" start="9788" end="9812" title="Mongol invasion of India (1306)" label="Mongol invasion of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="9839" end="9854" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q335362" start="9863" end="9878" title="Alauddin Khalji" label="Alauddin Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181417" start="9899" end="9910" title="Malik Kafur" label="Malik Kafur"/>
<link wikidata="Q317899" start="9974" end="9984" title="Ravi River" label="Ravi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="10241" end="10251" title="Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133075" start="10335" end="10345" title="Storkyrkan" label="Storkyrkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="10372" end="10381" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q316828" start="10401" end="10412" title="Birger Jarl" label="Birger Jarl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780" start="10440" end="10448" title="August 8" label="August 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q66594" start="10451" end="10467" title="Rudolf II, Duke of Bavaria" label="Rudolf the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116" start="10489" end="10493" title="1353" label="1353"/>
<link wikidata="Q725375" start="10497" end="10515" title="Ashikaga Tadayoshi" label="Ashikaga Tadayoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="10536" end="10543" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112" start="10560" end="10564" title="1352" label="1352"/>
<link wikidata="Q469959" start="10568" end="10587" title="Isabella, Countess of Brienne" label="Isabella of Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699324" start="10613" end="10621" title="suo jure" label="suo jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150" start="10646" end="10650" title="1360" label="1360"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036907" start="10654" end="10668" title="Sasaki Takauji" label="Sasaki Takauji"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261" start="10720" end="10724" title="1373" label="1373"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325" start="10742" end="10753" title="February 10" label="February 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351307" start="10756" end="10774" title="John Comyn III of Badenoch" label="John Comyn the Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527" start="10798" end="10802" title="1274" label="1274"/>
<link wikidata="Q626019" start="10814" end="10821" title="Araniko" label="Araniko"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440" start="10884" end="10888" title="1245" label="1245"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433" start="10892" end="10900" title="March 21" label="March 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q503063" start="10903" end="10912" title="Robert II, Duke of Burgundy" label="Robert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642657" start="10931" end="10948" title="House of Burgundy" label="House of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483" start="10954" end="10958" title="1248" label="1248"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550" start="10963" end="10968" title="May 5" label="May 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209190" start="10971" end="10994" title="Constantine Palaiologos (son of Michael VIII)" label="Constantine Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509" start="11029" end="11033" title="1261" label="1261"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784" start="11037" end="11045" title="August 4" label="August 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q54040" start="11048" end="11062" title="Wenceslaus III of Bohemia" label="Wenceslaus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056854" start="11072" end="11079" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1301–1526)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789596" start="11081" end="11088" title="Croatia in personal union with Hungary" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211371" start="11093" end="11099" title="Greater Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551" start="11104" end="11108" title="1289" label="1289"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849" start="11112" end="11124" title="September 12" label="September 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q495964" start="11127" end="11135" title="An Hyang" label="An Hyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438" start="11172" end="11176" title="1243" label="1243"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891" start="11180" end="11192" title="September 21" label="September 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q16182575" start="11195" end="11205" title="Royal Consort Wonbi Hong" label="Wonbi Hong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889" start="11245" end="11257" title="September 22" label="September 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q717037" start="11260" end="11273" title="John of Paris" label="John of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989" start="11315" end="11325" title="November 7" label="November 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181234" start="11328" end="11347" title="John of Strathbogie, 9th Earl of Atholl" label="John of Strathbogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714329" start="11371" end="11380" title="Justiciar" label="Justiciar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303" start="11383" end="11393" title="December 6" label="December 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357865" start="11396" end="11407" title="Roger Bigod, 5th Earl of Norfolk" label="Roger Bigod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369" start="11448" end="11459" title="December 12" label="December 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162645" start="11462" end="11478" title="Conrad of Offida" label="Conrad of Offida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436" start="11510" end="11514" title="1241" label="1241"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745" start="11518" end="11529" title="December 25" label="December 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q317267" start="11532" end="11548" title="Jacopone da Todi" label="Jacopone da Todi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412" start="11578" end="11582" title="1230" label="1230"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39954" wikidata="Q5726" url="?curid=39954" title="1309">
<text>Year 1309 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCIX]]) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.
== Events ==
=== January – March ===
* January 6 – The coronation of Henry of Luxemburg as &quot;King of the Romans&quot;, the person first-in-line to succeed the Holy Roman Emperor, takes place at Aachen (now in Germany). He will become the Emperor in 1312.
* February 2 – At Avignon, Pope Clement V begins the investigation and posthumous trial of the late Pope Boniface VIII, who was accused of heresy and sodomy after his death in 1303, in papers circulated by Guillaume de Nogaret.
* February 15 – King Denis of Portugal grants the &quot;Magna Charta Privilegioum&quot;, charter for Portugal&#x27;s first university, now the University of Coimbra. Joseph M. M. Hermans and Marc Nelissen, &quot;Charters of Foundation and Early Documents of the Universities of the Coimbra Group&quot; (Leuven University Press, 2005) p. 38.
* February 24 – In Spain, King Ferdinand IV of Castile agrees to assist the neighboring Kingdom of Aragon (led by King, King Jaume II, to wage war against the Islamic Emirate of Granada.
* March 9 – Pope Clement V officially transfers the headquarters of the Roman Catholic Pontiff from Rome to the French city of Avignon, his residence and at this time part of the Kingdom of Arles, starting the Avignon Papacy. Since 1305, the papal court had been at Poitiers, and the move is justified by violence in Rome. The papal seat becomes part of the Holy Roman Empire, and its absence from Rome is referred to as the &quot;Babylonian captivity of the Papacy&quot;.
* March 14 – (1 Shawwal 708 AH) Sultan Muhammad III is deposed during a palace coup after a 7-year reign, and is replaced by his half-brother Abu al-Juyush Nasr, as ruler of the Emirate of Granada. Muhammad III is spared and allowed to live in Almuñécar, but his vizier, Abu Abdallah ibn al-Hakim, is killed.

=== April – June ===
* April 24 – Spanish kings James II of Aragon and Ferdinand IV of Castile persuade Pope Clement V to grant the papal bull &quot;Indesinentis cure&quot;, authorizing them approval and church financial support for a crusade to rid the Iberian peninsula of Islam, as well as to conquer Corsica and Sardinia. The two monarchs fail to mention their collaboration with the Muslim Marinid Empire, and use the papal bull to plan a blockade of the Strait of Gibraltar with their combined fleet of 40 warships on their mission to expel the Saracen forces from Spain.
* April 29 – Pope Clement V issues the papal bull &quot;Prioribus decanis&quot; granting King Ferdinand IV of clergy taxes collected in Castile, in order to finance the war against Granada.
* April – After his ascent to the throne, the Emir Nasr ad-Din Muhammad of Granada sends envoys to the Marinid court at Fez, in Morocco.
* May 5 – Robert the Wise becomes the new King of Naples upon the death of his father, Charles the Lame. 
* May 12 – Marinid Sultan Abu al-Rabi Sulayman launches an attack on Ceuta. He concludes an alliance with King James II of Castile, and concedes commercial benefits to Castilian merchants. Abu al-Rabi also sends 1,000 measures of wheat to Aragon. A few months later, Marinid forces, without Castilian support, occupy Ceuta and expel Saracen forces from Morocco. 
* June 15 – The second coronation of Charles I as King of Hungary takes place at Székesfehérvár after a first attempt in 1301 was not recognized.

=== July – September ===
* July 3 – Portugal joins forces with the kingdoms of Castile and Aragon in their attack on Gibraltar.
* July 18 – King James II of Aragon and his navy depart from Valencia on their expedition to begin the Siege of Almería.
* July 21 – The north African territory of Ceuta, controlled by the Emirate of Granada, is conquered by a fleet of ships, led by Eimeric de Bellveí, from the Kingdom of Aragon.
* July 30 – (21 Safar 709 A.H.) Siege of Algeciras: Castilian forces led by Ferdinand IV &quot;the Summoned&quot;&quot;) begin the siege of Algeciras, capital of the Emirate of Granada. King Denis I of Portugal (&quot;the Poet King&quot;) sends a contingent of 700 knights to support the siege. He provides Ferdinand, in accordance with his friendship, a loan of 16,600 silver marks.
* August 11 – Siege of Almería: Aragonese forces (some 12,000 men) under King James II of Aragon (&quot;James the Just&quot;) land on the coast of Almería and begin blockading the city with his fleet. His forces include siege engines such as mangonels and trebuchets. James orders multiple unsuccessful assaults on the city and is forced (due to a shortage of supplies) to make a truce in December.
* August 15 – Conquest of Rhodes: The Byzantine garrison of the city of Rhodes surrenders to the Crusader forces of the Knights Hospitaller under Grand Master Foulques de Villaret – completing their conquest of Rhodes. The knights establish their headquarters on the island and rename themselves as the Knights of Rhodes.
* August 23 – A relief force from the Emirate of Granada attempts to drive out the Kingdom of Aragon forces at Almeria, but loses thousands of men.
* September 12 – Siege of Gibraltar: Castilian forces under Juan Núñez II de Lara and Alonso Pérez de Guzmán besiege and conquer the Saracen fortress at Gibraltar, which had been held by them for nearly 600 years (since the year 711). During the siege, the port is blockaded. Ferdinand IV of Castile orders repairs of the damaged city walls.

=== October – December ===
* October 1 – In Italy, the Archbishop of Milan, Cassone della Torre, is imprisoned by troops sent by his cousin Guido della Torre to attack the archbishop&#x27;s palace. 
* October 18 
**At Avignon, Pope Clement V signs a mandate consenting &quot;for any persons who wanted to proceed against the memory of Boniface VIII to proceed&quot; and sends it to the Bishop of Paris for the posthumous trial of Boniface for heresy.
**King Edward II summons a council to meet at York, but several nobles (the earls of Lancaster, Lincoln, Warwick, Oxford and Arundel) refuse to attend due to Piers Gaveston&#x27;s attendance. Since he returned from exile, Gaveston tries to alienate the nobles from the king.
* October 20 – In what is now central Myanmar, the coronation of Thihathu as the monarch of the Myinsaing Kingdom takes place.
* October 22 – The trial of the Knights Templar arrested in England begins and will continue for the next five months, ending on March 18, 1310.
* October 29 – Archbishop Cassone della Torre of Milan is exiled to Bologna by his cousin Guido, who is later excommunicated. 
* October 31 – In India, Alauddin Khalji, Sultan of Delhi, orders General Malik Kafur to invade the Kakatiya kingdom, ruled by Prataparudra, and to besiege its capital, Warangal (now in India&#x27;s Telangana state). 
* October – About 500 knights led by John of Castile, Lord of Valencia de Campos, uncle of King James II of Castile, desert the Castilian encampment during the Siege of Algeciras because they are not getting paid and because one-sixth of Granada will be ceded to the Kingdom of Aragon. King Ferdinand of Aragon continues the siege.
* November 4 – Pope Clement V declares that Knights Hospitaller will not be sent to the Holy Land and Jerusalem, and that they will be limited to defending the Mediterranean Sea including Cyprus and Rhodes.
* November 13 – After a layover in Masudspur, the Delhi Sultanate Army of General Kafur resumes its march toward Warangal, stopping at Sultanpur on November 19, at Khandar on December 5 and at Nikanth on December 27.
* November 19 – Pope Clement V reverses the excommunication of Flemish hero Willem van Saeftinghe and grants him absolution, but requires him to join the Knights Hospitaller in their crusade at the island of Rhodes.
* December 18 – In Spain, three months after the September 19 death of Alonso Pérez de Guzmán, Fernando Ponce de León is made the new ruler of Marchena, as well as Bornos, Espera, Rota and Chipiona by King Ferdinand IV of Castile.

=== By place ===
==== England ====
* Alnwick Castle in Northumberland is bought by the House of Percy, later Earls of Northumberland.

==== Cities and Towns ====
* The village of Lukáčovce in Slovakia first appears in the historical records.

== Births ==
* March 25 – Robert de Ferrers, English nobleman and knight (d. 1350)
* June 9 – Rupert I, German nobleman and count palatine (d. 1390) 
* December 6 – Humphrey de Bohun, English nobleman (d. 1361)
*&quot;probable&quot; – Aldona of Lithuania (or &quot;Anna&quot;), queen consort of Poland (d. 1339)
* Conrad of Megenberg, German scholar and scientist (d. 1374)

== Deaths ==
* January 4 – Angela of Foligno, Italian nun, mystic and writer (b. 1248) 
* February 9 – Nanpo Shōmyō, Japanese monk and priest (b. 1235)
* March 7 – Lovato Lovati, Italian scholar, judge and writer (b. 1241)
* April 10 (probable) – Elisabeth von Rapperswil, Swiss noblewoman (b. 1251)
* May 5 – King Charles II &quot;the Lame&quot; of Naples), son of Charles I of Anjou (b. 1254)
* May 19 – Agostino Novello, Italian priest and prior general (b. 1240)
* July 13 – John I, Dutch nobleman and bishop (House of Nassau)
* July 16 – James Stewart, Scottish nobleman and knight (b. 1260)
* August 10 – Giovanni Boccamazza, Italian cardinal and archbishop
* September 19 – Alonso Pérez de Guzmán, Spanish nobleman (b. 1256)
* October 6 – Frederick VII, German nobleman (House of Hohenzollern)
* October 18 – Tettsū Gikai, Japanese monk and Zen Master (b. 1219)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5726" start="5" end="9" title="1309" label="1309"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726" start="11" end="36" title="1309" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCIX]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235676" start="44" end="77" title="common year starting on Wednesday" label="common year starting on Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="85" end="100" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221" start="141" end="150" title="January 6" label="January 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q152717" start="171" end="189" title="Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry of Luxemburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="199" end="217" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="300" end="306" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313" start="363" end="373" title="February 2" label="February 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="461" end="479" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q726980" start="567" end="587" title="Guillaume de Nogaret" label="Guillaume de Nogaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334" start="591" end="602" title="February 15" label="February 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q212890" start="610" end="627" title="Denis of Portugal" label="Denis of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q368643" start="732" end="753" title="University of Coimbra" label="University of Coimbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355" start="932" end="943" title="February 24" label="February 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="961" end="984" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="Ferdinand IV of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="1018" end="1035" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Kingdom of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312735" start="1050" end="1063" title="James II of Aragon" label="King Jaume II"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="1097" end="1115" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Emirate of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401" start="1119" end="1126" title="March 9" label="March 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="1129" end="1143" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1217" end="1221" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="1244" end="1251" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271735" start="1296" end="1312" title="Kingdom of Arles" label="Kingdom of Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q202558" start="1327" end="1341" title="Avignon Papacy" label="Avignon Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616" start="1383" end="1391" title="Poitiers" label="Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1475" end="1492" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="1548" end="1568" title="Babylonian captivity" label="Babylonian captivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404" start="1592" end="1600" title="March 14" label="March 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q704786" start="1629" end="1641" title="Muhammad III of Granada" label="Muhammad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q321060" start="1732" end="1750" title="Nasr of Granada" label="Abu al-Juyush Nasr"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="1768" end="1786" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Emirate of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q193780" start="1834" end="1843" title="Almuñécar" label="Almuñécar"/>
<link wikidata="Q65684896" start="1861" end="1886" title="Abu Abdallah ibn al-Hakim" label="Abu Abdallah ibn al-Hakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529" start="1923" end="1931" title="April 24" label="April 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q312735" start="1948" end="1966" title="James II of Aragon" label="James II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="1971" end="1994" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="Ferdinand IV of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="2004" end="2018" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259833" start="2028" end="2072" title="Bull of the Crusade" label="the papal bull &amp;quot;Indesinentis cure&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="2360" end="2379" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2471" end="2476" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535" start="2480" end="2488" title="April 29" label="April 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q118" start="2670" end="2675" title="April" label="April"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="2788" end="2791" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="2796" end="2803" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550" start="2807" end="2812" title="May 5" label="May 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q290720" start="2815" end="2830" title="Robert, King of Naples" label="Robert the Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862798" start="2847" end="2861" title="King of Naples" label="King of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q314331" start="2892" end="2908" title="Charles II of Naples" label="Charles the Lame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559" start="2913" end="2919" title="May 12" label="May 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q590827" start="2937" end="2957" title="Abu al-Rabi Sulayman" label="Abu al-Rabi Sulayman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="2980" end="2985" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="3264" end="3271" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613" start="3276" end="3283" title="June 15" label="June 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812488" start="3297" end="3307" title="Coronation of the Hungarian monarch" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="3311" end="3320" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412254" start="3324" end="3339" title="King of Hungary" label="King of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q130212" start="3355" end="3369" title="Székesfehérvár" label="Székesfehérvár"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699" start="3448" end="3454" title="July 3" label="July 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="3457" end="3465" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2730" start="3551" end="3558" title="July 18" label="July 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276309" start="3652" end="3668" title="Siege of Almería (1309)" label="Siege of Almería"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727" start="3672" end="3679" title="July 21" label="July 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="3713" end="3718" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q20015451" start="3758" end="3790" title="Battle of Ceuta (1309)" label="is conquered by a fleet of ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716" start="3849" end="3856" title="July 30" label="July 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118163" start="3879" end="3897" title="Siege of Algeciras (1309–1310)" label="Siege of Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q484552" start="3987" end="3996" title="Algeciras" label="Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q212890" start="4033" end="4057" title="Denis of Portugal" label="King Denis I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778" start="4233" end="4242" title="August 11" label="August 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276309" start="4245" end="4261" title="Siege of Almería (1309)" label="Siege of Almería"/>
<link wikidata="Q10400" start="4378" end="4385" title="Almería" label="Almería"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="4451" end="4463" title="siege engine" label="siege engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q921249" start="4473" end="4481" title="mangonel" label="mangonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19776" start="4487" end="4496" title="trebuchet" label="trebuchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2774" start="4632" end="4641" title="August 15" label="August 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q28746090" start="4644" end="4662" title="Hospitaller conquest of Rhodes" label="Conquest of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q188731" start="4702" end="4708" title="Rhodes (city)" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="4750" end="4769" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439825" start="4789" end="4809" title="Foulques de Villaret" label="Foulques de Villaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="4841" end="4847" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="4933" end="4950" title="Knights of Rhodes" label="Knights of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821" start="4954" end="4963" title="August 23" label="August 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849" start="5102" end="5114" title="September 12" label="September 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q981031" start="5117" end="5135" title="First siege of Gibraltar" label="Siege of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892044" start="5160" end="5181" title="Juan Núñez II de Lara" label="Juan Núñez II de Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734497" start="5186" end="5208" title="Alonso Pérez de Guzmán" label="Alonso Pérez de Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="5253" end="5262" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23519" start="5329" end="5332" title="AD 711" label="711"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913" start="5472" end="5481" title="October 1" label="October 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231328" start="5498" end="5517" title="Archbishop of Milan" label="Archbishop of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3662024" start="5519" end="5538" title="Cassone della Torre" label="Cassone della Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q323020" start="5583" end="5600" title="Guido della Torre" label="Guido della Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964" start="5644" end="5654" title="October 18" label="October 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="5661" end="5668" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="5670" end="5684" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="5778" end="5791" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="5901" end="5910" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="5940" end="5944" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q710482" start="6052" end="6066" title="Piers Gaveston, 1st Earl of Cornwall" label="Piers Gaveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959" start="6171" end="6181" title="October 20" label="October 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="6207" end="6214" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066500" start="6234" end="6242" title="Thihathu" label="Thihathu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446205" start="6265" end="6282" title="Myinsaing Kingdom" label="Myinsaing Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957" start="6298" end="6308" title="October 22" label="October 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517734" start="6328" end="6343" title="Knights Templar in England" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2951" start="6443" end="6453" title="October 29" label="October 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q3662024" start="6467" end="6486" title="Cassone della Torre" label="Cassone della Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="6509" end="6516" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949" start="6570" end="6580" title="October 31" label="October 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q335362" start="6593" end="6608" title="Alauddin Khalji" label="Alauddin Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="6610" end="6625" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Sultan of Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181417" start="6642" end="6653" title="Malik Kafur" label="Malik Kafur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086556" start="6668" end="6684" title="Kakatiya dynasty" label="Kakatiya kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238615" start="6695" end="6707" title="Prataparudra" label="Prataparudra"/>
<link wikidata="Q39091134" start="6713" end="6735" title="Siege of Warangal (1310)" label="to besiege its capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q25563103" start="6737" end="6745" title="Warangal" label="Warangal"/>
<link wikidata="Q677037" start="6767" end="6776" title="Telangana" label="Telangana"/>
<link wikidata="Q124" start="6788" end="6795" title="October" label="October"/>
<link wikidata="Q926544" start="6823" end="6866" title="John of Castile, Lord of Valencia de Campos" label="John of Castile, Lord of Valencia de Campos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994" start="7120" end="7130" title="November 4" label="November 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="7206" end="7215" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="7220" end="7229" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984" start="7327" end="7338" title="November 13" label="November 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026" start="7544" end="7555" title="November 19" label="November 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596422" start="7618" end="7639" title="Willem van Saeftinghe" label="Willem van Saeftinghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="7750" end="7756" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438" start="7760" end="7771" title="December 18" label="December 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734497" start="7829" end="7851" title="Alonso Pérez de Guzmán" label="Alonso Pérez de Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444880" start="7853" end="7875" title="Fernando Ponce de León" label="Fernando Ponce de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q929481" start="7901" end="7909" title="Marchena, Spain" label="Marchena"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="7964" end="7987" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="Ferdinand IV of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320427" start="8027" end="8041" title="Alnwick Castle" label="Alnwick Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="8045" end="8059" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063857" start="8077" end="8091" title="House of Percy" label="House of Percy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277389" start="8099" end="8122" title="Earl of Northumberland" label="Earls of Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092830" start="8169" end="8178" title="Lukáčovce" label="Lukáčovce"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="8182" end="8190" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="8212" end="8230" title="History" label="historical records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454" start="8248" end="8256" title="March 25" label="March 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351399" start="8259" end="8276" title="Robert de Ferrers, 3rd Baron Ferrers of Chartley" label="Robert de Ferrers"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="8286" end="8294" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094" start="8310" end="8314" title="1350" label="1350"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618" start="8318" end="8324" title="June 9" label="June 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q63749" start="8327" end="8335" title="Rupert I, Elector Palatine" label="Rupert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q22932" start="8357" end="8371" title="count palatine" label="count palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375" start="8376" end="8380" title="1390" label="1390"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303" start="8385" end="8395" title="December 6" label="December 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089853" start="8398" end="8415" title="Humphrey de Bohun, 6th Earl of Hereford" label="Humphrey de Bohun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159" start="8438" end="8442" title="1361" label="1361"/>
<link wikidata="Q252763" start="8468" end="8487" title="Aldona of Lithuania" label="Aldona of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q577867" start="8528" end="8534" title="Kingdom of Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051" start="8539" end="8543" title="1339" label="1339"/>
<link wikidata="Q66631" start="8547" end="8566" title="Conrad of Megenberg" label="Conrad of Megenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269" start="8601" end="8605" title="1374" label="1374"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168" start="8623" end="8632" title="January 4" label="January 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q240297" start="8635" end="8652" title="Angela of Foligno" label="Angela of Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="8667" end="8673" title="Mysticism" label="mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483" start="8689" end="8693" title="1248" label="1248"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324" start="8698" end="8708" title="February 9" label="February 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q10797119" start="8711" end="8723" title="Nanpo Shōmyō" label="Nanpo Shōmyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425" start="8754" end="8758" title="1235" label="1235"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394" start="8762" end="8769" title="March 7" label="March 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091362" start="8772" end="8785" title="Lovato Lovati" label="Lovato Lovati"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436" start="8825" end="8829" title="1241" label="1241"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502" start="8833" end="8841" title="April 10" label="April 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330477" start="8855" end="8879" title="Elisabeth von Rapperswil" label="Elisabeth von Rapperswil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494" start="8902" end="8906" title="1251" label="1251"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550" start="8910" end="8915" title="May 5" label="May 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q314331" start="8918" end="8964" title="Charles II of Naples" label="King Charles II &amp;quot;the Lame&amp;quot; of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q203829" start="8974" end="8992" title="Charles I of Anjou" label="Charles I of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500" start="8997" end="9001" title="1254" label="1254"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578" start="9005" end="9011" title="May 19" label="May 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q385253" start="9014" end="9030" title="Agostino Novello" label="Agostino Novello"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435" start="9069" end="9073" title="1240" label="1240"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687" start="9077" end="9084" title="July 13" label="July 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q831419" start="9087" end="9093" title="John I, Bishop-Elect of Utrecht" label="John I"/>
<link wikidata="Q646085" start="9122" end="9137" title="House of Nassau" label="House of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731" start="9141" end="9148" title="July 16" label="July 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q361611" start="9151" end="9164" title="James Stewart, 5th High Steward of Scotland" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508" start="9199" end="9203" title="1260" label="1260"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779" start="9207" end="9216" title="August 10" label="August 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520234" start="9219" end="9238" title="Giovanni Boccamazza" label="Giovanni Boccamazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896" start="9274" end="9286" title="September 19" label="September 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734497" start="9289" end="9311" title="Alonso Pérez de Guzmán" label="Alonso Pérez de Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502" start="9334" end="9338" title="1256" label="1256"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928" start="9342" end="9351" title="October 6" label="October 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q73987" start="9354" end="9367" title="Frederick VII, Count of Zollern" label="Frederick VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="9386" end="9407" title="House of Hohenzollern" label="House of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964" start="9411" end="9421" title="October 18" label="October 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080763" start="9424" end="9436" title="Tettsū Gikai" label="Tettsū Gikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998748" start="9456" end="9466" title="Zen Master" label="Zen Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388" start="9471" end="9475" title="1219" label="1219"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39955" wikidata="Q5734" url="?curid=39955" title="1312">
<text>Year 1312 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXII]]) was a leap year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
===January – March===
* January 13 – English royal favourite Piers Gaveston, having returned secretly from two months exile on the continent, is reunited, probably at Knaresborough Castle, with King Edward II, who on January 18 restores all Gaveston&#x27;s confiscated lands to him. They plan to travel to Scotland to seek help from King Robert the Bruce.
* February 7 – In Scotland, Dungal MacDouall is forced to surrender Dumfries Castle to the forces of King Robert the Bruce. Despite having helped in the murder of King Robert&#x27;s brothers in 1308, Dungal is allowed to go into exile rather than being put to death.
* February 20 – Öljaitü, the Ikhanate of the Mongol Empire&#x27;s territory in the Middle East, carries out a purge of corrupt officials, with the arrest and execution of his vizier, Sa&#x27;d al-Din Savaji and one of Sa&#x27;d al-Din&#x27;s closest aides, Taj al-Din Avaji,
* February 29 – The division of Greater Poland (Wielkopolska) is carried out by the sons of Henry III, Duke of Silesia-Glogau, with Konrad I and Bolesław receiving the eastern portion of Henry III&#x27;s lands, and Henry IV, Jan and Przemko II retaining the rest.
* March 9 – Beatrice, Countess of Montfort, French noblewoman and co-ruler of Montfort, dies and is succeeded as Countess by her daughter Yolande of Dreux, former Queen consort of Scotland and wife of Arthur II, Duke of Brittany.
* March 22 – Pope Clement V, under pressure from King Philip IV of France, officially disbands the Order of the Knights Templar at the Council of Vienne, issuing the bull &quot;Vox in excelso&quot;. The Order&#x27;s property and monetary assets are given to a rival order, the Knights Hospitaller. Meanwhile, Jacques de Molay, last Grand Master of the Knights Templar, is held in prison in Paris, where he is forced to commit false confessions.

===April – June===
* April 4 – At the Council of Vienne in France, a future Christian Crusade against a Muslim nation is approved by the 180 participants in the 15th Roman Catholic ecumenical council (including 20 cardinals and 122 bishops), convened by Pope Clement V. While agreeing that a Crusade should take place within one year, the parties disagree over where it should take place, with suggestions of attacking the Spanish Emirate of Granada, the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia, or the Sultanate of Egypt. Although tithes will be collected from Catholic churches to support the venture, the proposed crusade never takes place.
* April 10 – The threat of a takeover by the Kingdom of France against the sovereign French Archdiocese of Lyon is ended when the Archbishop Pierre de Savoie signs a treaty granting King Philip the Fair the authority to administer the Lyon courts and law enforcement system.
* April 14 – In Germany, Frederick I, Margrave of Meissen signs the Treaty of Tangermünde after having been captured by Waldemar the Great of Brandenburg. Under the treaty, Meissen cedes its territory between the Elbe River and the Elster River to Brandenburg, and Frederick the Brave pays 32,000 silver coins to Waldemar.
* May 1 – Mladen II Šubić of Bribir becomes the new Ban of Croatia upon the death of his father, Paul I Šubić. 
* May 2 – Pope Clement V orders the confiscation of all property of the Knights Templar in the papal bull &quot;Ad providam&quot;.
* May 4 – Edward II and Piers Gaveston are at Newcastle upon Tyne when they are alerted to the news of an English force under Henry Percy and Robert Clifford is heading for them. They manage to escape to Scarborough Castle. 
* May 6 – The Council of Vienne (convened in the southeastern French town of Vienne, in the modern-day département of Isère) is closed by Pope Clement V almost seven months after opening on October 16. During its session, the Knights Templar organization was outlawed, the matter of a posthumous trial against the late Pope Boniface VIII was tabled and forgotten about, and a pledge was made to raise tithes and offerings for a new crusade to someday be made against the Muslims. A medieval historian, John of Saint-Victor, writes later that &quot;It was said by many that the council was created for the purpose of extorting money.&quot;
* May 13 – Frederick IV becomes the new Duke of Lorraine upon the death of his father, Theobald II.
* May 19 – Scarborough Castle is captured by English forces under the command of Aymer de Valence, 2nd Earl of Pembroke after a two week siege with the surrender of Piers Gaveston, after Aymer gives his word that Gaveston will not be harmed. 
* May 28 – After the Emir Abu al-Juyush Nasr of Granada asks for help from King Ferdinand IV of Castile, the Kingdom of Castile&#x27;s forces, commanded by Peter of Castile, Lord of Cameros, Ferdinand&#x27;s son of King Sancho IV, defeats the rebel Granadan Governor of Malaga, Abu Said Faraj in battle. Abu Said is allowed to retain his post as Governor of Málaga and resumes paying tributes to the Emir.
* June 15 – Battle of Rozgony: Hungarian forces led by King Charles I defeat the family of Palatine Amadeus Aba near Rozgony. During the battle, Charles losses his royal standard, but is reinforced by German mercenaries from Košice (now part of the Republic of Slovakia). The rebel army is routed, and Charles extends his power base in Hungary. His position is secured and resistance (reduced by the magnates&#x27; opposition) against Charles&#x27; rule comes to an end.
* June 19 – One month after surrendering Scarborough Castle to the Earl of Pembroke and having his life spared, Piers Gaveston is executed at Blacklow Hill after having been taken hostage by Guy de Beauchamp, 10th Earl of Warwick and put in a dungeon at Warwick Castle.
* June 29 – Henry VII is crowned emperor of the Holy Roman Empire in the Lateran Palace, since St Peter&#x27;s Basilica is occupied by Romans hostile to him.

===July – September===
* July 6 (1 Showa, 2nd day of 6th month) – Hirotoki Hojo becomes the regent for the Kamakura shogunate in Japan.
* July 8 – In Italy, Francesco I Pico, Lord of Mirandola, is captured at Baggiovara by Guelph rebels in Bologna, while on his way home to Mirandola after being invested by the Holy Roman Emperor, Henry VII as imperial vicar. Pico is imprisoned for the next nine months before being released to resume his Lordship.
* July 13
**Giovanni Soranzo is elected as the new Doge to lead the Republic of Venice, 10 days after the death of the Doge Marino Zorzi and will serve for the next 18 years.
**King Ferdinand IV of Castile leaves his palace at Ávila for the last time, placing his son Prince Alfonso in charge, and arrives in Toledo before proceeding to the province of Jaén to join his younger brother.
* August 27 – In France, Jean III, nicknamed &quot;John the Good&quot; becomes the new Duke of Brittany upon the death of his father, Arthur II. 
* September 7 – King Ferdinand IV of Castile dies after a 17-year reign and is succeeded by his one-year-old son Alfonso XI. King Alfonso&#x27;s mother, Queen consort Constance, becomes regent.
* September 27 – The Charter of Kortenberg is signed, and is possibly the first constitution which allows democratic decisions in feudal mainland Europe.

===October – December===
* October 13 – Özbeg Khan, the Mongol ruler of much of Russia, demands that the Middle East Mongol ruler Öljaitü cede to him the Azerbaijan territory of modern-day Iran.
* October 31 – Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor abandons his campaign against Florence.
* November 9 – Otto III, Duke of Lower Bavaria and former King of Hungary, dies at his capital at Landshut (&quot;Niederbayern&quot;). Otto had shared power with his two brothers Louis III (who died in 1296) and Stephen I (who died in 1310), and the only heirs are the minor children of Stephen, 7-year-old Henry XIV and 5-year-old Otto IV, and Otto&#x27;s 2-month-old son Henry XV, Duke of Bavaria. 
* November 13 – Four years after the marriage of King Edward II of England and Queen consort Isabella, an heir to the throne is born at Windsor Castle, and will be christened four days later. Prince Edward. Upon the death of Edward II in 1327, his son will be crowned King Edward III at the age of 14.
* December 7 – Michael II, Syrian Orthodox patriarch of Antioch, dies after a service of 20 years. Michael III Yeshu will be elected his successor.
* December 13 – John Hotham is appointed as the new Chancellor of the Exchequer in England by King Edward and serves for three and a half years.
* December 15 – In Germany, Henry II the Lion, ruler of Mecklenburg, succeeds in his conquest of the Lordship of Rostock, at the time a protectorate of King Eric VI Menved of Denmark. 
* December 23 – At Avignon in France, Pope Clement V elevates nine bishops, all French, to the position of Roman Catholic cardinals. The nine include Jacques d&#x27;Euse, Bishop of Avignon, who will be elected Pope John XXII as Clement&#x27;s successor in 1316.

==By place (date unknown)==
===Europe===
* Battle of Amorgos: A Knights Hospitaller fleet intercepts and destroys a Turkish fleet near the island of Amorgos. During the battle, all 23 Turkish ships are burnt.
* Winter – Battle of Gallipoli: A combined Byzantine-Serbian force (supported by a Genoese fleet) defeats the Turcopoles (some 2,000 men) at Gallipoli.

==== Middle East ====
* Öljaitü of the Ilkhanate briefly raids into Syria, with Siege of Al-Rahba. He withdraws in the same year, ending the Mongol invasions of the Levant

==== Africa ====
* Mansa Musa becomes ruler of the Mali Empire, guiding his realm through its prosperous years, enhancing trade, expanding borders and sponsoring mosques (approximate date).
* The Canary Islands are &quot;rediscovered&quot; by Lancelotto Malocello, Genoese navigator, who sails to Lanzarote, and remains there for almost two decades.

== Births ==
* September 17 – William Donn de Burgh, Irish nobleman (d. 1333)
* November 13 – Edward III, king of England and Ireland (d. 1377)
* William II, Latin prince and knight (House of Barcelona) (d. 1338)

== Deaths ==
* January 23 – Isabella of Villehardouin, Latin princess (b. 1263)
* March 9 – Beatrice, French noblewoman and co-ruler (b. 1249)
* March 10 – Casimir of Bytom, Polish nobleman (House of Piast)
* May 1 – Paul I, Croatian nobleman, knight and oligarch (b. 1245)
* May 13 – Theobald II, Duke of Lorraine, German nobleman (b. 1263)
* June 19 – Piers Gaveston, English nobleman and knight (b. 1284)
* August 27 – Angelo da Foligno, Italian priest (b. 1226)
* September 7 – Ferdinand IV, king of Castile and León (b. 1285)
* October 27
** Gentile Portino da Montefiore, Italian cardinal-priest (b. 1240)
** John II, Duke of Brabant, Dutch nobleman and knight (b. 1275)
* October 28 – Elisabeth of Carinthia, queen of Germany (b. 1262)
* October 29 – Landolfo Brancaccio, Italian aristocrat and cardinal
* November 2 – Afonso of Portugal, Portuguese prince (b. 1263)
* November 6 – Christina von Stommeln, German nun (b. 1242)
* November 9 – Mujū Dōkyō, Japanese Buddhist monk (b. 1227)
* December 7 – Michael II, Syrian Orthodox patriarch of Antioch
* December 13 – John the Parricide, German nobleman (b. 1290)
* Eschiva of Ibelin, Outremer noblewoman and co-ruler (b. 1253)
* Guido della Torre, Italian nobleman and rebel leader (b. 1259)
* Malatesta da Verucchio, Italian nobleman and knight (b. 1212)
* Reginald le Chen, Scottish nobleman and high sheriff (b. 1235)
* Siemowit of Dobrzyń, Polish prince and knight (House of Piast)
* Valdemar IV, Danish nobleman and knight (House of Estridsen)
* Xenia of Tarusa, Russian noblewoman and princess (b. 1246)
* Zayn al-Din al-Amidi, Arab scholar, academic, jurist and writer

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5734" start="5" end="9" title="1312" label="1312"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734" start="11" end="37" title="1312" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXII]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q217026" start="45" end="75" title="leap year starting on Saturday" label="leap year starting on Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="83" end="98" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255" start="138" end="148" title="January 13" label="January 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q710482" start="175" end="189" title="Piers Gaveston, Earl of Cornwall" label="Piers Gaveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421781" start="281" end="301" title="Knaresborough Castle" label="Knaresborough Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="313" end="322" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="420" end="428" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="452" end="468" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322" start="472" end="482" title="February 7" label="February 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315072" start="498" end="514" title="Dungal MacDouall" label="Dungal MacDouall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313791" start="538" end="553" title="Dumfries Castle" label="Dumfries Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344" start="739" end="750" title="February 20" label="February 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q297065" start="753" end="760" title="Öljaitü" label="Öljaitü"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364" start="1014" end="1025" title="February 29" label="February 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q211371" start="1044" end="1058" title="Greater Poland" label="Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q573444" start="1104" end="1137" title="Henry III, Duke of Silesia-Glogau" label="Henry III, Duke of Silesia-Glogau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401" start="1278" end="1285" title="March 9" label="March 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877103" start="1288" end="1318" title="Beatrice, Countess of Montfort" label="Beatrice, Countess of Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q251655" start="1354" end="1362" title="Montfort-l&amp;#x27;Amaury" label="Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082875" start="1414" end="1430" title="Yolande of Dreux, Queen of Scotland" label="Yolande of Dreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q506501" start="1477" end="1504" title="Arthur II, Duke of Brittany" label="Arthur II, Duke of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435" start="1508" end="1516" title="March 22" label="March 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="1519" end="1533" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="1560" end="1579" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="1618" end="1633" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q543076" start="1641" end="1658" title="Council of Vienne" label="Council of Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064085" start="1683" end="1697" title="Vox in excelso" label="Vox in excelso"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="1783" end="1802" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q208215" start="1815" end="1831" title="Jacques de Molay" label="Jacques de Molay"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1896" end="1901" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508" start="1973" end="1980" title="April 4" label="April 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q543076" start="1990" end="2007" title="Council of Vienne" label="Council of Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2019" end="2069" title="Crusades after Acre, 1291–1399#Philip IV and a new crusade" label="a future Christian Crusade against a Muslim nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="2211" end="2220" title="Clement V" label="Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="2383" end="2401" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Emirate of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q335088" start="2407" end="2434" title="Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia" label="Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="2472" end="2477" title="tithe" label="tithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502" start="2586" end="2594" title="April 10" label="April 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364921" start="2676" end="2695" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Lyon" label="Archdiocese of Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387699" start="2714" end="2741" title="Peter of Savoy (archbishop)" label="Archbishop Pierre de Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500" start="2861" end="2869" title="April 14" label="April 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q694358" start="2884" end="2916" title="Frederick I, Margrave of Meissen" label="Frederick I, Margrave of Meissen"/>
<link wikidata="Q565434" start="2979" end="2997" title="Waldemar, Margrave of Brandenburg-Stendal" label="Waldemar the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="3001" end="3012" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325077" start="3046" end="3103" title="Elbe-Elster Land" label="its territory between the Elbe River and the Elster River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544" start="3184" end="3189" title="May 1" label="May 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048627" start="3192" end="3217" title="Mladen II Šubić of Bribir" label="Mladen II Šubić of Bribir"/>
<link wikidata="Q253779" start="3234" end="3248" title="Ban of Croatia" label="Ban of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291568" start="3279" end="3291" title="Paul I Šubić of Bribir" label="Paul I Šubić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545" start="3296" end="3301" title="May 2" label="May 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q345795" start="3406" end="3417" title="Ad providam" label="Ad providam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549" start="3427" end="3432" title="May 4" label="May 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="3471" end="3490" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785021" start="3551" end="3562" title="Henry Percy, 1st Baron Percy" label="Henry Percy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351392" start="3567" end="3582" title="Robert Clifford, 1st Baron Clifford" label="Robert Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963850" start="3629" end="3647" title="Scarborough Castle" label="Scarborough Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552" start="3652" end="3657" title="May 6" label="May 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q543076" start="3664" end="3681" title="Council of Vienne" label="Council of Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q26849" start="3727" end="3733" title="Vienne, Isère" label="Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12559" start="3768" end="3773" title="Isère" label="Isère"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="3788" end="3802" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="3876" end="3891" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560" start="4291" end="4297" title="May 13" label="May 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q562051" start="4300" end="4312" title="Frederick IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="4329" end="4345" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q571525" start="4376" end="4387" title="Theobald II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theobald II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578" start="4391" end="4397" title="May 19" label="May 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247422" start="4470" end="4508" title="Aymer de Valence, 2nd Earl of Pembroke" label="Aymer de Valence, 2nd Earl of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q710482" start="4554" end="4568" title="Piers Gaveston" label="Piers Gaveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588" start="4634" end="4640" title="May 28" label="May 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="4653" end="4657" title="Emir" label="Emir"/>
<link wikidata="Q321060" start="4658" end="4676" title="Nasr of Granada" label="Abu al-Juyush Nasr"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="4680" end="4687" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="4712" end="4735" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="Ferdinand IV of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="4741" end="4759" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Kingdom of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469933" start="4788" end="4821" title="Peter of Castile, Lord of Cameros" label="Peter of Castile, Lord of Cameros"/>
<link wikidata="Q312110" start="4847" end="4861" title="Sancho IV of Castile" label="King Sancho IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q25410902" start="4910" end="4924" title="Abu Said Faraj" label="Abu Said Faraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613" start="5040" end="5047" title="June 15" label="June 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q181293" start="5050" end="5067" title="Battle of Rozgony" label="Battle of Rozgony"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="5098" end="5107" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q479138" start="5138" end="5149" title="Amadeus Aba" label="Amadeus Aba"/>
<link wikidata="Q978292" start="5155" end="5162" title="Rozhanovce" label="Rozgony"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="5263" end="5269" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="5287" end="5307" title="Republic of Slovakia" label="Republic of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056854" start="5374" end="5381" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1301–1526)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669" start="5511" end="5518" title="June 19" label="June 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516219" start="5651" end="5664" title="Leek Wootton" label="Blacklow Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122244" start="5700" end="5738" title="Guy de Beauchamp, 10th Earl of Warwick" label="Guy de Beauchamp, 10th Earl of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q941276" start="5763" end="5777" title="Warwick Castle" label="Warwick Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659" start="5781" end="5788" title="June 29" label="June 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q152717" start="5791" end="5800" title="Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="5827" end="5844" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q848394" start="5852" end="5866" title="Lateran Palace" label="Lateran Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q810126" start="5874" end="5898" title="Old St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695" start="5963" end="5969" title="July 6" label="July 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324807" start="5973" end="5978" title="Shōwa (1312–1317)" label="Showa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331538" start="6004" end="6017" title="Hōjō Hirotoki" label="Hirotoki Hojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q736839" start="6045" end="6063" title="Kamakura shogunate" label="Kamakura shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2692" start="6076" end="6082" title="July 8" label="July 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750110" start="6095" end="6111" title="Francesco I Pico" label="Francesco I Pico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615455" start="6121" end="6130" title="Duchy of Mirandola" label="Mirandola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="6178" end="6185" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q152717" start="6250" end="6279" title="Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor, Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687" start="6391" end="6398" title="July 13" label="July 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010686" start="6401" end="6417" title="Giovanni Soranzo" label="Giovanni Soranzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q858316" start="6440" end="6444" title="Doge of Venice" label="Doge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="6457" end="6475" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065976" start="6513" end="6525" title="Marino Zorzi" label="Marino Zorzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="6571" end="6594" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="Ferdinand IV of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q15688" start="6616" end="6621" title="Ávila" label="Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="6698" end="6704" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q95025" start="6730" end="6746" title="Province of Jaén (Spain)" label="province of Jaén"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822" start="6778" end="6787" title="August 27" label="August 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q259146" start="6801" end="6809" title="John III, Duke of Brittany" label="Jean III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352465" start="6863" end="6879" title="List of monarchs of Brittany" label="Duke of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q506501" start="6910" end="6919" title="Arthur II, Duke of Brittany" label="Arthur II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852" start="6924" end="6935" title="September 7" label="September 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="6943" end="6966" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="Ferdinand IV of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q298808" start="7035" end="7045" title="Alfonso XI of Castile" label="Alfonso XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081231" start="7075" end="7098" title="Constance of Portugal" label="Queen consort Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="7108" end="7114" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884" start="7118" end="7130" title="September 27" label="September 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181368" start="7137" end="7158" title="Charter of Kortenberg" label="Charter of Kortenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="7262" end="7268" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925" start="7298" end="7308" title="October 13" label="October 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q335097" start="7311" end="7321" title="Özbeg Khan" label="Özbeg Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q274536" start="7425" end="7435" title="Azerbaijan (Iran)" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="7460" end="7464" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949" start="7468" end="7478" title="October 31" label="October 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q152717" start="7481" end="7510" title="Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="7541" end="7549" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991" start="7553" end="7563" title="November 9" label="November 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q57323" start="7566" end="7574" title="Otto III, Duke of Bavaria" label="Otto III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7576" end="7597" title="List of monarchs of Bavaria#First partition, 1253–1340" label="Duke of Lower Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974" start="7649" end="7657" title="Landshut" label="Landshut"/>
<link wikidata="Q64326" start="7730" end="7739" title="Louis III, Duke of Bavaria" label="Louis III"/>
<link wikidata="Q61967" start="7763" end="7772" title="Stephen I, Duke of Bavaria" label="Stephen I"/>
<link wikidata="Q62649" start="7858" end="7867" title="Henry XIV, Duke of Bavaria" label="Henry XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q64304" start="7883" end="7890" title="Otto IV, Duke of Lower Bavaria" label="Otto IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q61513" start="7924" end="7949" title="Henry XV, Duke of Bavaria" label="Henry XV, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984" start="7954" end="7965" title="November 13" label="November 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="8006" end="8026" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q228642" start="8045" end="8053" title="Isabella of France" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="8088" end="8102" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="8144" end="8157" title="Edward III of England" label="Prince Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299" start="8256" end="8266" title="December 7" label="December 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145296" start="8269" end="8279" title="Michael II of Antioch" label="Michael II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8281" end="8317" title="List of Syriac Orthodox patriarchs of Antioch#Syriac patriarchs from 1292 to 1445" label="Syrian Orthodox patriarch of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379" start="8404" end="8415" title="December 13" label="December 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239960" start="8418" end="8429" title="John Hotham (bishop)" label="John Hotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="8454" end="8481" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383" start="8549" end="8560" title="December 15" label="December 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q71254" start="8575" end="8592" title="Henry II, Lord of Mecklenburg" label="Henry II the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q109057" start="8603" end="8614" title="Mecklenburg" label="Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614435" start="8648" end="8667" title="Lordship of Rostock" label="Lordship of Rostock"/>
<link wikidata="Q164142" start="8683" end="8695" title="protectorate" label="protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q359601" start="8699" end="8729" title="Eric VI of Denmark" label="King Eric VI Menved of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2676" start="8734" end="8745" title="December 23" label="December 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="8751" end="8758" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="8770" end="8784" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="8942" end="8956" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q28555185" start="9038" end="9055" title="Battle of Amorgos (1312)" label="Battle of Amorgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q208587" start="9144" end="9151" title="Amorgos" label="Amorgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265867" start="9215" end="9234" title="Battle of Gallipoli (1312)" label="Battle of Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479646" start="9314" end="9323" title="Turcopole" label="Turcopole"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="9345" end="9354" title="Gallipoli" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q297065" start="9381" end="9388" title="Öljaitü" label="Öljaitü"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="9396" end="9405" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="9425" end="9430" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q125523213" start="9437" end="9454" title="Siege of Al-Rahba" label="Siege of Al-Rahba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397066" start="9498" end="9528" title="Mongol invasions of the Levant" label="Mongol invasions of the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q309333" start="9549" end="9559" title="Mansa Musa" label="Mansa Musa"/>
<link wikidata="Q184536" start="9581" end="9592" title="Mali Empire" label="Mali Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="9726" end="9740" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q537601" start="9773" end="9793" title="Lancelotto Malocello" label="Lancelotto Malocello"/>
<link wikidata="Q182432" start="9827" end="9836" title="Lanzarote" label="Lanzarote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894" start="9896" end="9908" title="September 17" label="September 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568561" start="9911" end="9932" title="William Donn de Burgh, 3rd Earl of Ulster" label="William Donn de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="9940" end="9948" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004" start="9953" end="9957" title="1333" label="1333"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984" start="9961" end="9972" title="November 13" label="November 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="9975" end="9985" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="9995" end="10002" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q844250" start="10007" end="10014" title="Lordship of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289" start="10019" end="10023" title="1377" label="1377"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060357" start="10027" end="10037" title="William II, Duke of Athens" label="William II"/>
<link wikidata="Q661534" start="10064" end="10082" title="House of Barcelona" label="House of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044" start="10088" end="10092" title="1338" label="1338"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276" start="10110" end="10120" title="January 23" label="January 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q261720" start="10123" end="10148" title="Isabella of Villehardouin" label="Isabella of Villehardouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512" start="10169" end="10173" title="1263" label="1263"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401" start="10177" end="10184" title="March 9" label="March 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877103" start="10187" end="10195" title="Beatrice, Countess of Montfort" label="Beatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485" start="10232" end="10236" title="1249" label="1249"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397" start="10240" end="10248" title="March 10" label="March 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q668238" start="10251" end="10267" title="Casimir of Bytom" label="Casimir of Bytom"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="10286" end="10300" title="Piast dynasty" label="House of Piast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544" start="10304" end="10309" title="May 1" label="May 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291568" start="10312" end="10318" title="Paul I Šubić of Bribir" label="Paul I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440" start="10363" end="10367" title="1245" label="1245"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560" start="10371" end="10377" title="May 13" label="May 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q571525" start="10380" end="10409" title="Theobald II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theobald II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669" start="10439" end="10446" title="June 19" label="June 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q710482" start="10449" end="10463" title="Piers Gaveston" label="Piers Gaveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544" start="10497" end="10501" title="1284" label="1284"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822" start="10505" end="10514" title="August 27" label="August 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q26838309" start="10517" end="10534" title="Angelo da Foligno" label="Angelo da Foligno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405" start="10555" end="10559" title="1226" label="1226"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852" start="10563" end="10574" title="September 7" label="September 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="10577" end="10589" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="Ferdinand IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="10599" end="10606" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q175276" start="10611" end="10615" title="Kingdom of León" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546" start="10620" end="10624" title="1285" label="1285"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956" start="10628" end="10638" title="October 27" label="October 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009266" start="10642" end="10671" title="Gentile Portino da Montefiore" label="Gentile Portino da Montefiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435" start="10701" end="10705" title="1240" label="1240"/>
<link wikidata="Q703470" start="10710" end="10734" title="John II, Duke of Brabant" label="John II, Duke of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529" start="10766" end="10770" title="1275" label="1275"/>
<link wikidata="Q2952" start="10774" end="10784" title="October 28" label="October 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q241653" start="10787" end="10809" title="Elisabeth of Carinthia, Queen of the Romans" label="Elisabeth of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q175211" start="10820" end="10827" title="Kingdom of Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510" start="10832" end="10836" title="1262" label="1262"/>
<link wikidata="Q2951" start="10840" end="10850" title="October 29" label="October 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q703860" start="10853" end="10872" title="Landolfo Brancaccio" label="Landolfo Brancaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996" start="10908" end="10918" title="November 2" label="November 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840038" start="10921" end="10939" title="Afonso of Portugal, Lord of Portalegre" label="Afonso of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992" start="10971" end="10981" title="November 6" label="November 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q298265" start="10984" end="11006" title="Christina von Stommeln" label="Christina von Stommeln"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437" start="11023" end="11027" title="1242" label="1242"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991" start="11031" end="11041" title="November 9" label="November 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062835" start="11044" end="11054" title="Mujū" label="Mujū Dōkyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q736311" start="11065" end="11073" title="Buddhism in Japan" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407" start="11083" end="11087" title="1227" label="1227"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299" start="11091" end="11101" title="December 7" label="December 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145296" start="11104" end="11114" title="Michael II of Antioch" label="Michael II"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="11145" end="11152" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379" start="11155" end="11166" title="December 13" label="December 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q696784" start="11169" end="11187" title="John Parricida" label="John the Parricide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552" start="11209" end="11213" title="1290" label="1290"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047004" start="11217" end="11234" title="Eschiva, Lady of Beirut" label="Eschiva of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498" start="11273" end="11277" title="1253" label="1253"/>
<link wikidata="Q323020" start="11281" end="11298" title="Guido della Torre" label="Guido della Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507" start="11338" end="11342" title="1259" label="1259"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738448" start="11346" end="11368" title="Malatesta da Verucchio" label="Malatesta da Verucchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255" start="11402" end="11406" title="1212" label="1212"/>
<link wikidata="Q27907457" start="11410" end="11426" title="Reginald le Chen (died 1312)" label="Reginald le Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425" start="11467" end="11471" title="1235" label="1235"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338139" start="11475" end="11494" title="Siemowit of Dobrzyń" label="Siemowit of Dobrzyń"/>
<link wikidata="Q870782" start="11540" end="11551" title="Valdemar IV, Duke of Schleswig" label="Valdemar IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518738" start="11581" end="11599" title="House of Estridsen" label="House of Estridsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140983" start="11603" end="11618" title="Xenia of Tarusa" label="Xenia of Tarusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441" start="11656" end="11660" title="1246" label="1246"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574950" start="11664" end="11684" title="Zayn al-Din al-Amidi" label="Zayn al-Din al-Amidi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39956" wikidata="Q5731" url="?curid=39956" title="1311">
<text>Year 1311 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXI]]) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
===January – March===
* January 6 – Henry VII, the future Holy Roman Emperor, is crowned King of Italy in Milan with a mock-up of the Iron crown of Lombardy. The Tuscan Guelphs refuse to attend the ceremony and begin preparing for resistance against Henry&#x27;s rule. Henry approves the despotic regimes of Matteo I Visconti in Milan and Cangrande I della Scala in Verona. The cities of Piedmont and Lombardy submit to Henry – in accordance with the proclaimed program of peace and justice. Florence and their Guelph (anti-imperialist) allies in Tuscany and Romagna move to defend themselves against Henry&#x27;s accession.
* February 12 – Milan Uprising: German forces under Baldwin of Luxembourg (brother of Henry VII) crush the Italian Guelph troops, led by Guido della Torre in Milan. A contingent of Teutonic Knights kills and disperses most of the rebels in a single cavalry charge. Guido della Torre escapes, and is condemned to death in absence by Henry.
* March 15 – The Battle of Halmyros is fought in Greece as the mercenaries of the Catalan Company defeat the Latin forces (some 15,000 men), and their allies under Walter V at Halmyros (southern Thessaly). After the battle, they take control of the Duchy of Athens. Later, Catalan forces peacefully occupy all of Attica and Boeotia, which they rule as part of Greece (until the 1380s).
* March 20 – King Ferdinand IV, known as &quot;Ferdinand the Summoned&quot;, grants new privileges to the Catholic Church within the Kingdom of Castile during an assembly at Palencia. In April, Ferdinand becomes seriously ill and is transferred to Valladolid, despite the opposition of his wife, Queen Constance, who wishes to transfer him to Carrión de los Condes (northern Spain).

===April – June=== 
* April 7
**In Asia, Ayurbarwada Buyantu Khan is proclaimed as the Mongol Emperor Renzong of Yuan Dynasty China, 10 weeks after the death of his brother, Külüg Khan.
** Battle of Woplauken: In Europe, the Teutonic Knights defeat the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.
* April 26 – King Henry VII of Italy razes the city walls of Cremona after suppressing the rebellion of the Torriani family against his rule.
* April 27 – Pope Clement V, having decided to let the Council of Vienne determine the question of whether the late Pope Boniface VIII had been guilty of heresy, officially excuses King Philip IV of France from any condemnation of Boniface. 
* May 29 – Sancho the Peaceful of Barcelona becomes the new King of Majorca, a set of islands in the Mediterranean Sea (now Spain&#x27;s Balearic Islands) after the death of his father, King Jaume II
* June 9 – The painting &quot;Maestà&quot; the master work of the Italian artist Duccio di Buoninsegna, is unveiled at the Siena Cathedral in the Republic of Siena.
* June 11 – Boleslaw III the Wasteful, Duke of Wroclaw, renounces his claims to the throne of the Kingdom of Poland 
* June 25 – Matthew III Csák, the Palatine of Hungary, attempts to expand his territory within the kingdom and pillages the area around the town of Buda (now half of the city of Budapest.

===July – September===
* July 6
**Bolad, who had served as the Mongol Empire&#x27;s representative in the Middle East as Ikhanate, is appointed as the Duke of Ze by the Mongol Emperor of Yuan dynasty China, Ayurbarwada Buyantu Khan
**Eleven days after beginning his siege of Buda, Matthew III Csak is excommunicated by Gentile Portino da Montefiore, the Roman Catholic Cardinal sent by Pope Clement V.
* July 13 – Matteo I Visconti is restored to rule over the Duchy of Milan after purchasing the title of imperial vicar from the new King of Italy, Henry VII. 
* July 25 – At Algeciras a fleet of Marinid ships, arrives after being sent by Morocco&#x27;s Sultan Abu Sa&#x27;id Uthman II, who was attempting to restore the Muslim presence.
* August 13 – Pietro Gradenigo, Doge of the Republic of Venice since 1289, dies after a reign of 22 years. Marino Zorzi is elected by the Venetian nobles to replace Gradenigo as the republic&#x27;s chief executive officer.
* August 16 – The Parliament of England presents the Ordinances of 1311 to King Edward II (document dated 5 October; published on 11 October); these substitute the 21 Lord Ordainers for the King as the effective government of the country.
* September 5 – In the northeastern part of the Kingdom of Hungary, in what is now the Republic of Slovakia, the oligarch Amadeus Aba is assassinated by rebels at the south gate of Košice. 
* September 16 – After a four-month siege, Guelph rebels in the Italian city of Brescia surrender to Cangrande I della Scala, Lord of Verona and officer of King Henry VII.

===October – December===
* October 3 – Peace is restored in northeastern Hungary as the envoys of King Charles I arbitrate and agreement between the rebels at Košice and the two sons of the late Amadeus Aba, Amadeus II and Dominic. 
* October 11 – The Ordinances of 1311 are published in England by King Edward II, restricting the power of the monarchs of England.
* October 16 – Council of Vienne: Pope Clement V convokes the 15th Ecumenical Council at Vienne, France, in the presence of 20 cardinals, about 100 archbishops and bishops, and a number of abbots and priors. The main item on the agenda of the council is the Order of the Knights Templar. Clement passes papal bulls to dissolve the Templar Order, confiscate their lands, and label them as heretics. 
* October 28 – King Ferdinand IV of Castile signs the Concord of Palencia with the principal magnates of the rest of the kingdom (including his brother, Prince John of Castile), promising to respect the customs and privileges of the subjects of his towns, and as well as to not deprive the nobles of the rents and lands that belong to the Crown.
* November 5 – Eight days after the signing of the Concord of Palencia, John of Castile violates his promise to his nephew Ferdinand IV and enters into an alliance with Juan Núñez II de Lara.
* November 13 – (1 Ocho, 22nd day of 9th month) Munenobu Hojo becomes the regent for the Kamakura Shogunate (to July 1312).
* November 23 – Pope Clement V appoints Jens Grand, the Danish-born Prince-Archbishopric of Bremen, as the arbiter of a dispute between the Archbishopric of Riga (at the time of Terra Mariana, now the Republic of Latvia) and Teutonic Prussia (now part of Poland).
* November 29 – Alboino I della Scala, the Lord of Verona, dies and is succeeded by his brother Cangrande. 
* December 26 – Al-Mahdi Muhammad bin al-Mutahhar, the Shi&#x27;ite Muslim Imam of the Zaidiyyah state in Yemen, leads Zaidi troops to victory in a battle in the Sheref district against the Sunni Muslim Rasulid sultanate that dominates most of Yemen. A 10-year ceasefire agreement is brokered between Zaidiyyah and the Rasulid Sultan al-Mu&#x27;ayyad Da&#x27;udsultan.

== By place ==
=== England ===
* Bolingbroke Castle passes to the House of Lancaster.
* Lincoln Cathedral in England is completed; with the spire reaching around 525 feet (160 m), it becomes the world&#x27;s tallest structure (surpassing the Great Pyramid of Giza, which held the record for almost 4,000 years), a record it holds until the spire is blown down in 1549.

== Births ==
* March 29 – Amadeus III, Savoyan nobleman and knight (d. 1367)
* April 3 – Margaret de Bohun, English noblewoman (d. 1391)
* July 1 – Liu Bowen, Chinese statesman and politician (d. 1375)
* August 13 – Alfonso XI, nicknamed &quot;Alfonso the Avenger&quot;, King of Castile (d. 1350)
*&quot;unknown dates&quot;
** Margaret I, German queen and Holy Roman Empress (d. 1356)
** Munenaga, Japanese nobleman, prince and priest (d. 1385)
** Peter I, Duke of Bourbon, French nobleman, knight and ambassador (d. 1356)

== Deaths ==
* January 27 – Külüg Khan, Mongol ruler and Emperor Wuzong of the Yuan dynasty China, (b. 1281)
* March 3 (date buried) – Antony Bek, English bishop and patriarch (b. 1245)
* March 15 
** Walter V, French nobleman (House of Brienne) (b. 1275)
** Thomas III d&#x27;Autremencourt, Lord of Salona, Marshal of Achaea
** George I Ghisi, Triarch of Euboea, Baron of Chalandritsa, Lord of Tinos, Mykonos, Serifos and Keos
*April - Botulf Botulfsson, Swedish man executed for heresy
* May 29 – James II of Majorca (b. 1243)
* August 13 – Pietro Gradenigo, Doge of Venice
* September 5 – Amadeus Aba, Hungarian oligarch
* December 14 – Margaret of Brabant, German queen consort (b. 1276)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** David VIII of Georgia (b. 1273)
** Arnold of Villanova, Spanish alchemist and physician (b. 1235)
** Mangrai, founding king of Lan Na (b. 1238)
* &quot;probable&quot; – Bernard Saisset, Occitan bishop of Pamiers (b. 1232)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5731" start="5" end="9" title="1311" label="1311"/>
<link wikidata="Q5731" start="11" end="36" title="1311" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXI]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235680" start="44" end="74" title="common year starting on Friday" label="common year starting on Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="82" end="97" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221" start="137" end="146" title="January 6" label="January 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q152717" start="149" end="189" title="Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VII, the future Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="202" end="215" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="219" end="224" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q545902" start="247" end="257" title="Iron crown" label="Iron crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="261" end="269" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q715225" start="421" end="438" title="Matteo I Visconti" label="Matteo I Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q785349" start="452" end="475" title="Cangrande I della Scala" label="Cangrande I della Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="479" end="485" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="501" end="509" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="605" end="613" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="660" end="667" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q244482" start="672" end="679" title="Romagna" label="Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336" start="740" end="751" title="February 12" label="February 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q65081358" start="754" end="768" title="Milan uprising (1311)" label="Milan Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q152347" start="790" end="811" title="Baldwin of Luxembourg" label="Baldwin of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q323020" start="875" end="892" title="Guido della Torre" label="Guido della Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="919" end="935" title="Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403" start="1079" end="1087" title="March 15" label="March 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064142" start="1094" end="1112" title="Battle of Halmyros" label="Battle of Halmyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501196" start="1159" end="1174" title="Catalan Company" label="Catalan Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q721440" start="1241" end="1249" title="Walter V, Count of Brienne" label="Walter V"/>
<link wikidata="Q965037" start="1253" end="1261" title="Almyros" label="Halmyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="1272" end="1280" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q334714" start="1326" end="1341" title="Duchy of Athens" label="Duchy of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="1390" end="1396" title="Attica" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="1401" end="1408" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1437" end="1443" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427" start="1465" end="1473" title="March 20" label="March 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="1476" end="1493" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="King Ferdinand IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1569" end="1584" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="1596" end="1614" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Kingdom of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q8378" start="1637" end="1645" title="Palencia" label="Palencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8356" start="1711" end="1721" title="Valladolid" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081231" start="1765" end="1774" title="Constance of Portugal" label="Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q986557" start="1806" end="1827" title="Carrión de los Condes" label="Carrión de los Condes"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1838" end="1843" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505" start="1869" end="1876" title="April 7" label="April 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q8540" start="1888" end="1912" title="Ayurbarwada Buyantu Khan" label="Ayurbarwada Buyantu Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8532" start="2021" end="2031" title="Külüg Khan" label="Külüg Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12678149" start="2036" end="2055" title="Battle of Wopławki" label="Battle of Woplauken"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="2072" end="2088" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="2100" end="2124" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532" start="2128" end="2136" title="April 26" label="April 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q152717" start="2139" end="2162" title="Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor" label="King Henry VII of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231" start="2187" end="2194" title="Cremona" label="Cremona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533" start="2270" end="2278" title="April 27" label="April 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="2281" end="2295" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q543076" start="2323" end="2340" title="Council of Vienne" label="Council of Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="2384" end="2402" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="2449" end="2473" title="Philip IV of France" label="King Philip IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589" start="2512" end="2518" title="May 29" label="May 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q878340" start="2521" end="2553" title="Sancho of Majorca" label="Sancho the Peaceful of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q338297" start="2570" end="2585" title="King of Majorca" label="King of Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="2611" end="2628" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="2647" end="2663" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q528401" start="2696" end="2709" title="James II of Majorca" label="King Jaume II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618" start="2712" end="2718" title="June 9" label="June 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q667202" start="2740" end="2746" title="Maestà (Duccio)" label="Maestà"/>
<link wikidata="Q15792" start="2791" end="2812" title="Duccio" label="Duccio di Buoninsegna"/>
<link wikidata="Q282554" start="2833" end="2848" title="Siena Cathedral" label="Siena Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q736727" start="2856" end="2873" title="Republic of Siena" label="Republic of Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617" start="2877" end="2884" title="June 11" label="June 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q646226" start="2887" end="2912" title="Bolesław III the Generous" label="Boleslaw III the Wasteful"/>
<link wikidata="Q353227" start="2973" end="2990" title="History of Poland during the Piast dynasty" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662" start="2994" end="3001" title="June 25" label="June 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q222534" start="3004" end="3020" title="Matthew III Csák" label="Matthew III Csák"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077786" start="3026" end="3045" title="Palatine of Hungary" label="Palatine of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q193478" start="3140" end="3144" title="Buda" label="Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="3170" end="3178" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695" start="3206" end="3212" title="July 6" label="July 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q4090633" start="3215" end="3220" title="Bolad" label="Bolad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009266" start="3500" end="3529" title="Gentile Portino da Montefiore" label="Gentile Portino da Montefiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="3567" end="3581" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687" start="3585" end="3592" title="July 13" label="July 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q715225" start="3595" end="3612" title="Matteo I Visconti" label="Matteo I Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q153529" start="3642" end="3656" title="Duchy of Milan" label="Duchy of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720" start="3744" end="3751" title="July 25" label="July 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q335335" start="3843" end="3867" title="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Uthman II" label="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Uthman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776" start="3922" end="3931" title="August 13" label="August 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q723300" start="3934" end="3950" title="Pietro Gradenigo" label="Pietro Gradenigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q858316" start="3952" end="3956" title="Doge of Venice" label="Doge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="3964" end="3982" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065976" start="4027" end="4039" title="Marino Zorzi" label="Marino Zorzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812" start="4145" end="4154" title="August 16" label="August 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="4161" end="4182" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885130" start="4196" end="4214" title="Ordinances of 1311" label="Ordinances of 1311"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="4218" end="4232" title="Edward II of England" label="King Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2854" start="4384" end="4395" title="September 5" label="September 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="4469" end="4489" title="Republic of Slovakia" label="Republic of Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q479138" start="4504" end="4515" title="Amadeus Aba" label="Amadeus Aba"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="4563" end="4569" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897" start="4574" end="4586" title="September 16" label="September 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221" start="4652" end="4659" title="Brescia" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q785349" start="4673" end="4696" title="Cangrande I della Scala" label="Cangrande I della Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931" start="4772" end="4781" title="October 3" label="October 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="4904" end="4910" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q479138" start="4940" end="4951" title="Amadeus Aba" label="Amadeus Aba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927" start="4980" end="4990" title="October 11" label="October 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885130" start="4997" end="5015" title="Ordinances of 1311" label="Ordinances of 1311"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="5044" end="5058" title="Edward II of England" label="King Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963" start="5112" end="5122" title="October 16" label="October 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q543076" start="5125" end="5142" title="Council of Vienne" label="Council of Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="5144" end="5158" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q26849" start="5199" end="5205" title="Vienne, Isère" label="Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="5381" end="5396" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="5498" end="5506" title="Heresy" label="heretics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2952" start="5511" end="5521" title="October 28" label="October 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993" start="5857" end="5867" title="November 5" label="November 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984" start="6049" end="6060" title="November 13" label="November 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327136" start="6066" end="6070" title="Ōchō" label="Ocho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037124" start="6095" end="6108" title="Hōjō Munenobu" label="Munenobu Hojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q736839" start="6136" end="6154" title="Kamakura Shogunate" label="Kamakura Shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021" start="6173" end="6184" title="November 23" label="November 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="6187" end="6201" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q645888" start="6211" end="6221" title="Jens Grand" label="Jens Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q837128" start="6239" end="6269" title="Prince-Archbishopric of Bremen" label="Prince-Archbishopric of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15471939" start="6311" end="6332" title="Archbishopric of Riga" label="Archbishopric of Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458532" start="6349" end="6362" title="Terra Mariana" label="Terra Mariana"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="6372" end="6390" title="Republic of Latvia" label="Republic of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156020" start="6396" end="6412" title="State of the Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016" start="6437" end="6448" title="November 29" label="November 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q322127" start="6451" end="6472" title="Alboino I della Scala" label="Alboino I della Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q785349" start="6531" end="6540" title="Cangrande I della Scala" label="Cangrande"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761" start="6545" end="6556" title="December 26" label="December 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702773" start="6559" end="6592" title="Al-Mahdi Muhammad bin al-Mutahhar" label="Al-Mahdi Muhammad bin al-Mutahhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="6598" end="6617" title="Shia Islam" label="Shi&amp;#x27;ite Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q125482" start="6618" end="6622" title="Imam" label="Imam"/>
<link wikidata="Q144333" start="6630" end="6639" title="Zaidiyyah" label="Zaidiyyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="6649" end="6654" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="6733" end="6745" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132267" start="6746" end="6763" title="Rasulid Dynasty" label="Rasulid sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6877" end="6910" title="Rasulid dynasty#List of sultans" label="al-Mu&amp;#x27;ayyad Da&amp;#x27;udsultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241847" start="6946" end="6964" title="Bolingbroke Castle" label="Bolingbroke Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q105278" start="6979" end="6997" title="House of Lancaster" label="House of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q390169" start="7001" end="7018" title="Lincoln Cathedral" label="Lincoln Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="7022" end="7029" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q12234854" start="7108" end="7138" title="World&amp;#x27;s tallest structures" label="world&amp;#x27;s tallest structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q37200" start="7155" end="7176" title="Great Pyramid of Giza" label="Great Pyramid of Giza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554" start="7276" end="7280" title="1549" label="1549"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459" start="7298" end="7306" title="March 29" label="March 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247705" start="7309" end="7320" title="Amadeus III of Geneva" label="Amadeus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="7330" end="7338" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202" start="7354" end="7358" title="1367" label="1367"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509" start="7362" end="7369" title="April 3" label="April 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760053" start="7372" end="7389" title="Margaret de Bohun, Countess of Devon" label="Margaret de Bohun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378" start="7414" end="7418" title="1391" label="1391"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700" start="7422" end="7428" title="July 1" label="July 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q699485" start="7431" end="7440" title="Liu Bowen" label="Liu Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277" start="7479" end="7483" title="1375" label="1375"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776" start="7487" end="7496" title="August 13" label="August 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q298808" start="7499" end="7509" title="Alfonso XI of Castile" label="Alfonso XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="7562" end="7569" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094" start="7574" end="7578" title="1350" label="1350"/>
<link wikidata="Q467019" start="7610" end="7620" title="Margaret II, Countess of Hainaut" label="Margaret I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130" start="7662" end="7666" title="1356" label="1356"/>
<link wikidata="Q541057" start="7671" end="7679" title="Prince Munenaga" label="Munenaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350" start="7722" end="7726" title="1385" label="1385"/>
<link wikidata="Q444668" start="7731" end="7755" title="Peter I, Duke of Bourbon" label="Peter I, Duke of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130" start="7800" end="7804" title="1356" label="1356"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284" start="7822" end="7832" title="January 27" label="January 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q8532" start="7835" end="7845" title="Külüg Khan" label="Külüg Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537" start="7910" end="7914" title="1281" label="1281"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391" start="7918" end="7925" title="March 3" label="March 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618479" start="7942" end="7952" title="Antony Bek (bishop of Durham)" label="Antony Bek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440" start="7987" end="7991" title="1245" label="1245"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403" start="7995" end="8003" title="March 15" label="March 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q721440" start="8008" end="8016" title="Walter V, Count of Brienne" label="Walter V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541666" start="8035" end="8051" title="County of Brienne" label="House of Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529" start="8057" end="8061" title="1275" label="1275"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790972" start="8066" end="8097" title="Thomas III d&amp;#x27;Autremencourt" label="Thomas III d&amp;#x27;Autremencourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563479" start="8136" end="8150" title="George I Ghisi" label="George I Ghisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q118" start="8236" end="8241" title="April" label="April"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081604" start="8244" end="8261" title="Botulf Botulfsson" label="Botulf Botulfsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589" start="8297" end="8303" title="May 29" label="May 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q528401" start="8306" end="8325" title="James II of Majorca" label="James II of Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438" start="8330" end="8334" title="1243" label="1243"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776" start="8338" end="8347" title="August 13" label="August 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q723300" start="8350" end="8366" title="Pietro Gradenigo" label="Pietro Gradenigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2854" start="8385" end="8396" title="September 5" label="September 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q479138" start="8399" end="8410" title="Amadeus Aba" label="Amadeus Aba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382" start="8433" end="8444" title="December 14" label="December 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q271713" start="8447" end="8466" title="Margaret of Brabant" label="Margaret of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530" start="8493" end="8497" title="1276" label="1276"/>
<link wikidata="Q887088" start="8529" end="8550" title="David VIII of Georgia" label="David VIII of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526" start="8555" end="8559" title="1273" label="1273"/>
<link wikidata="Q356568" start="8564" end="8583" title="Arnold of Villanova" label="Arnold of Villanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425" start="8621" end="8625" title="1235" label="1235"/>
<link wikidata="Q887732" start="8630" end="8637" title="Mangrai" label="Mangrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059707" start="8656" end="8662" title="Lan Na" label="Lan Na"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433" start="8667" end="8671" title="1238" label="1238"/>
<link wikidata="Q822689" start="8698" end="8713" title="Bernard Saisset" label="Bernard Saisset"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418" start="8745" end="8749" title="1232" label="1232"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39957" wikidata="Q5729" url="?curid=39957" title="1310">
<text>Year 1310 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCX]]) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
===January – March===
* January 19 – General Malik Kafur of the Delhi Sultanate begins the siege of Warangal, capital of the Kakatiya kingdom in what is now the Indian state of Telangana.
* January 26 – James II of Aragon ends the siege of Almeria after five months without taking the city.
* February 8 – The English Parliament opens at Westminster, after being summoned on October 26. The Parliament will continue to meet until April 12.
* February 9 – At Dublin, acting in his capacity as Lord of Ireland, King Edward II of England (as Éadbhard II Shasana, &quot;Tiarna Éireann&quot;) opens the first session of the Parliament of Ireland during his administration. The Irish Parliament will hold 14 sessions before being dismissed in 1326.
* February 24 – A group of 12 Scottish Catholic bishops, including William Sinclair, Bishop of Dunkeld, swear fealty to Robert the Bruce, King of Scotland.
* March 3 – Konrad I of Oleśnica and his brother Boleslaw, sons and heirs of Henry III, Duke of Głogów renounce their rights to Gdańsk Pomerania (now part of Poland) in return for payment by the principality of Brandenburg, ruled by the Margrave Heinrich I.
* March 5 – Baybars II, Sultan of the Mamluks in Egypt, is driven from office by an angry mob consisting of supporters of his predecessor, An-Nasir Muhammad. Baybars is located and turned over to Sultan Nasir.
* March 20 – Having secured the surrender of King Prataparudra of Kakatiya during the siege of Warangal, General Malik Kafur of the Delhi Sultanate begins his return journey to Delhi. He will arrive on June 23.

===April – June===
* April 8 – The return of the Kingdom of Hungary&#x27;s Crown of Saint Stephen is successfully negotiated at Szeged by Thomas II, Archbishop of Esztergom, along with Amadeus Aba and Dominic II Rátót to secure its return from Ladislaus III Kán, the Voivode of Transylvania.
* April 13 – In Burma, Athinkhaya, one of the three brothers serving as regents of the Kingdom of Myinsaing in present-day central Burma (Myanmar), dies at the age of 49, leaving his brothers Thihathu and Yazathingyan in control. Thihathu will soon be the sole ruler of Burma.
* April 15 – Sultan An-Nasir Muhammad of Egypt has his predecessor, the former Sultan Baybars II, executed.
* May 9 – Nephon I of Constantinople becomes the new Patriarch of the Eastern Orthodox Church in Byzantium, now at Turkey. He is elected after his predecessor, the 80-year-old Athanasius I, is forced to retire.
* May 12 – In France, 54 members of the Knights Templar are burned at the stake for heresy at Paris, on orders of King Philip IV of France (Philip the Fair). Pope Clement V attempts to take control of the situation by issuing a papal bull, to assert the Church&#x27;s authority over the matter and demands Philip turn over the Templars and their property to ecclesiastical officials, who will then try the Templars for charges themselves. (→ Trials of the Knights Templar)
* May 25 – Otto III, Duke of Carinthia, dies and is succeeded by his younger brother, King Henry of Bohemia, Margrave of Moravia and the nominal King of Poland.
* May 26 – Siege of Algeciras: Castilian forces abandon the siege as King Ferdinand IV of Castile (&quot;Ferdinand the Summoned&quot;) sign a seven-year peace treaty with Abu al-Juyush Nasr, Sultan of Granada. Nasr agrees to pay an indemnity of 150,000 gold doblas and an annual tribute of 11,000 doblas to Castile. He yields some frontier towns, including Quesada and Bedmar. In accordance with the terms, Nasr becomes a vassal of Castile and provides up to 3 months of military service per year if summoned. Markets will be opened between Castile and Granada – Ferdinand appoints a &quot;judge of the frontiers&quot; (&quot;juez de la frontera&quot;) to adjudicate disputes between Christians and Muslims in the border regions.
* June 15 – Tiepolo conspiracy: Leading Venetian nobles led by Bajamonte Tiepolo organise a conspiracy against Doge Pietro Gradenigo. Their plot fails due to treachery and the rebels are defeated near Piazza San Marco by forces faithful to the doge. During their retreat to the San Polo sestiere, the Rialto Bridge is burnt down. Later, Tiepolo surrenders himself and is exiled to Istria. The suppression of the revolt will lead to the creation of the Council of Ten. 
* June 23 – General Malik Kafur arrives at Delhi and presents to Sultan Alauddin the treasures captured from Warrangal.

===July – September===
* July 1 – The Citadel of Erbil, headquarters of a rebellion by 10,000 Eastern Christians and located in what is now Iraq, is captured after a siege by the Mongol Ilkhanate, and the defenders are massacred.
* July 10 – The Council of Ten (or simply &quot;the Ten&quot;), &quot;Il Consiglio dei Dieci&quot; is created to govern the Republic of Venice, by decree of Pietro Gradenigo, Doge of Venice. The council, the inner circle of oligarchical patricians, initially investigates the conspiracy of Bajamonte Tiepolo.
* August 27 – The third coronation of Károly Róbert I (Charles I) as King of Hungary is carried out at Székesfehérvár by Thomas II, Archbishop of Esztergom after the Archbishop successfully negotiates the return of the Crown of Saint Stephen from Ladislaus Kán. Use of the Holy Crown had been required by Hungarian law for recognition by the nobles of Hungary.
* September 1 – John of Luxemburg, younger brother of King Henry of Bohemia, marries Princess Elizabeth, the daughter of the late King Wenceslaus II.
* September 20 – King Edward II of England reaches Roxburgh after starting his invasion of the Kingdom of Scotland &quot;in the third week of September&quot;. The campaign is fruitless, even though English forces under Piers Gaveston manage to reach as far north as Perth.

===October – December===
* October 1 – Writing from Kildrum, King Robert the Bruce of Scotland attempts to establish peace talks with King Edward II of England (who is encamped in Scotland at Biggar) but Edward refuses to negotiate. 
* November 23 – Abu Sa&#x27;id Uthman II becomes the new Sultan of Morocco upon the death of his nephew, the Sultan Abu al-Rabi Sulayman. 
* December 3 – Prague, capital of the Kingdom of Bohemia, is captured and King Henry of Bohemia is deposed by his brother, John of Luxemburg, who will later be known as &quot;John the Blind&quot;. 
* December 10 – Stephen I, Duke of Bavaria, one of the three brothers ruling the southern German duchy within the Roman Empire, dies, leaving his older brothers Otto III and Louis III as the dual rulers.
* December 11 – In Poland, Henry the Faithful becomes the new duke of Silesia and of much of Wielkopolska (&quot;Greater Poland&quot;, now part of northwestern Poland as Henry IV, upon the death of his father, Henry III, Duke of Głogów. Wielkopolska is divided between Henry III&#x27;s sons, Henry IV, Konrad I of Oleśnica, Bolesław of Oleśnica, John, Duke of Ścinawa and Przemko II, with the Duchy of Glogow given to his wife, Matilda of Brunswick-Lüneburg. Wielkopolska will be conquered in 1314.

=== By place ===

==== Europe ====
* Spring – Castilian forces abandon the siege of Algeciras after six months and begin negotiations with Granada. Ferdinand and Sultan sign a peace treaty for seven years on May 26. 
* Summer – Count Charles of Valois founds the Diocese of Corfu, Zakynthos and Cephalonia with its seat in Corfu. It is, comprising the Ionian Islands of Corfu, Zakynthos and Cephalonia.

==== Asia ====
* Spring – Siege of Warangal: Delhi forces led by Malik Kafur conquer the fortress of Warangal after a month-long siege. Rudradeva II, Indian ruler of the Kakatiya Dynasty, negotiates a truce and surrenders a huge amount of wealth to send to the Delhi Sultanate.

=== By topic ===

==== Education ====
* The first purpose-built accommodation for students (the Mob Quad) is completed at Merton College, Oxford, England.

== Births ==
* March 5 – Przecław of Pogorzela, Polish bishop (d. 1376)
* April 30 – Casimir III the Great, king of Poland (d. 1368)
* November 29 – John de Mowbray, English nobleman (d. 1361)
* November 30 – Frederick II, German nobleman (d. 1349)
* Berenguer de Cruïlles, Spanish abbot and bishop (d. 1362)
* Dermot MacCarthy, Irish nobleman and magnate (d. 1367)
* Gil Álvarez Carrillo de Albornoz, Spanish cardinal (d. 1367)
* Guillaume Tirel (or &quot;Taillevent&quot;), French head chef (d. 1395)
* Jean de Beaumanoir, Breton nobleman and knight (d. 1366)
* Margaret I, French noblewoman (House of Capet) (d. 1382)
* Niccolò Acciaioli, Italian nobleman and seneschal (d. 1365)
* Simon Langham, English cardinal and archbishop (d. 1376)
* Urban V, French pope of the Catholic Church (d. 1370)

== Deaths ==
* February 11 – Marguerite d&#x27;Oingt, French nun (b. 1240)
* April 10 – Peire Autier, French religious leader (b. 1245)
* April 13 – Athinkhaya, Burmese ruler and regent (b. 1261)
* April 15 – Baybars II, Egyptian ruler and regent (b. 1250)
* April 26 – Constance of Montcada, French noblewoman 
* May 20 – John de Moels, English nobleman and knight
* May 22 – Humilitas of Vallombrosa, Italian nun (b. 1226)
* May 25 – Otto III, Austrian nobleman (House of Gorizia)
* June 1 – Marguerite Porete, French mystic and author
* June 5 – Amalric of Tyre, Cypriot prince and statesman
* October 1 – Beatrice of Burgundy, French noblewoman
* October 14 – Blanche of Anjou, consort of King James II of Aragon 
* October 28 – Athanasius I, Byzantine patriarch (b. 1230)
* November 23 – Abu al-Rabi Sulayman, Moroccan ruler 
* December 10 – Stephen I, German nobleman (b. 1271)
*&quot;unknown dates&quot;
** Abu al-Barakat al-Nasafi, Syrian scholar and theologian
** Alexander MacDougall, Scottish nobleman and magnate
** Constantine I, co-ruler of Cilician Armenia (b. 1278)
** Dai Biaoyuan, Chinese littérateur, poet and writer (b. 1244)
** Diego López V de Haro, Spanish nobleman and knight
** Erik Eriksøn (&quot;Eric Longlegs&quot;), Danish nobleman and co-ruler
** Gao Kegong (or &quot;Fang Shan&quot;), Chinese painter (b. 1248)
** Geoffrey I, Luxemburgian nobleman (House of Vianden)
** George Pachymeres, Byzantine historian and theologian
** Henry II Kőszegi, Hungarian nobleman and knight
** John de Soules, Scottish nobleman (House of de Soules)
** Robert FitzRoger, English nobleman and knight (b. 1247)
** Tommaso degli Stefani, Italian painter and artist (b. 1231)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5729" start="5" end="9" title="1310" label="1310"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729" start="11" end="35" title="1310" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCX]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235690" start="43" end="75" title="common year starting on Thursday" label="common year starting on Thursday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="83" end="98" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266" start="138" end="148" title="January 19" label="January 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181417" start="159" end="170" title="Malik Kafur" label="Malik Kafur"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="178" end="193" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q39091134" start="205" end="222" title="siege of Warangal (1310)" label="siege of Warangal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086556" start="239" end="247" title="Kakatiya" label="Kakatiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q677037" start="291" end="300" title="Telangana" label="Telangana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282" start="304" end="314" title="January 26" label="January 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276309" start="345" end="361" title="Siege of Almería (1309)" label="siege of Almeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323" start="407" end="417" title="February 8" label="February 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887914" start="424" end="442" title="List of parliaments of England" label="English Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="452" end="463" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324" start="556" end="566" title="February 9" label="February 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="572" end="578" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="606" end="621" title="Monarchy of Ireland#Lords of Ireland, 1177–1542" label="Lord of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="628" end="648" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889821" start="733" end="754" title="Parliament of Ireland" label="Parliament of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5782" start="851" end="855" title="1326" label="1326"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355" start="859" end="870" title="February 24" label="February 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018464" start="924" end="940" title="William Sinclair (bishop)" label="William Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591356" start="942" end="959" title="Bishop of Dunkeld" label="Bishop of Dunkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="977" end="993" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391" start="1015" end="1022" title="March 3" label="March 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q557504" start="1025" end="1045" title="Konrad I of Oleśnica" label="Konrad I of Oleśnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q480572" start="1062" end="1070" title="Bolesław of Oleśnica" label="Boleslaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q573444" start="1090" end="1115" title="Henry III, Duke of Głogów" label="Henry III, Duke of Głogów"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060302" start="1141" end="1157" title="Gdańsk Pomerania" label="Gdańsk Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="1224" end="1235" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q157802" start="1250" end="1258" title="Margrave" label="Margrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q555384" start="1259" end="1269" title="Henry I, Margrave of Brandenburg" label="Heinrich I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392" start="1273" end="1280" title="March 5" label="March 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q558305" start="1283" end="1293" title="Baybars II" label="Baybars II"/>
<link wikidata="Q293505" start="1410" end="1427" title="An-Nasir Muhammad" label="An-Nasir Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427" start="1483" end="1491" title="March 20" label="March 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238615" start="1531" end="1543" title="Prataparudra" label="Prataparudra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086556" start="1547" end="1555" title="Kakatiya" label="Kakatiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q39091134" start="1567" end="1584" title="siege of Warangal (1310)" label="siege of Warangal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181417" start="1594" end="1605" title="Malik Kafur" label="Malik Kafur"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="1613" end="1628" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="1658" end="1663" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503" start="1714" end="1721" title="April 8" label="April 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q51081" start="1768" end="1790" title="Holy Crown of Hungary" label="Crown of Saint Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81581" start="1821" end="1827" title="Szeged" label="Szeged"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579304" start="1831" end="1865" title="Thomas II, Archbishop of Esztergom" label="Thomas II, Archbishop of Esztergom"/>
<link wikidata="Q479138" start="1878" end="1889" title="Amadeus Aba" label="Amadeus Aba"/>
<link wikidata="Q60628543" start="1894" end="1910" title="Dominic II Rátót" label="Dominic II Rátót"/>
<link wikidata="Q716210" start="1937" end="1954" title="Ladislaus III Kán" label="Ladislaus III Kán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416040" start="1960" end="1983" title="Voivode of Transylvania" label="Voivode of Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498" start="1987" end="1995" title="April 13" label="April 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813668" start="2008" end="2018" title="Athinkhaya" label="Athinkhaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="2057" end="2063" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446205" start="2072" end="2092" title="Kingdom of Myinsaing" label="Kingdom of Myinsaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066500" start="2177" end="2185" title="Thihathu" label="Thihathu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050574" start="2190" end="2202" title="Yazathingyan" label="Yazathingyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497" start="2264" end="2272" title="April 15" label="April 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q558305" start="2348" end="2358" title="Baybars II" label="Baybars II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556" start="2372" end="2377" title="May 9" label="May 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131394" start="2380" end="2406" title="Nephon I of Constantinople" label="Nephon I of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="2467" end="2476" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q606457" start="2546" end="2558" title="Athanasius I of Constantinople" label="Athanasius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559" start="2583" end="2589" title="May 12" label="May 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q237131" start="2595" end="2601" title="France in the Middle Ages" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="2621" end="2636" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="2665" end="2671" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2675" end="2680" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="2700" end="2719" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="2744" end="2753" title="Pope Clement V" label="Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q685604" start="3023" end="3052" title="Trials of the Knights Templar" label="Trials of the Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585" start="3056" end="3062" title="May 25" label="May 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q682317" start="3065" end="3092" title="Otto III, Duke of Carinthia" label="Otto III, Duke of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q275408" start="3140" end="3161" title="Henry of Bohemia" label="King Henry of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="3175" end="3182" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="3199" end="3213" title="King of Poland" label="King of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586" start="3217" end="3223" title="May 26" label="May 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118163" start="3226" end="3244" title="Siege of Algeciras (1309)" label="Siege of Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="3289" end="3312" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="Ferdinand IV of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q321060" start="3386" end="3423" title="Nasr of Granada" label="Abu al-Juyush Nasr, Sultan of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780962" start="3473" end="3478" title="dobla" label="dobla"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="3522" end="3529" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866847" start="3572" end="3579" title="Quesada, Spain" label="Quesada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631814" start="3584" end="3590" title="Bedmar y Garcíez" label="Bedmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613" start="3947" end="3954" title="June 15" label="June 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686843" start="3957" end="3975" title="Tiepolo conspiracy" label="Tiepolo conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q803702" start="4008" end="4025" title="Bajamonte Tiepolo" label="Bajamonte Tiepolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q723300" start="4061" end="4077" title="Pietro Gradenigo" label="Pietro Gradenigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q217527" start="4146" end="4162" title="Piazza San Marco" label="Piazza San Marco"/>
<link wikidata="Q52429" start="4223" end="4231" title="San Polo" label="San Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q52505" start="4246" end="4259" title="Rialto Bridge" label="Rialto Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="4326" end="4332" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q547077" start="4397" end="4411" title="Council of Ten" label="Council of Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668" start="4416" end="4423" title="June 23" label="June 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181417" start="4434" end="4445" title="Malik Kafur" label="Malik Kafur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="4457" end="4462" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700" start="4560" end="4566" title="July 1" label="July 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q206236" start="4573" end="4589" title="Citadel of Erbil" label="Citadel of Erbil"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="4629" end="4646" title="Eastern Christian" label="Eastern Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="4675" end="4679" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="4721" end="4730" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689" start="4767" end="4774" title="July 10" label="July 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q547077" start="4781" end="4795" title="Council of Ten" label="Council of Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="4889" end="4907" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q723300" start="4922" end="4938" title="Pietro Gradenigo" label="Pietro Gradenigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q58481270" start="5002" end="5012" title="Venetian nobility" label="patricians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822" start="5076" end="5085" title="August 27" label="August 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="5112" end="5127" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="Károly Róbert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412254" start="5143" end="5158" title="King of Hungary" label="King of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q130212" start="5177" end="5191" title="Székesfehérvár" label="Székesfehérvár"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579304" start="5195" end="5229" title="Thomas II, Archbishop of Esztergom" label="Thomas II, Archbishop of Esztergom"/>
<link wikidata="Q51081" start="5293" end="5315" title="Holy Crown of Hungary" label="Crown of Saint Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859" start="5437" end="5448" title="September 1" label="September 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q155167" start="5451" end="5468" title="John of Bohemia" label="John of Luxemburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q254322" start="5520" end="5538" title="Elizabeth of Bohemia (1292–1330)" label="Princess Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q155581" start="5565" end="5583" title="Wenceslaus II of Bohemia" label="King Wenceslaus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892" start="5587" end="5599" title="September 20" label="September 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="5607" end="5627" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714424" start="5636" end="5644" title="Roxburgh" label="Roxburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="5680" end="5699" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q710482" start="5804" end="5818" title="Piers Gaveston, 1st Earl of Cornwall" label="Piers Gaveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q203000" start="5851" end="5856" title="Perth, Scotland" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913" start="5886" end="5895" title="October 1" label="October 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406795" start="5911" end="5918" title="Kildrum" label="Kildrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="5925" end="5941" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="5998" end="6018" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250089" start="6051" end="6057" title="Biggar, South Lanarkshire" label="Biggar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021" start="6095" end="6106" title="November 23" label="November 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q335335" start="6109" end="6133" title="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Uthman II" label="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Uthman II"/>
<link wikidata="Q257009" start="6150" end="6167" title="Sultan of Morocco" label="Sultan of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q590827" start="6209" end="6229" title="Abu al-Rabi Sulayman" label="Abu al-Rabi Sulayman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298" start="6234" end="6244" title="December 3" label="December 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="6247" end="6253" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q42585" start="6270" end="6288" title="Kingdom of Bohemia" label="Kingdom of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q275408" start="6306" end="6327" title="Henry of Bohemia" label="King Henry of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155167" start="6355" end="6372" title="John of Bohemia" label="John of Luxemburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302" start="6432" end="6443" title="December 10" label="December 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q61967" start="6446" end="6472" title="Stephen I, Duke of Bavaria" label="Stephen I, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q57323" start="6591" end="6599" title="Otto III, Duke of Bavaria" label="Otto III"/>
<link wikidata="Q64326" start="6604" end="6613" title="Louis III, Duke of Bavaria" label="Louis III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363" start="6636" end="6647" title="December 11" label="December 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q573417" start="6661" end="6679" title="Henry IV the Faithful" label="Henry the Faithful"/>
<link wikidata="Q211371" start="6727" end="6739" title="Greater Poland" label="Wielkopolska"/>
<link wikidata="Q573444" start="6844" end="6869" title="Henry III, Duke of Głogów" label="Henry III, Duke of Głogów"/>
<link wikidata="Q557504" start="6936" end="6956" title="Konrad I of Oleśnica" label="Konrad I of Oleśnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q480572" start="6958" end="6978" title="Bolesław of Oleśnica" label="Bolesław of Oleśnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q480203" start="6980" end="7001" title="John, Duke of Ścinawa" label="John, Duke of Ścinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q480199" start="7006" end="7016" title="Przemko II of Głogów" label="Przemko II"/>
<link wikidata="Q684501" start="7027" end="7042" title="Duchy of Glogow" label="Duchy of Glogow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561260" start="7062" end="7091" title="Matilda of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Matilda of Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118163" start="7209" end="7227" title="siege of Algeciras (1309–1310)" label="siege of Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="7273" end="7280" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586" start="7342" end="7348" title="May 26" label="May 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q270438" start="7368" end="7385" title="Charles, Count of Valois" label="Charles of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364732" start="7397" end="7439" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Corfu, Zakynthos, and Cephalonia" label="Diocese of Corfu, Zakynthos and Cephalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="7457" end="7462" title="Corfu" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q170295" start="7486" end="7500" title="Ionian Islands" label="Ionian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q144880" start="7511" end="7520" title="Zakynthos" label="Zakynthos"/>
<link wikidata="Q178488" start="7525" end="7535" title="Cephalonia" label="Cephalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39091134" start="7564" end="7581" title="Siege of Warangal (1310)" label="Siege of Warangal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181417" start="7603" end="7614" title="Malik Kafur" label="Malik Kafur"/>
<link wikidata="Q25563103" start="7639" end="7647" title="Warangal" label="Warangal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238615" start="7674" end="7686" title="Prataparudra" label="Rudradeva II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086556" start="7708" end="7724" title="Kakatiya dynasty" label="Kakatiya Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="7799" end="7814" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886564" start="7913" end="7921" title="Mob Quad" label="Mob Quad"/>
<link wikidata="Q82513" start="7939" end="7953" title="Merton College, Oxford" label="Merton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="7955" end="7961" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="7963" end="7970" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392" start="7988" end="7995" title="March 5" label="March 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108261" start="7998" end="8019" title="Przecław of Pogorzela" label="Przecław of Pogorzela"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282" start="8039" end="8043" title="1376" label="1376"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536" start="8047" end="8055" title="April 30" label="April 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q53457" start="8058" end="8079" title="Casimir III of Poland" label="Casimir III the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q577867" start="8089" end="8095" title="Kingdom of Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207" start="8100" end="8104" title="1368" label="1368"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016" start="8108" end="8119" title="November 29" label="November 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265601" start="8122" end="8137" title="John de Mowbray, 3rd Baron Mowbray" label="John de Mowbray"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="8147" end="8155" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159" start="8160" end="8164" title="1361" label="1361"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015" start="8168" end="8179" title="November 30" label="November 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q695279" start="8182" end="8194" title="Frederick II, Margrave of Meissen" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090" start="8216" end="8220" title="1349" label="1349"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924075" start="8224" end="8245" title="Berenguer de Cruïlles" label="Berenguer de Cruïlles"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="8255" end="8260" title="abbot" label="abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166" start="8276" end="8280" title="1362" label="1362"/>
<link wikidata="Q75653841" start="8284" end="8300" title="Dermot MacCarthy, 1st Lord of Muskerry" label="Dermot MacCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q903810" start="8321" end="8328" title="magnate" label="magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202" start="8333" end="8337" title="1367" label="1367"/>
<link wikidata="Q709181" start="8341" end="8373" title="Gil Álvarez Carrillo de Albornoz" label="Gil Álvarez Carrillo de Albornoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q935382" start="8404" end="8419" title="Guillaume Tirel" label="Guillaume Tirel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6400" start="8470" end="8474" title="1395" label="1395"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379913" start="8478" end="8496" title="Jean de Beaumanoir" label="Jean de Beaumanoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194" start="8529" end="8533" title="1366" label="1366"/>
<link wikidata="Q261999" start="8537" end="8547" title="Margaret I, Countess of Burgundy" label="Margaret I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937731" start="8568" end="8582" title="House of Capet" label="House of Capet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335" start="8588" end="8592" title="1382" label="1382"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437326" start="8596" end="8613" title="Niccolò Acciaioli" label="Niccolò Acciaioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138622" start="8636" end="8645" title="seneschal" label="seneschal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190" start="8650" end="8654" title="1365" label="1365"/>
<link wikidata="Q709017" start="8658" end="8671" title="Simon Langham" label="Simon Langham"/>
<link wikidata="Q133046" start="8717" end="8724" title="Pope Urban V" label="Urban V"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8745" end="8760" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217" start="8765" end="8769" title="1370" label="1370"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335" start="8787" end="8798" title="February 11" label="February 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290763" start="8801" end="8824" title="Marguerite d&amp;#x27;Oingt" label="Marguerite d&amp;#x27;Oingt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435" start="8841" end="8845" title="1240" label="1240"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502" start="8849" end="8857" title="April 10" label="April 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160952" start="8860" end="8872" title="Peire Autier" label="Peire Autier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440" start="8902" end="8906" title="1245" label="1245"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498" start="8910" end="8918" title="April 13" label="April 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813668" start="8921" end="8931" title="Athinkhaya" label="Athinkhaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="8951" end="8957" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509" start="8962" end="8966" title="1261" label="1261"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497" start="8970" end="8978" title="April 15" label="April 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q558305" start="8981" end="8991" title="Baybars II" label="Baybars II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487" start="9023" end="9027" title="1250" label="1250"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532" start="9031" end="9039" title="April 26" label="April 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877403" start="9042" end="9063" title="Constance of Béarn" label="Constance of Montcada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579" start="9086" end="9092" title="May 20" label="May 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791337" start="9095" end="9108" title="John de Moels, 1st Baron Moels" label="John de Moels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581" start="9140" end="9146" title="May 22" label="May 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171057" start="9149" end="9173" title="Saint Humility" label="Humilitas of Vallombrosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405" start="9191" end="9195" title="1226" label="1226"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585" start="9199" end="9205" title="May 25" label="May 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q682317" start="9208" end="9216" title="Otto III, Duke of Carinthia" label="Otto III"/>
<link wikidata="Q698981" start="9237" end="9253" title="House of Gorizia" label="House of Gorizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625" start="9257" end="9263" title="June 1" label="June 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q255132" start="9266" end="9283" title="Marguerite Porete" label="Marguerite Porete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622" start="9312" end="9318" title="June 5" label="June 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q453370" start="9321" end="9336" title="Amalric, Lord of Tyre" label="Amalric of Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913" start="9369" end="9378" title="October 1" label="October 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q510987" start="9381" end="9401" title="Beatrice of Burgundy, Lady of Bourbon" label="Beatrice of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922" start="9423" end="9433" title="October 14" label="October 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q167180" start="9436" end="9452" title="Blanche of Anjou" label="Blanche of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q312735" start="9470" end="9488" title="James II of Aragon" label="James II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2952" start="9492" end="9502" title="October 28" label="October 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q606457" start="9505" end="9517" title="Athanasius I of Constantinople" label="Athanasius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412" start="9543" end="9547" title="1230" label="1230"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021" start="9551" end="9562" title="November 23" label="November 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q590827" start="9565" end="9585" title="Abu al-Rabi Sulayman" label="Abu al-Rabi Sulayman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302" start="9605" end="9616" title="December 10" label="December 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q61967" start="9619" end="9628" title="Stephen I, Duke of Bavaria" label="Stephen I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523" start="9650" end="9654" title="1271" label="1271"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223449" start="9686" end="9710" title="Abu al-Barakat al-Nasafi" label="Abu al-Barakat al-Nasafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275634" start="9745" end="9765" title="Alexander of Argyll" label="Alexander MacDougall"/>
<link wikidata="Q888130" start="9800" end="9813" title="Constantine I, King of Armenia" label="Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q335088" start="9827" end="9843" title="Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia" label="Cilician Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208978" start="9857" end="9869" title="Dai Biaoyuan" label="Dai Biaoyuan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9879" end="9890" title="Intellectual#&amp;quot;Man of letters" label="littérateur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439" start="9912" end="9916" title="1244" label="1244"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706087" start="9921" end="9942" title="Diego López V de Haro" label="Diego López V de Haro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386987" start="9975" end="9987" title="Eric Longlegs, Lord of Langeland" label="Erik Eriksøn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095236" start="10049" end="10059" title="Gao Kegong" label="Gao Kegong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483" start="10108" end="10112" title="1248" label="1248"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338416" start="10117" end="10127" title="Geoffrey I of Vianden" label="Geoffrey I"/>
<link wikidata="Q319057" start="10152" end="10168" title="Counts of Vianden" label="House of Vianden"/>
<link wikidata="Q318365" start="10173" end="10190" title="George Pachymeres" label="George Pachymeres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126755" start="10230" end="10246" title="Henry II Kőszegi" label="Henry II Kőszegi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702247" start="10281" end="10295" title="John de Soules (Guardian of Scotland)" label="John de Soules"/>
<link wikidata="Q85755967" start="10316" end="10334" title="de Soules" label="House of de Soules"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785230" start="10339" end="10355" title="Robert fitzRoger (died 1310)" label="Robert FitzRoger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482" start="10389" end="10393" title="1247" label="1247"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819091" start="10398" end="10419" title="Tommaso degli Stefani" label="Tommaso degli Stefani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417" start="10452" end="10456" title="1231" label="1231"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39958" wikidata="Q5740" url="?curid=39958" title="1314">
<text>== Events ==
===January – March===
* January 17 – Queen Oljath, who had been the Queen consort of the Kingdom of Georgia as wife of King Vakhtang II (d. 1292), and then his cousin, King David VIII (d. 1302), marries a third time, taking as her husband Qara Sonqur, Governor of Maragheh (in the modern-day East Azerbaijan province of Iran), in exchange for a dowry of 30,000 dinars.
* January 21 (3 Shawwal 713 AH) – Muhammad III of Granada, Sultan from 1302 to 1309, is murdered by being drowned in the pool of the Dar al-Kubra on orders of his brother, Sultan Nasr.
* February 8 (21 Shawwal 713 AH) – Sultan Nasr of Granada is forced to abdicate after 18 days as the ruler of the Emirate of Granada (in modern-day Spain) by his nephew, Abu&#x27;l-Walid Ismail I ibn Faraj, who is proclaimed at the Alhambra as the new Sultan. 
* March 18 – Jacques de Molay, Grand Master of the Knights Templar and Geoffroi de Charney, are, by orders of King Philip IV of France (&quot;Philip the Fair&quot;), burned at the stake in front of the cathedral of Notre-Dame de Paris on the Île de la Cité in the Seine. Jacques declares his innocence and that the Templar Order is also innocent of all the charges of heresy. It is said that Jacques correctly predicts the deaths of both Philip and Pope Clement V within the year. 
* March – Tour de Nesle Affair: After confirmation that two of his sons&#x27; wives are engaged in adultery, King Philip IV of France orders the arrest of his daughters-in-law, Margaret of Burgundy (the wife of Prince Louis X); Blanche of Burgundy (wife of Prince Charles of Valois), and Joan II, Countess of Burgundy (wife of Prince Philip V). The arrests come after the accusations of King Philip&#x27;s daughter, Isabella, Queen consort of England, and surveillance of the Tower of Nesle. Joan II is charged with being an accessory for being aware of the crime and not reporting it, and put under house arrest until after King Philip&#x27;s death later in the year. Blanche is imprisoned at the Château Gaillard until 1322. Margaret will die of illness in prison a year later, and five months after technically becoming Queen consort of France. Two knights, Philip of Aunay and his older brother Walter of Aunay, are also arrested for adultery (with Margaret and Blanche respectively), imprisoned, tortured at the Place du Grand Martroy in Pontoise and brutally executed on April 19.

===April – June===
* April 4 – Exeter College, Oxford, in England is founded by Walter Stapledon, Bishop of Exeter, and his brother for the education of clergy.
* April 20 – Pope Clement V dies after an 9-year pontificate at Roquemaure. During his reign, he has reorganized and centralized the administration of the Catholic Church.
* May 1 – The 1314–1316 papal conclave to elect a successor to Pope Clement V begins at Carpentras Cathedral in Provence with 23 cardinals in attendance, of whom the votes of 16 are necessary to elect a new Pontiff. The cardinals are divided into three factions, none of which have more than eight people, with a group from Italy (led by Guillaume de Mandagot), who want to move the papacy back to Rome; nine from Gascony, most of whom are relatives of Pope Clement (led by Arnaud de Pellegrue); and five from Provence (led by Berengar Fredol).
* May 14 – In Italy, more than 50 of the Fraticelli spiritualists of the Franciscan order of Tuscany are excommunicated from the Roman Catholic Church by the Archbishop of Genoa after refusing to return to obedience to the Pope.
* June 17 – First War of Scottish Independence: English forces led by King Edward II leave Berwick-upon-Tweed to march to break the Scottish siege of Stirling Castle. They cross the River Tweed at Wark and Coldstream and march west across the flat Merse of Berwickshire towards Lauderdale. In Earlston, Edward uses an old Roman road through the Lammermuir Hills, practical for the wheeled transport of a long supply train as well as the cavalry and infantry. 
* June 19 – English forces march to the environs of Edinburgh; here Edward II waits for the wagon train of over 200 baggage and supply wagons – which straggle behind the long columns, to catch up. At the nearby port of Leith, English supply ships land stores for the army – who will be well rested before the march that will bring them to Stirling Castle, before the deadline of June 24.
* June 23 – Battle of Bannockburn begins: English forces approach the Scottish positions at Torwood, mounted troops under Gilbert de Clare are confronted by Scottish forces and repulsed. During the fierce fighting, Henry de Bohun is killed in a duel by King Robert the Bruce. Edward II and forward elements, mainly cavalry, encamp at Bannockburn near Stirling in central Scotland. The baggage train and the majority of the forces arrive in the evening.
* June 24 – Battle of Bannockburn (First War of Scottish Independence): Scottish forces (some 8,000 men) led by Robert the Bruce defeat the English army at Bannockburn, securing &quot;de facto&quot; independence for Scotland. During the battle, the Scottish pikemen formed in schiltrons (or phalanx) repulses the English cavalry (some 2,000 men). Edward II flees with his bodyguard (some 500 men), while panic spreads among the remaining forces, turning their defeat into a rout. Stirling Castle is surrendered to the Scots.
* June 25 – Edward II arrives at Dunbar Castle, and takes safely a ship to Bamburgh in Northumberland. His mounted escort takes the coastal route from Dunbar to Berwick.

===July – September===
* July 14 – The Italian cardinals participating in the papal conclave in France walk out after weeks of harassment by supporters of a French candidate for pope. The rest of the College of Cardinals disperse to Avignon, seat of the Papacy; Orange, in the modern-day département of Vaucluse, and Valence in the modern-day département of Drôme. The conclave will not meet again for two years, during which time there is no Pope.
* August 14 – Scottish raiders led by Edward Bruce plunder the north-eastern counties of England in the Pennines; they are attacked at Stainmore by the English under Andrew Harclay.
* August 31 – King Haakon V of Norway moves his capital from Bergen to Oslo – where he builds Akershus Fortress, from which Norway is ruled for the next 500 years.
* September 29 – In exchange for captured English nobles, Edward II releases Elizabeth de Burgh, wife of Robert the Bruce, his sister Mary Bruce, and his daughter Marjorie Bruce.

===October – December===
* October 19 – 19 October 1314 imperial election for the Holy Roman Emperor at Sachsenhausen (Frankfurt am Main). The 25-year-old Frederick the Fair of the House of Habsburg is elected by four of the electors and is crowned at Bonn Minster on November 25; however, in a dispute over validity of the election, Louis IV the Bavarian of the House of Wittelsbach is elected the following day by the remaining three electors and is crowned at Aachen, leading to civil war in the Empire.
* November 29 – Louis X (&quot;Louis the Quarrelsome&quot;) becomes King of France after his father, King Philip IV, is killed in a hunting accident at Fontainebleau.
* December 3 – The state funeral and burial of King Philip IV takes place at the Basilica of Saint-Denis near Paris.
* December 9 – Brandenburg–Pomeranian conflict: In Germany, the Margraviate of Brandenburg renounces all claims to the region around Loitz (in the modern-day northeast German state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern) to the Principality of Rügen in Denmark in return for payment.

=== Undated===
* Stephen II becomes ruler (&quot;ban&quot;) of Bosnia following the death of his father Stephen I Kotromanić. He rules the lands from the river Sava to the Adriatic Sea, but does not effectively come into full power until 1322.
* Amda Seyon I, known as &quot;the Pillar of Zion&quot; begins his reign as Emperor of Ethiopia, during which he expands into Muslim territory to the southeast by incorporating a number of smaller states.

=== By topic ===

==== Religion ====
* The Ozbek Han Mosque is built in the realm of Özbeg Khan in the Crimea.
* Completion of Old St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral in London.

==== Natural environment ====
* Approximate date – Volcanic eruption of Mount Tarawera in New Zealand; there are few settlers here at this time.

== Births ==
* January 13 – John Bardolf, English nobleman and peerage (d. 1363)
* March 10 – Ramathibodi I, Thai nobleman, prince and ruler (d. 1369)
* May 13 – Sergius of Radonezh, Russian abbot and reformer (d. 1392)
* June 24 – Philippa of Hainault, queen consort of Edward III (d. 1369)
* October 18 – Giles de Badlesmere, English nobleman and knight (d. 1338)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Akmal al-Din al-Babarti, Syrian scholar and theologian (d. 1384)
** John of Arkel, Dutch nobleman, bishop and prince-bishop (d. 1378)
** Li Shanchang, Chinese official, chancellor and politician (d. 1390)
** Toqto&#x27;a (or &quot;Dayong&quot;, Chinese official, historian and writer (d. 1356)
** Valdemar III, King of Denmark from the House of Estridsen (d. 1364)
** William Devereux the Younger, English nobleman (d. 1384)

== Deaths ==
* January 21 – Muhammad III, Nasrid ruler (&quot;sultan&quot;) (b. 1257)
* January 30 – Nicholas III of Saint Omer, Latin nobleman
* February 8 – Helen of Anjou, queen of Serbia (b. 1235)
* February 10 – Riccardo Petroni, Italian cardinal (b. 1250)
* March 4 – Jakub Świnka, Polish priest and archbishop
* March 18
** Geoffroy de Charney, French nobleman and preceptor
** Jacques de Molay, French nobleman and Grand Master 
* April 20 – Clement V, pope of the Catholic Church (b. 1264)
* May 3 – Emilia Bicchieri, Italian nun and prioress (b. 1238)
* May 31 – James Salomoni, Italian priest, prior and saint (b. 1231)
* June 23 – Henry de Bohun, English nobleman, knight and duelist
* June 24 – (Battle of Bannockburn)
** Gilbert de Clare, English nobleman, knight and peerage (b. 1291)
** Giles d&#x27;Argentan, Norman nobleman, favourite and knight (b. 1280)
** Robert Clifford, English nobleman, knight and High Sheriff (b. 1274)
** William de Vescy, Norman nobleman, knight and peerage (b. 1296)
** William Marshal, English nobleman, knight and Marshal of Ireland
* September 30 – Yolanda I, French noblewoman and ruler (&quot;suo jure&quot;) (b. 1257)
* October 21 – Geoffrey de Geneville, English nobleman and diplomat (b. 1226)
* November 20 – Albert II the Degenerate, German ruler and knight (b. 1240)
* November 25 – Nicholas &quot;the Child&quot;, German nobleman and knight (b. 1261)
* November 29 – Philip IV the Fair, King of France from the House of Capet, in a hunting accident (b. 1268)
* &quot;date unknown&quot; 
** Ahmed al-Ghubrini, Algerian scholar, biographer and chronicler (b. 1264)
** Alan la Zouche, English nobleman, knight, governor and steward (b. 1267)
** Alexander Bonini, Italian Minister General, philosopher and writer (b. 1270)
** Ermengol X, Spanish nobleman and adviser (House of Cabrera) (b. 1254)
** Guo Shoujing, Chinese astronomer, mathematician and politician (b. 1231)
** Henry Percy, English nobleman, landowner, magnate and knight (b. 1273)
** John Balliol (&quot;Toom Tabard&quot;), king of Scotland (House of Balliol) (b. 1249)
** Nicholas III, Hungarian nobleman and Master of the Treasury (b. 1285)
** Nikō, Japanese Buddhist monk, teacher and religious leader (b. 1253)
** Rainier I, Genoese nobleman and knight (House of Grimaldi) (b. 1267)
** Sanggye Pal, Tibetan teacher and Imperial Preceptor (&quot;dishi&quot;) (b. 1267)
** Stephen I Kotromanić, Bosnian nobleman (&quot;ban&quot;) and ruler (b. 1242)
** Takezaki Suenaga, Japanese nobleman, retainer and samurai (b. 1246)
** Violante Manuel, Spanish noblewoman and princess (&quot;infanta&quot;) (b. 1265)
** William Devereux, English nobleman, landowner and knight (b. 1244)
** Zhu Shije (or &quot;Hanqing&quot;), Chinese mathematician and writer (b. 1249)
** Wedem Arad, Emperor of Ethiopia

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2264" start="37" end="47" title="January 17" label="January 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q154667" start="102" end="120" title="Kingdom of Georgia" label="Kingdom of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q887097" start="132" end="148" title="Vakhtang II of Georgia" label="King Vakhtang II"/>
<link wikidata="Q887088" start="181" end="196" title="David VIII of Georgia" label="King David VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q605021" start="277" end="285" title="Maragheh" label="Maragheh"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="358" end="363" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273" start="384" end="394" title="January 21" label="January 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q704786" start="416" end="439" title="Muhammad III of Granada" label="Muhammad III of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q321060" start="561" end="564" title="Nasr of Granada" label="Nas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323" start="569" end="579" title="February 8" label="February 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q321060" start="609" end="624" title="Nasr of Granada" label="Nasr of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="681" end="699" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Emirate of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="715" end="720" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q563129" start="737" end="772" title="Ismail I of Granada" label="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Walid Ismail I ibn Faraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q47476" start="799" end="807" title="Alhambra" label="Alhambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422" start="830" end="838" title="March 18" label="March 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q208215" start="841" end="857" title="Jacques de Molay" label="Jacques de Molay"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="879" end="894" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398648" start="899" end="918" title="Geoffroi de Charney" label="Geoffroi de Charney"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="943" end="962" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q468455" start="994" end="1013" title="Death by burning" label="burned at the stake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="1043" end="1062" title="Notre-Dame de Paris" label="Notre-Dame de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q190063" start="1070" end="1084" title="Île de la Cité" label="Île de la Cité"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="1092" end="1097" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="1196" end="1202" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="1277" end="1291" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q110" start="1312" end="1317" title="March" label="March"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825957" start="1320" end="1340" title="Tour de Nesle Affair" label="Tour de Nesle Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="1409" end="1417" title="adultery" label="adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q70590" start="1487" end="1507" title="Margaret of Burgundy, Queen of France" label="Margaret of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8384" start="1521" end="1535" title="Louis X of France" label="Prince Louis X"/>
<link wikidata="Q232267" start="1538" end="1557" title="Blanche of Burgundy" label="Blanche of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174964" start="1567" end="1591" title="Charles IV of France" label="Prince Charles of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q231760" start="1598" end="1627" title="Joan II, Countess of Burgundy" label="Joan II, Countess of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8433" start="1637" end="1652" title="Philip V of France" label="Prince Philip V"/>
<link wikidata="Q228642" start="1726" end="1760" title="Isabella of France" label="Isabella, Queen consort of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090492" start="2008" end="2024" title="Château Gaillard" label="Château Gaillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163406" start="2171" end="2186" title="Philip of Aunay" label="Philip of Aunay"/>
<link wikidata="Q201352" start="2353" end="2361" title="Pontoise" label="Pontoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523" start="2387" end="2395" title="April 19" label="April 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508" start="2419" end="2426" title="April 4" label="April 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q81173" start="2429" end="2451" title="Exeter College, Oxford" label="Exeter College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="2456" end="2463" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476147" start="2478" end="2494" title="Walter Stapledon" label="Walter Stapledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524" start="2561" end="2569" title="April 20" label="April 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="2572" end="2586" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q12799209" start="2608" end="2619" title="pontificate" label="pontificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q322376" start="2623" end="2633" title="Roquemaure, Gard" label="Roquemaure"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2714" end="2729" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544" start="2733" end="2738" title="May 1" label="May 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516721" start="2745" end="2769" title="1314–1316 papal conclave" label="1314–1316 papal conclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763848" start="2819" end="2839" title="Carpentras Cathedral" label="Carpentras Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3055" end="3060" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="3129" end="3133" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="3145" end="3152" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863257" start="3205" end="3224" title="Arnaud de Pellegrue" label="Arnaud de Pellegrue"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="3241" end="3249" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q521012" start="3258" end="3273" title="Berengar Fredol the Elder" label="Berengar Fredol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561" start="3278" end="3284" title="May 14" label="May 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q420576" start="3317" end="3327" title="Fraticelli" label="Fraticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="3381" end="3395" title="Excommunication" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672" start="3507" end="3514" title="June 17" label="June 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242848" start="3517" end="3551" title="First War of Scottish Independence" label="First War of Scottish Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="3580" end="3589" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q504678" start="3596" end="3614" title="Berwick-upon-Tweed" label="Berwick-upon-Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="3655" end="3670" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q503262" start="3687" end="3698" title="River Tweed" label="River Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018205" start="3702" end="3706" title="Wark on Tweed" label="Wark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018874" start="3711" end="3721" title="Coldstream" label="Coldstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q786649" start="3762" end="3774" title="Berwickshire" label="Berwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497841" start="3783" end="3793" title="Lauderdale" label="Lauderdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010108" start="3798" end="3806" title="Earlston" label="Earlston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179671" start="3827" end="3837" title="Roman roads in Britannia" label="Roman road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216412" start="3850" end="3866" title="Lammermuir Hills" label="Lammermuir Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669" start="3967" end="3974" title="June 19" label="June 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="4017" end="4026" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018540" start="4184" end="4189" title="Leith" label="Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665" start="4344" end="4351" title="June 24" label="June 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668" start="4355" end="4362" title="June 23" label="June 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827470" start="4445" end="4452" title="Torwood" label="Torwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002601" start="4475" end="4491" title="Gilbert de Clare, 8th Earl of Gloucester" label="Gilbert de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730732" start="4568" end="4582" title="Henry de Bohun" label="Henry de Bohun"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="4611" end="4627" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q806906" start="4687" end="4698" title="Bannockburn" label="Bannockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665" start="4808" end="4815" title="June 24" label="June 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q222520" start="4818" end="4839" title="Battle of Bannockburn" label="Battle of Bannockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="4918" end="4934" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754114" start="5082" end="5091" title="schiltron" label="schiltron"/>
<link wikidata="Q180335" start="5097" end="5104" title="phalanx" label="phalanx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662" start="5333" end="5340" title="June 25" label="June 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969165" start="5364" end="5377" title="Dunbar Castle" label="Dunbar Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q805983" start="5406" end="5414" title="Bamburgh" label="Bamburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="5418" end="5432" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002133" start="5482" end="5488" title="Dunbar" label="Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691" start="5527" end="5534" title="July 14" label="July 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516721" start="5580" end="5594" title="1314–1316 papal conclave" label="papal conclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="5735" end="5742" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q187796" start="5764" end="5770" title="Orange, Vaucluse" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="5790" end="5801" title="departments of France" label="département"/>
<link wikidata="Q12792" start="5805" end="5813" title="Vaucluse" label="Vaucluse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8848" start="5819" end="5826" title="Valence, Drôme" label="Valence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364" start="5860" end="5865" title="Drôme" label="Drôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2775" start="5953" end="5962" title="August 14" label="August 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q385362" start="5989" end="6001" title="Edward Bruce" label="Edward Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q35647" start="6055" end="6063" title="Pennines" label="Pennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412710" start="6086" end="6095" title="Stainmore" label="Stainmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786825" start="6117" end="6131" title="Andrew Harclay, 1st Earl of Carlisle" label="Andrew Harclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830" start="6135" end="6144" title="August 31" label="August 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q313153" start="6152" end="6160" title="Haakon V" label="Haakon V"/>
<link wikidata="Q26793" start="6194" end="6200" title="Bergen" label="Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="6204" end="6208" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q644464" start="6227" end="6244" title="Akershus Fortress" label="Akershus Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196956" start="6257" end="6263" title="Kingdom of Norway (872–1397)" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882" start="6299" end="6311" title="September 29" label="September 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q262059" start="6374" end="6392" title="Elizabeth de Burgh" label="Elizabeth de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="6402" end="6418" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779128" start="6431" end="6441" title="Mary Bruce" label="Mary Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q291049" start="6460" end="6474" title="Marjorie Bruce" label="Marjorie Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961" start="6504" end="6514" title="October 19" label="October 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q60528009" start="6517" end="6550" title="19 October 1314 imperial election" label="19 October 1314 imperial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="6559" end="6577" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q151535" start="6581" end="6614" title="Sachsenhausen (Frankfurt am Main)" label="Sachsenhausen (Frankfurt am Main)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124950" start="6632" end="6650" title="Frederick the Fair" label="Frederick the Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="6658" end="6675" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q686664" start="6729" end="6741" title="Bonn Minster" label="Bonn Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020" start="6745" end="6756" title="November 25" label="November 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q57161" start="6811" end="6832" title="Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Louis IV the Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621" start="6840" end="6860" title="House of Wittelsbach" label="House of Wittelsbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="6940" end="6946" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016" start="6986" end="6997" title="November 29" label="November 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q8384" start="7000" end="7007" title="Louis X of France" label="Louis X"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="7052" end="7066" title="King of France" label="King of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q182872" start="7136" end="7149" title="Fontainebleau" label="Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298" start="7153" end="7163" title="December 3" label="December 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q184407" start="7232" end="7255" title="Basilica of Saint-Denis" label="Basilica of Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="7261" end="7266" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304" start="7270" end="7280" title="December 9" label="December 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956674" start="7283" end="7314" title="Brandenburg–Pomeranian conflict" label="Brandenburg–Pomeranian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="7332" end="7358" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Margraviate of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q572048" start="7401" end="7406" title="Loitz" label="Loitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196" start="7452" end="7474" title="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern" label="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern"/>
<link wikidata="Q571428" start="7483" end="7504" title="Principality of Rügen" label="Principality of Rügen"/>
<link wikidata="Q965795" start="7557" end="7567" title="Stephen II, Ban of Bosnia" label="Stephen II"/>
<link wikidata="Q577017" start="7589" end="7592" title="Ban (title)" label="ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312021" start="7603" end="7609" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Middle Ages" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289015" start="7644" end="7664" title="Stephen I, Ban of Bosnia" label="Stephen I Kotromanić"/>
<link wikidata="Q14383" start="7700" end="7704" title="Sava" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="7712" end="7724" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5770" start="7778" end="7782" title="1322" label="1322"/>
<link wikidata="Q460342" start="7786" end="7798" title="Amda Seyon I" label="Amda Seyon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962705" start="7860" end="7879" title="Emperor of Ethiopia" label="Emperor of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116539" start="8033" end="8049" title="Ozbek Han Mosque" label="Ozbek Han Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q335097" start="8075" end="8085" title="Özbeg Khan" label="Özbeg Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="8093" end="8099" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576524" start="8117" end="8145" title="Old St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="Old St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192560" start="8230" end="8244" title="Mount Tarawera" label="Mount Tarawera"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="8248" end="8259" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255" start="8319" end="8329" title="January 13" label="January 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220658" start="8332" end="8344" title="John Bardolf, 3rd Baron Bardolf" label="John Bardolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="8354" end="8362" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176" start="8379" end="8383" title="1363" label="1363"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397" start="8387" end="8395" title="March 10" label="March 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q718191" start="8398" end="8411" title="Uthong" label="Ramathibodi I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211" start="8449" end="8453" title="1369" label="1369"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560" start="8457" end="8463" title="May 13" label="May 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q312899" start="8466" end="8485" title="Sergius of Radonezh" label="Sergius of Radonezh"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="8495" end="8500" title="abbot" label="abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382" start="8518" end="8522" title="1392" label="1392"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665" start="8526" end="8533" title="June 24" label="June 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q229279" start="8536" end="8556" title="Philippa of Hainault" label="Philippa of Hainault"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="8575" end="8585" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964" start="8598" end="8608" title="October 18" label="October 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561737" start="8611" end="8630" title="Giles de Badlesmere, 2nd Baron Badlesmere" label="Giles de Badlesmere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044" start="8664" end="8668" title="1338" label="1338"/>
<link wikidata="Q12180143" start="8700" end="8723" title="Akmal al-Din al-Babarti" label="Akmal al-Din al-Babarti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347" start="8759" end="8763" title="1384" label="1384"/>
<link wikidata="Q776595" start="8768" end="8781" title="John of Arkel" label="John of Arkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306" start="8828" end="8832" title="1378" label="1378"/>
<link wikidata="Q699369" start="8837" end="8849" title="Li Shanchang" label="Li Shanchang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375" start="8899" end="8903" title="1390" label="1390"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655284" start="8908" end="8920" title="Toqto&amp;#x27;a (Yuan dynasty)" label="Toqto&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130" start="8988" end="8992" title="1356" label="1356"/>
<link wikidata="Q381082" start="8997" end="9009" title="Valdemar III of Denmark" label="Valdemar III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="9011" end="9026" title="King of Denmark" label="King of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518738" start="9036" end="9054" title="House of Estridsen" label="House of Estridsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185" start="9059" end="9063" title="1364" label="1364"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863346" start="9068" end="9096" title="William Devereux of Frome (1314–1384)" label="William Devereux the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273" start="9141" end="9151" title="January 21" label="January 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q704786" start="9154" end="9166" title="Muhammad III of Granada" label="Muhammad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="9188" end="9194" title="sultan" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504" start="9206" end="9210" title="1257" label="1257"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287" start="9214" end="9224" title="January 30" label="January 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q6853636" start="9227" end="9253" title="Nicholas III of Saint Omer" label="Nicholas III of Saint Omer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323" start="9272" end="9282" title="February 8" label="February 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661920" start="9285" end="9299" title="Helen of Anjou" label="Helen of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415003" start="9310" end="9316" title="Kingdom of Serbia (medieval)" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425" start="9321" end="9325" title="1235" label="1235"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325" start="9329" end="9340" title="February 10" label="February 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430384" start="9343" end="9359" title="Riccardo Petroni" label="Riccardo Petroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487" start="9382" end="9386" title="1250" label="1250"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396" start="9390" end="9397" title="March 4" label="March 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q322448" start="9400" end="9412" title="Jakub Świnka" label="Jakub Świnka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422" start="9445" end="9453" title="March 18" label="March 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398648" start="9457" end="9476" title="Geoffroi de Charney" label="Geoffroy de Charney"/>
<link wikidata="Q499143" start="9498" end="9507" title="preceptor" label="preceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q208215" start="9511" end="9527" title="Jacques de Molay" label="Jacques de Molay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524" start="9565" end="9573" title="April 20" label="April 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="9576" end="9585" title="Pope Clement V" label="Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9599" end="9614" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514" start="9619" end="9623" title="1264" label="1264"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547" start="9627" end="9632" title="May 3" label="May 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q113347" start="9635" end="9651" title="Emilia Bicchieri" label="Emilia Bicchieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433" start="9682" end="9686" title="1238" label="1238"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591" start="9690" end="9696" title="May 31" label="May 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q3762261" start="9699" end="9713" title="James Salomoni" label="James Salomoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417" start="9751" end="9755" title="1231" label="1231"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668" start="9759" end="9766" title="June 23" label="June 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730732" start="9769" end="9783" title="Henry de Bohun" label="Henry de Bohun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665" start="9824" end="9831" title="June 24" label="June 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q222520" start="9835" end="9856" title="Battle of Bannockburn" label="Battle of Bannockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002601" start="9861" end="9877" title="Gilbert de Clare, 8th Earl of Gloucester" label="Gilbert de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554" start="9920" end="9924" title="1291" label="1291"/>
<link wikidata="Q19662552" start="9929" end="9950" title="Giles d&amp;#x27;Argentan" label="Giles d&amp;#x27;Argentan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536" start="9994" end="9998" title="1280" label="1280"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351392" start="10003" end="10018" title="Robert Clifford, 1st Baron Clifford" label="Robert Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527" start="10066" end="10070" title="1274" label="1274"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020836" start="10075" end="10091" title="William de Vescy of Kildare" label="William de Vescy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561" start="10133" end="10137" title="1296" label="1296"/>
<link wikidata="Q23770668" start="10142" end="10157" title="William Marshal, 1st Baron Marshal" label="William Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q115813755" start="10188" end="10206" title="Earl Marshal of Ireland" label="Marshal of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881" start="10209" end="10221" title="September 30" label="September 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q459175" start="10224" end="10233" title="Yolanda of Lusignan" label="Yolanda I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699324" start="10270" end="10278" title="suo jure" label="suo jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960" start="10298" end="10308" title="October 21" label="October 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503067" start="10311" end="10332" title="Geoffrey de Geneville, 1st Baron Geneville" label="Geoffrey de Geneville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405" start="10368" end="10372" title="1226" label="1226"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024" start="10376" end="10387" title="November 20" label="November 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q61508" start="10390" end="10414" title="Albert II, Margrave of Meissen" label="Albert II the Degenerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435" start="10444" end="10448" title="1240" label="1240"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020" start="10452" end="10463" title="November 25" label="November 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q101419" start="10466" end="10496" title="Nicholas I, Lord of Rostock" label="Nicholas &amp;quot;the Child&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509" start="10529" end="10533" title="1261" label="1261"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016" start="10537" end="10548" title="November 29" label="November 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="10551" end="10569" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV the Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="10571" end="10585" title="King of France" label="King of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937731" start="10595" end="10609" title="House of Capet" label="House of Capet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520" start="10637" end="10641" title="1268" label="1268"/>
<link wikidata="Q109264888" start="10674" end="10691" title="Ahmed al-Ghubrini" label="Ahmed al-Ghubrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q23060144" start="10750" end="10764" title="Alan la Zouche, 1st Baron Zouche of Ashby" label="Alan la Zouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519" start="10817" end="10821" title="1267" label="1267"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718389" start="10826" end="10842" title="Alexander Bonini" label="Alexander Bonini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522" start="10897" end="10901" title="1270" label="1270"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895452" start="10906" end="10916" title="Ermengol X, Count of Urgell" label="Ermengol X"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914784" start="10948" end="10964" title="House of Cabrera" label="House of Cabrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500" start="10970" end="10974" title="1254" label="1254"/>
<link wikidata="Q733082" start="10979" end="10991" title="Guo Shoujing" label="Guo Shoujing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785021" start="11055" end="11066" title="Henry Percy, 1st Baron Percy" label="Henry Percy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526" start="11120" end="11124" title="1273" label="1273"/>
<link wikidata="Q310065" start="11129" end="11141" title="John Balliol" label="John Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="11177" end="11185" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589976" start="11187" end="11203" title="House of Balliol" label="House of Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485" start="11209" end="11213" title="1249" label="1249"/>
<link wikidata="Q62063234" start="11218" end="11230" title="Nicholas III Kőszegi" label="Nicholas III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785328" start="11255" end="11277" title="Master of the Treasury" label="Master of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546" start="11282" end="11286" title="1285" label="1285"/>
<link wikidata="Q452609" start="11291" end="11295" title="Nikō" label="Nikō"/>
<link wikidata="Q736311" start="11306" end="11314" title="Buddhism in Japan" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498" start="11354" end="11358" title="1253" label="1253"/>
<link wikidata="Q950631" start="11363" end="11372" title="Rainier I of Monaco, Lord of Cagnes" label="Rainier I"/>
<link wikidata="Q668182" start="11403" end="11420" title="House of Grimaldi" label="House of Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299932" start="11435" end="11446" title="Sanggye Pal" label="Sanggye Pal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236141" start="11488" end="11505" title="Imperial Preceptor" label="&amp;quot;dishi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289015" start="11520" end="11540" title="Stephen I, Ban of Bosnia" label="Stephen I Kotromanić"/>
<link wikidata="Q577017" start="11560" end="11575" title="Ban (title)" label="&amp;quot;ban&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437" start="11591" end="11595" title="1242" label="1242"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064936" start="11600" end="11616" title="Takezaki Suenaga" label="Takezaki Suenaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="11650" end="11657" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441" start="11662" end="11666" title="1246" label="1246"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933098" start="11671" end="11686" title="Violante Manuel" label="Violante Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q213594" start="11721" end="11740" title="Infante" label="&amp;quot;infanta&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516" start="11746" end="11750" title="1265" label="1265"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863350" start="11755" end="11771" title="William Devereux, Baron Devereux of Lyonshall" label="William Devereux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439" start="11816" end="11820" title="1244" label="1244"/>
<link wikidata="Q198126" start="11825" end="11834" title="Zhu Shije" label="Zhu Shije"/>
<link wikidata="Q328495" start="11907" end="11917" title="Wedem Arad" label="Wedem Arad"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39959" wikidata="Q5742" url="?curid=39959" title="1315">
<text>Year 1315 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXV]]) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
=== January – March ===
* January 2 – King Edward II of England buries his friend, the late Piers Gaveston, having secured a papal absolution in one of the last acts of Pope Clement V. The burial takes place somewhere near the King&#x27;s Langley Priory in Hertfordshire, but the location of the tomb is subsequently forgotten. Gaveston had been excommunicated before he had been executed.
* January 20 – The English Parliament is convened at Lincoln to hear the reading of the &quot;Articuli Cleri&quot;, the list of grievances against the church in England. The parliament ends on March 9. 
* February 12 – Italian sculptor Tino di Camaino is commissioned by the Republic of Pisa to create the statue of the late Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor (Enrico VII di Lussemburgo, King of Italy), to be finished in less than six months for the August 24 dedication of Henry&#x27;s tomb. Camaino delivers the work by July 26. 
* February 15 – John of Argyll reports to King Edward II of England that he and his army have recovered the Isle of Man and expelled the Scottish occupiers.
* March 4 (4 Dhu al-Hijjah 714 AH) – The Emir of Mecca, Abu al-Ghayth, is defeated in a battle near Mecca by his brother Humaydah ibn Abi Numayy. Wounded in battle, then captured by the enemy, Abu al-Ghayth is executed by order of his brother at Khayf Bani Shadid.
* March 8 – The Al-Shamah Mosque, in modern-day Gaza City in Palestine, is completed after being commissioned by the Mamluk Sultanate Governor of Gaza, Sanjar al-Jawli. 
* March 27 – In China, Kunga Lotro Gyaltsen is installed as the Imperial Preceptor of Tibetan Buddhists, by order of the Mongol Emperor Ayurbarwada Buyantu Khan.

=== April – June ===
* April 26 – The Scottish parliament is convened at Ayr, and proclaims Edward Bruce as the legal heir to the throne to succeed if Edward&#x27;s brother, King Robert the Bruce dies. 
* April 28 – The Mamluk Sultanate army invades the Christian outpost of Malatya in Byzantium, then loots the city.
* April 30
**Margaret of Burgundy, technically Queen consort of France as the wife of King Louis X, dies in the Château Gaillard prison after a year of incarceration, due to her 1314 conviction for adultery in the Tour de Nesle affair. Unable to have the marriage nullified because a new Pope has not been installed, King Louis leaves Margaret imprisoned.
**Enguerrand de Marigny, who had been the Chief Minister of France during the reign of King Philip IV of France, is hanged at the Gibbet of Montfaucon in Paris, on orders of Philip&#x27;s successor, King Louis X.
* May 9 – In France, Odo IV becomes the new Duke of Burgundy upon the death of his older brother, Hugh V.
* May 26 – King Edward II of England and ships with more than 6,000 troops land on the coast of Ireland at Larne to counter the Scottish invasion of Ireland led by Edward Bruce.
* June 15 – King James II of Aragon is married by proxy to Marie of Lusignan, daughter of King Hugh III of Cyprus, at a ceremony attended by James&#x27;s representative at Nicosia.

=== July – September ===
* July 3 – King Louis X abolishes serfdom in the Kingdom of France.
* July 6 – In Germany, Henry II, Lord of Mecklenburg is married to Anna of Saxe-Wittenberg , daughter of Albert II, Duke of Saxony. The marriage produces an heir, Albert II, who will become Duke of Mecklenburg in 1348.
* July 22 – Siege of Carlisle: Scottish forces led by King Robert the Bruce besiege Carlisle Castle, but the stronghold holds out, due to a well-conducted defense organized by Andrew Harclay and the siege is abandoned by August 1. 
* July 24 – Otto II, Prince of Anhalt-Aschersleben, dies without leaving any heirs, bringing an end to the Principality. His assets are seized by his cousin and creditor, Bishop Albert of Halberstadt.
* July 28 – King Louis X of France issues a charter in allowing expelled Jews to come back to France, but under strict conditions. The French Jews will be allowed to stay in the country for 12 years, after which their right to remain will be reviewed. For identification, Jewish people are required to wear armbands in public, can only live in designated communities and are forbidden from usury. Through this, the Jewish community will depend upon the king for their right to protection. In December, Sultan Ismail I of Granada implements similar rules for the Jews in the Spanish kingdom, directing Jews to wear a yellow badge in public.
* July 31 – King Louis X mobilizes an army along the Flemish border. He prohibits the export of grain and other goods to Flanders – which proves challenging to enforce. Louis pressures officers of the Church at the borderlands, as well as King Edward II, to support his effort to prevent Spanish merchant vessels from trading with the embargoed Flemish cities.
* August 1 – After a 10-day siege of the Irish stronghold at Carlisle, King Robert of Scotland withdraws on August 1. During the Scots&#x27; presence in Cumbria, Scottish forces under James the Black raid Copeland and plunder St Bees Priory.
* August 11 (12th day of 7th month of 4 Shōwa) – Hōjō Mototoki becomes ruler (&quot;shogun&quot;) and regent (&quot;shikken&quot;) of the Kamakura shogunate in Japan upon the death of Hōjō Hirotoki.
* August 17 – Ferdinand of Majorca completes the conquest of the Principality of Achaea, one of the crusader states that had been founded in Greece during the Fourth Crusade, by capturing the capital, Andravida. 
* August 19 – King Louis X of France, nicknamed &quot;Louis the Quarrelsome&quot;, marries the 22-year-old Clementia of Hungary,daughter of Charles Martel of Anjou (titular king of Hungary). He and his second wife are five days later crowned at Reims. Louis becomes the 12th Capetian ruler of France. After his coronation, he passes the throne of the Kingdom of Navarre to his younger brother, who becomes Philip II of Navarre, nicknamed &quot;Philip the Tall&quot;.
* August 24 – The coronation of Louis X as King of France takes place at Reims, nine months after Louis ascended the throne upon the death of his father, Philip IV.
* August 29 – Battle of Montecatini: The Pisan army (some 20,000 men) led by Uguccione della Faggiuola defeats the allied forces of Florence and Naples. During the battle, Philip I manages to escape, but his son Charles of Taranto (titled the Latin Emperor of Constantinople and his brother Peter Tempesta are killed. 
* September 3 (3 Jumada II 715 AH) – Rumaythah ibn Abi Numayy, the former emir of Mecca, arrives at the court of the Mamluk Sultan of Egypt, al-Nasir Muhammad in Cairo. He receives pardon from the Sultan and seeks support against the new Emir, Humaydah ibn Abi Numayy, who had killed his brother and predecessor, Abu al-Ghayth. Al-Nasir sends Rumaythah back to Mecca with an Egyptian army. However, six days before the relief army&#x27;s arrival, Humaydah pillages and burns the castle at Wadi Marr, and destroys 2,000 date palm trees. 
* September 10 – The Battle of Connor is fought in County Antrim in Ireland (Northern Ireland) as part of the Bruce campaign in Ireland. Scottish-Irish forces commanded by Edward Bruce, brother of Scotland&#x27;s King Robert the Bruce, routs the army commanded by &quot;The Red Earl&quot;, Richard Óg de Burgh, 2nd Earl of Ulster. Those earls not captured by the Scottish army flee to Carrickfergus Castle

=== October – December ===
* October 9 – Banastre Rebellion: A group of English knights start an uprising in Lancashire and revenge themselves on Thomas of Lancaster. After the rebellion, Liverpool Castle is granted to Robert de Holland.
* November 15 – Battle of Morgarten: The Swiss defeat Leopold of Austria on the shore of the Ägerisee, ensuring independence for the Swiss Confederation.
* November 17 – The marriage of King James II of Aragon to Marie of Lusignan is performed in person after Marie has traveled to Spain, with the ceremony taking place at Girona.
* December 9 – In Switzerland, the Pact of Brunnen is signed between leaders of the cantons of Uri, Schwyz and Unterwalden at the city of Brunnen in Schwyz as a mutual defense pact against an invasion by Austria.
* December 13
**Gaston II of Foix-Béarn becomes the new French representative to rule the Co-principality of Andorra after the death of his father, Gaston I.
**(3 Jumada II 715 AH) Rumaythah ibn Abi Numayy arrives at Mecca with an Egyptian Army, led by the emirs Najm al-Din Damurkhan ibn Qaraman and Sayf al-Din Taydamur al-Jamadar, then spends two weeks in making plans to drive out the Emir Humaydah ibn Abi Numayy. They loot Humaydah&#x27;s castle at al-Khalf wal-Khulayf, plunder the wealth inside and capture his 12-year-old son, but Humaydah himself escapes to Iraq.

== By topic ==
=== Natural disasters ===
* Spring – Great Famine of 1315–1317: A famine and pestilence sweeps over Europe, and exacts so frightful a toll of human life that the phenomenon is to be regarded as one of the most impressive features of the period. It covers almost the whole of Northern Europe; the current territory of Ireland, England, France, Netherlands, Germany and Poland. Heavy rains and unseasonably cold weather, the ensuing harvest failures and death of livestock from starvation, and the sharp rise in food prices cause an acute shortage of food that will last for two years. The famine causes millions of deaths (according to estimates, around 10 to 25% of the urban population dies). On August 10, King Edward II of England witnesses its extent in his realm when he and his entourage stop at St Albans and find bread and other food unavailable. 

=== Cities and towns ===
* Cairo, capital of the Mamluk Sultanate becomes the largest city in the world, taking the lead from Hangzhou in Mongolian China (approximate date).
* Siegfried II, bishop of Hildesheim, provides Dassel in Lower Saxony, Germany with city rights.
* In the Netherlands, Vlissingen (Anglicized to &quot;Flushing&quot; later) is granted city rights.

== Births ==
* January 20 – Yi Ja-chun, Korean nobleman and general (d. 1361)
* February 22 – Chunghye, Korean crown prince and king (d. 1344)
* April 5 – King James III of Majorca, who will be nicknamed &quot;James the Unfortunate&quot;.(d. 1349)
* April 14 – Emir Muhammad IV of Granada, Nasrid ruler (sultan) of the Emirate of Granada, now part of Spain. (d. 1333)
* May 4 – John Segrave, English nobleman and landowner (d. 1353)
* May 20 – Bonne of Luxembourg, queen consort of France (d. 1349)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Albert IV, German nobleman (House of Ascania) (d. 1343)
** Federico di Pagana, Genoese nobleman and doge (d. 1406)
** The Empress Gi, Chinese concubine and empress consort as wife of Emperor Huizong of the Yuan dynasty (d. 1369)
** James of Piedmont, Italian nobleman (House of Savoy) (d. 1367)
** Joanna of Hainault, French noblewoman and regent (d. 1374)
** Johann Hiltalinger, Swiss bishop, theologian and writer (d. 1392)
** John FitzWalter, English nobleman, knight and landowner (d. 1361)
** Kujō Michinori, Japanese nobleman (&quot;kugyō&quot;) and regent (d. 1349)
** Louis V, German nobleman, knight, prince and co-ruler (d. 1361)
** Marie de Bourbon, Latin princess (House of Bourbon) (d. 1387)
** Pierre d&#x27;Orgemont, French politician and chancellor (d. 1389)
** Raoul II of Brienne, French nobleman and constable (d. 1350)
** Roger Beauchamp, English nobleman and chamberlain (d. 1380)

== Deaths ==
* January 15 – Gyeguk, Korean queen consort of Goryeo (b. 1285)
* March 10 – Agnes Blannbekin, Austrian mystic and writer (b. 1244)
* April 30
** Enguerrand de Marigny, French Grand Chamberlain (b. 1260)
** Margaret of Burgundy, queen consort of France (b. 1290)
* May 1 – Margaret of Brandenburg, German noblewoman (b. 1270)
* May 9 – Hugh V, French nobleman (House of Burgundy) (b. 1294)
* June 27 – Mieszko I, Polish nobleman and knight (House of Piast)
* July 24 – Otto II, German nobleman and prince (House of Ascania)
* August 12 – Guy de Beauchamp, English nobleman and magnate
* August 18 – Hōjō Hirotoki, Japanese nobleman and regent (b. 1279)
* August 29 – (Killed in the Battle of Montecatini)
** Charles of Taranto, Italian nobleman (House of Anjou) (b. 1296)
** Peter Tempesta, nicknamed &quot;Storm&quot;, Italian nobleman and knight (b. 1291)
* August 31 – Andrea Dotti, Italian nobleman and preacher (b. 1256)
* November 24 – Fulk FitzWarin, English nobleman and landowner
* December 6 – William Greenfield, English rector and archbishop
* December 13 – Gaston I, Occitan nobleman and knight (b. 1287)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Abu al-Ghayth ibn Abi Numayy, Hasanid ruler of Mecca
** Adolph VI, German nobleman, knight and ruler (b. 1256)
** Esclaramunda of Foix, queen consort of Majorca (b. 1250)
** Henry of Treviso, German hermit, pilgrim and saint (b. 1250)
** Ibn al-Raqqam, Andalusian astronomer and jurist (b. 1250)
** Jean Pitard, French physician, surgeon and writer (b. 1228)
** John I of Chalon-Arlay, French nobleman (House of Chalon-Arlay) (b. 1258)
** Juan Núñez II de Lara, Spanish nobleman (House of Lara) (b. 1276)
** Lanfranc of Milan, Italian cleric, surgeon and writer (b. 1250)
** Lu Zhi, Chinese official, politician, poet and writer (b. 1243)
** Margaret of Villehardouin, Latin noblewoman and princess
** Nichigen, Japanese Buddhist monk and disciple (b. 1262)
** Robert FitzPayne, English nobleman, knight and governor
** Stephen Ákos, Hungarian nobleman and oligarch (b. 1260)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5742" start="5" end="9" title="1315" label="1315"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742" start="11" end="36" title="1315" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXV]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235676" start="44" end="77" title="common year starting on Wednesday" label="common year starting on Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="85" end="100" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151" start="142" end="151" title="January 2" label="January 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="159" end="179" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q710482" start="208" end="222" title="Piers Gaveston" label="Piers Gaveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="285" end="299" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410986" start="343" end="369" title="King&amp;#x27;s Langley Priory" label="King&amp;#x27;s Langley Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="373" end="386" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267" start="508" end="518" title="January 20" label="January 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336" start="711" end="722" title="February 12" label="February 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q527261" start="742" end="757" title="Tino di Camaino" label="Tino di Camaino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365493" start="781" end="797" title="Republic of Pisa" label="Republic of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q152717" start="831" end="860" title="Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334" start="1036" end="1047" title="February 15" label="February 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275635" start="1050" end="1064" title="John of Argyll" label="John of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="1142" end="1153" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396" start="1193" end="1200" title="March 4" label="March 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q15109402" start="1232" end="1245" title="Emir of Mecca" label="Emir of Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048770" start="1247" end="1260" title="Abu al-Ghayth ibn Abi Numayy" label="Abu al-Ghayth"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048767" start="1312" end="1335" title="Humaydah ibn Abi Numayy" label="Humaydah ibn Abi Numayy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395" start="1458" end="1465" title="March 8" label="March 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703221" start="1472" end="1488" title="Al-Shamah Mosque" label="Al-Shamah Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492" start="1504" end="1513" title="Gaza City" label="Gaza City"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="1517" end="1526" title="Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418403" start="1608" end="1623" title="Sanjar al-Jawli" label="Sanjar al-Jawli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457" start="1628" end="1636" title="March 27" label="March 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797079" start="1649" end="1669" title="Kunga Lotro Gyaltsen" label="Kunga Lotro Gyaltsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236141" start="1690" end="1708" title="Imperial Preceptor" label="Imperial Preceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8540" start="1762" end="1786" title="Ayurbarwada Buyantu Khan" label="Ayurbarwada Buyantu Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532" start="1812" end="1820" title="April 26" label="April 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="1827" end="1846" title="Scottish parliament" label="Scottish parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q654216" start="1862" end="1865" title="Ayr" label="Ayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q385362" start="1881" end="1893" title="Edward Bruce" label="Edward Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="1968" end="1984" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534" start="1994" end="2002" title="April 28" label="April 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q165995" start="2064" end="2071" title="Malatya" label="Malatya"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="2075" end="2084" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536" start="2109" end="2117" title="April 30" label="April 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q70590" start="2120" end="2140" title="Margaret of Burgundy, Queen of France" label="Margaret of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q878198" start="2154" end="2177" title="Queen consort of France" label="Queen consort of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q8384" start="2193" end="2205" title="Louis X of France" label="King Louis X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090492" start="2219" end="2235" title="Château Gaillard" label="Château Gaillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825957" start="2321" end="2341" title="Tour de Nesle affair" label="Tour de Nesle affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q251884" start="2465" end="2486" title="Enguerrand de Marigny" label="Enguerrand de Marigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403515" start="2505" end="2529" title="Chief Minister of France" label="Chief Minister of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="2550" end="2574" title="King Philip IV of France" label="King Philip IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q987914" start="2593" end="2613" title="Gibbet of Montfaucon" label="Gibbet of Montfaucon"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2617" end="2622" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556" start="2678" end="2683" title="May 9" label="May 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q707899" start="2697" end="2703" title="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="2720" end="2736" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q707654" start="2774" end="2780" title="Hugh V, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586" start="2784" end="2790" title="May 26" label="May 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q935686" start="2889" end="2894" title="Larne" label="Larne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978527" start="2910" end="2958" title="Bruce campaign in Ireland" label="Scottish invasion of Ireland led by Edward Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613" start="2962" end="2969" title="June 15" label="June 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q312735" start="2977" end="2995" title="James II of Aragon" label="James II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q195240" start="3019" end="3036" title="Marie of Lusignan, Queen of Aragon" label="Marie of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q544496" start="3055" end="3073" title="Hugh III of Cyprus" label="Hugh III of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856" start="3132" end="3139" title="Nicosia" label="Nicosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699" start="3169" end="3175" title="July 3" label="July 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="3201" end="3208" title="serfdom" label="serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695" start="3237" end="3243" title="July 6" label="July 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q71254" start="3258" end="3287" title="Henry II, Lord of Mecklenburg" label="Henry II, Lord of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q661181" start="3340" end="3365" title="Albert II, Duke of Saxony" label="Albert II, Duke of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q64251" start="3398" end="3407" title="Albert II, Duke of Mecklenburg" label="Albert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q704530" start="3425" end="3444" title="Duke of Mecklenburg" label="Duke of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725" start="3456" end="3463" title="July 22" label="July 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277671" start="3466" end="3483" title="Siege of Carlisle (1315)" label="Siege of Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="3513" end="3529" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q614836" start="3538" end="3553" title="Carlisle Castle" label="Carlisle Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786825" start="3630" end="3644" title="Andrew Harclay, 1st Earl of Carlisle" label="Andrew Harclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721" start="3688" end="3695" title="July 24" label="July 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q871125" start="3698" end="3736" title="Otto II, Prince of Anhalt-Aschersleben" label="Otto II, Prince of Anhalt-Aschersleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718" start="3889" end="3896" title="July 28" label="July 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="4277" end="4282" title="usury" label="usury"/>
<link wikidata="Q563129" start="4396" end="4415" title="Ismail I of Granada" label="Ismail I of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q329429" start="4503" end="4515" title="yellow badge" label="yellow badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715" start="4529" end="4536" title="July 31" label="July 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q157070" start="4648" end="4656" title="County of Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="4771" end="4780" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788" start="4890" end="4898" title="August 1" label="August 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788" start="4996" end="5004" title="August 1" label="August 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q648516" start="5072" end="5087" title="James Douglas, Lord of Douglas" label="James the Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131007" start="5093" end="5101" title="Borough of Copeland" label="Copeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592633" start="5114" end="5128" title="St Bees Priory" label="St Bees Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778" start="5132" end="5141" title="August 11" label="August 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324807" start="5170" end="5175" title="Shōwa (1312–1317)" label="Shōwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490704" start="5179" end="5192" title="Hōjō Mototoki" label="Hōjō Mototoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="5214" end="5220" title="shogun" label="shogun"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="5232" end="5238" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045904" start="5246" end="5253" title="shikken" label="shikken"/>
<link wikidata="Q736839" start="5268" end="5286" title="Kamakura shogunate" label="Kamakura shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="5290" end="5295" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331538" start="5314" end="5327" title="Hōjō Hirotoki" label="Hōjō Hirotoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827" start="5331" end="5340" title="August 17" label="August 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367881" start="5343" end="5363" title="Ferdinand of Majorca" label="Ferdinand of Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q332005" start="5394" end="5416" title="Principality of Achaea" label="Principality of Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q493019" start="5530" end="5539" title="Andravida" label="Andravida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829" start="5544" end="5553" title="August 19" label="August 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q8384" start="5561" end="5578" title="Louis X of France" label="Louis X of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q230081" start="5649" end="5669" title="Clementia of Hungary" label="Clementia of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q359237" start="5682" end="5705" title="Charles Martel of Anjou" label="Charles Martel of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056854" start="5723" end="5730" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1301–1526)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="5787" end="5792" title="Reims" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q200262" start="5893" end="5911" title="Kingdom of Navarre" label="Kingdom of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8433" start="5948" end="5968" title="Philip V of France" label="Philip II of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825" start="6011" end="6020" title="August 24" label="August 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q8384" start="6041" end="6048" title="Louis X of France" label="Louis X"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="6082" end="6087" title="Reims" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816" start="6176" end="6185" title="August 29" label="August 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q946298" start="6188" end="6209" title="Battle of Montecatini" label="Battle of Montecatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q941306" start="6251" end="6276" title="Uguccione della Faggiuola" label="Uguccione della Faggiuola"/>
<link wikidata="Q148540" start="6306" end="6314" title="Republic of Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="6319" end="6325" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q712759" start="6346" end="6354" title="Philip I, Prince of Taranto" label="Philip I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659977" start="6386" end="6404" title="Charles of Taranto" label="Charles of Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q669200" start="6417" end="6448" title="Latin Emperor of Constantinople" label="Latin Emperor of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094509" start="6465" end="6479" title="Peter Tempesta" label="Peter Tempesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860" start="6495" end="6506" title="September 3" label="September 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q29840947" start="6530" end="6554" title="Rumaythah ibn Abi Numayy" label="Rumaythah ibn Abi Numayy"/>
<link wikidata="Q293505" start="6634" end="6651" title="al-Nasir Muhammad" label="al-Nasir Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="6655" end="6660" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048767" start="6737" end="6760" title="Humaydah ibn Abi Numayy" label="Humaydah ibn Abi Numayy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048770" start="6806" end="6819" title="Abu al-Ghayth ibn Abi Numayy" label="Abu al-Ghayth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="6854" end="6859" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853" start="7032" end="7044" title="September 10" label="September 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870784" start="7051" end="7067" title="Battle of Connor" label="Battle of Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189592" start="7081" end="7094" title="County Antrim" label="County Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="7107" end="7123" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978527" start="7140" end="7165" title="Bruce campaign in Ireland" label="Bruce campaign in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q385362" start="7202" end="7214" title="Edward Bruce" label="Edward Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q708175" start="7320" end="7359" title="Richard Óg de Burgh, 2nd Earl of Ulster" label="Richard Óg de Burgh, 2nd Earl of Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368960" start="7415" end="7435" title="Carrickfergus Castle" label="Carrickfergus Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923" start="7466" end="7475" title="October 9" label="October 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853958" start="7478" end="7496" title="Banastre Rebellion" label="Banastre Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="7546" end="7556" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q249183" start="7583" end="7602" title="Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster" label="Thomas of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658332" start="7625" end="7641" title="Liverpool Castle" label="Liverpool Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938481" start="7656" end="7673" title="Robert Holland, 1st Baron Holand" label="Robert de Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982" start="7677" end="7688" title="November 15" label="November 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q326989" start="7691" end="7710" title="Battle of Morgarten" label="Battle of Morgarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q223421" start="7729" end="7747" title="Leopold I, Duke of Austria" label="Leopold of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q14507" start="7768" end="7776" title="Ägerisee" label="Ägerisee"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="7808" end="7827" title="Swiss Confederation" label="Swiss Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028" start="7831" end="7842" title="November 17" label="November 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q312735" start="7866" end="7884" title="James II of Aragon" label="James II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038" start="7998" end="8004" title="Girona" label="Girona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304" start="8008" end="8018" title="December 9" label="December 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q667123" start="8041" end="8056" title="Pact of Brunnen" label="Pact of Brunnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="8090" end="8097" title="cantons of Switzerland" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404" start="8101" end="8104" title="canton of Uri" label="Uri"/>
<link wikidata="Q12433" start="8106" end="8112" title="canton of Schwyz" label="Schwyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q214069" start="8117" end="8128" title="canton of Unterwalden" label="Unterwalden"/>
<link wikidata="Q675405" start="8144" end="8151" title="Brunnen" label="Brunnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379" start="8221" end="8232" title="December 13" label="December 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q612148" start="8235" end="8258" title="Gaston II, Count of Foix" label="Gaston II of Foix-Béarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q228" start="8309" end="8335" title="Andorra" label="Co-principality of Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q726943" start="8367" end="8375" title="Gaston I, Count of Foix" label="Gaston I"/>
<link wikidata="Q29840947" start="8400" end="8424" title="Rumaythah ibn Abi Numayy" label="Rumaythah ibn Abi Numayy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048767" start="8613" end="8636" title="Humaydah ibn Abi Numayy" label="Humaydah ibn Abi Numayy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988505" start="8846" end="8871" title="Great Famine of 1315–1317" label="Great Famine of 1315–1317"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="8875" end="8881" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="8909" end="8915" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="9084" end="9099" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="9126" end="9133" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="9135" end="9142" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q237131" start="9144" end="9150" title="France in the Middle Ages" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="9152" end="9163" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q175211" start="9165" end="9172" title="Kingdom of Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="9177" end="9183" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779" start="9506" end="9515" title="August 10" label="August 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="9522" end="9542" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226" start="9611" end="9620" title="St Albans" label="St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="9693" end="9698" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="9715" end="9731" title="Mamluk Sultanate" label="Mamluk Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="9792" end="9800" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9814" end="9819" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283432" start="9842" end="9854" title="Siegfried II of Querfurt" label="Siegfried II"/>
<link wikidata="Q671443" start="9866" end="9876" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Hildesheim" label="Hildesheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q486556" start="9887" end="9893" title="Dassel" label="Dassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="9897" end="9909" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942" start="9924" end="9935" title="town privileges" label="city rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="9946" end="9957" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q10084" start="9959" end="9969" title="Vlissingen" label="Vlissingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267" start="10053" end="10063" title="January 20" label="January 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q497473" start="10066" end="10076" title="Yi Ja-chun" label="Yi Ja-chun"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="10085" end="10093" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159" start="10110" end="10114" title="1361" label="1361"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351" start="10118" end="10129" title="February 22" label="February 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q487766" start="10132" end="10140" title="Chunghye of Goryeo" label="Chunghye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073" start="10175" end="10179" title="1344" label="1344"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507" start="10183" end="10190" title="April 5" label="April 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q727402" start="10193" end="10207" title="James III of Majorca" label="King James III"/>
<link wikidata="Q836676" start="10211" end="10218" title="Kingdom of Majorca" label="Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090" start="10280" end="10284" title="1349" label="1349"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500" start="10288" end="10296" title="April 14" label="April 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346472" start="10304" end="10326" title="Muhammad IV of Granada" label="Muhammad IV of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="10342" end="10348" title="sultan" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="10357" end="10375" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Emirate of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004" start="10400" end="10404" title="1333" label="1333"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549" start="10408" end="10413" title="May 4" label="May 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863364" start="10416" end="10428" title="John Segrave, 4th Baron Segrave" label="John Segrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116" start="10465" end="10469" title="1353" label="1353"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579" start="10473" end="10479" title="May 20" label="May 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q235487" start="10482" end="10501" title="Bonne of Luxembourg" label="Bonne of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q237131" start="10520" end="10526" title="France in the Middle Ages" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q75477" start="10567" end="10576" title="Albert IV, Duke of Saxe-Lauenburg" label="Albert IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q168352" start="10595" end="10611" title="House of Ascania" label="House of Ascania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072" start="10617" end="10621" title="1343" label="1343"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741846" start="10626" end="10644" title="Federico di Pagana" label="Federico di Pagana"/>
<link wikidata="Q202691" start="10667" end="10671" title="Doge (title)" label="doge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129" start="10676" end="10680" title="1406" label="1406"/>
<link wikidata="Q491079" start="10689" end="10699" title="Empress Gi" label="Empress Gi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8666" start="10750" end="10765" title="Toghon Temür" label="Emperor Huizong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211" start="10790" end="10794" title="1369" label="1369"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136844" start="10799" end="10816" title="James of Piedmont" label="James of Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="10836" end="10850" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202" start="10856" end="10860" title="1367" label="1367"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168025" start="10865" end="10883" title="Joanna of Hainaut" label="Joanna of Hainault"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="10907" end="10913" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269" start="10918" end="10922" title="1374" label="1374"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697689" start="10927" end="10945" title="Johann Hiltalinger" label="Johann Hiltalinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382" start="10987" end="10991" title="1392" label="1392"/>
<link wikidata="Q19325324" start="10996" end="11011" title="John FitzWalter, 2nd Baron FitzWalter" label="John FitzWalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200264" start="11065" end="11079" title="Kujō Michinori" label="Kujō Michinori"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138036" start="11106" end="11111" title="kugyō" label="kugyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q61473" start="11143" end="11150" title="Louis V, Duke of Bavaria" label="Louis V"/>
<link wikidata="Q576479" start="11210" end="11226" title="Marie de Bourbon, Princess of Achaea" label="Marie de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="11244" end="11260" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6359" start="11266" end="11270" title="1387" label="1387"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094065" start="11275" end="11297" title="Pierre d&amp;#x27;Orgemont" label="Pierre d&amp;#x27;Orgemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371" start="11336" end="11340" title="1389" label="1389"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007274" start="11345" end="11364" title="Raoul II of Brienne, Count of Eu" label="Raoul II of Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094" start="11400" end="11404" title="1350" label="1350"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357850" start="11409" end="11424" title="Roger Beauchamp, 1st Baron Beauchamp of Bletso" label="Roger Beauchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327" start="11463" end="11467" title="1380" label="1380"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260" start="11485" end="11495" title="January 15" label="January 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817683" start="11498" end="11504" title="Princess Gyeguk" label="Gyeguk"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208" start="11530" end="11536" title="Goryeo" label="Goryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546" start="11541" end="11545" title="1285" label="1285"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397" start="11549" end="11557" title="March 10" label="March 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q87891" start="11560" end="11576" title="Agnes Blannbekin" label="Agnes Blannbekin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439" start="11609" end="11613" title="1244" label="1244"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536" start="11617" end="11625" title="April 30" label="April 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q251884" start="11629" end="11650" title="Enguerrand de Marigny" label="Enguerrand de Marigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549372" start="11659" end="11676" title="Grand Chamberlain of France" label="Grand Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508" start="11681" end="11685" title="1260" label="1260"/>
<link wikidata="Q70590" start="11690" end="11710" title="Margaret of Burgundy, Queen of France" label="Margaret of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552" start="11740" end="11744" title="1290" label="1290"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544" start="11748" end="11753" title="May 1" label="May 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298199" start="11756" end="11779" title="Margaret of Brandenburg" label="Margaret of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522" start="11803" end="11807" title="1270" label="1270"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556" start="11811" end="11816" title="May 9" label="May 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q707654" start="11819" end="11825" title="Hugh V, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642657" start="11844" end="11861" title="House of Burgundy" label="House of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559" start="11867" end="11871" title="1294" label="1294"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664" start="11875" end="11882" title="June 27" label="June 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q689152" start="11885" end="11894" title="Mieszko I, Duke of Cieszyn" label="Mieszko I"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="11924" end="11938" title="Piast dynasty" label="House of Piast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721" start="11942" end="11949" title="July 24" label="July 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q871125" start="11952" end="11959" title="Otto II, Prince of Anhalt-Aschersleben" label="Otto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777" start="12009" end="12018" title="August 12" label="August 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122244" start="12021" end="12037" title="Guy de Beauchamp, 10th Earl of Warwick" label="Guy de Beauchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q903810" start="12060" end="12067" title="magnate" label="magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826" start="12070" end="12079" title="August 18" label="August 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331538" start="12082" end="12095" title="Hōjō Hirotoki" label="Hōjō Hirotoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534" start="12130" end="12134" title="1279" label="1279"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816" start="12138" end="12147" title="August 29" label="August 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q946298" start="12165" end="12186" title="Battle of Montecatini" label="Battle of Montecatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659977" start="12191" end="12209" title="Charles of Taranto" label="Charles of Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716871" start="12229" end="12243" title="House of Valois-Anjou" label="House of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561" start="12249" end="12253" title="1296" label="1296"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094509" start="12258" end="12272" title="Peter Tempesta" label="Peter Tempesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554" start="12335" end="12339" title="1291" label="1291"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830" start="12343" end="12352" title="August 31" label="August 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846327" start="12355" end="12367" title="Andrea Dotti (saint)" label="Andrea Dotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502" start="12403" end="12407" title="1256" label="1256"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022" start="12411" end="12422" title="November 24" label="November 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534800" start="12425" end="12439" title="Fulk FitzWarin, 1st Baron FitzWarin" label="Fulk FitzWarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303" start="12474" end="12484" title="December 6" label="December 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010166" start="12487" end="12505" title="William Greenfield" label="William Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147441" start="12515" end="12521" title="Rector (ecclesiastical)" label="rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379" start="12539" end="12550" title="December 13" label="December 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q726943" start="12553" end="12561" title="Gaston I, Count of Foix" label="Gaston I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549" start="12595" end="12599" title="1287" label="1287"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048770" start="12631" end="12659" title="Abu al-Ghayth ibn Abi Numayy" label="Abu al-Ghayth ibn Abi Numayy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121369" start="12678" end="12683" title="Sharifate of Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q364418" start="12687" end="12696" title="Adolph VI, Count of Holstein-Schauenburg" label="Adolph VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q829907" start="12745" end="12765" title="Esclaramunda of Foix" label="Esclaramunda of Foix"/>
<link wikidata="Q836676" start="12784" end="12791" title="Kingdom of Majorca" label="Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487" start="12796" end="12800" title="1250" label="1250"/>
<link wikidata="Q332854" start="12805" end="12821" title="Henry of Treviso" label="Henry of Treviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="12830" end="12836" title="hermit" label="hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q50805156" start="12869" end="12882" title="Ibn al-Raqqam" label="Ibn al-Raqqam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174039" start="12930" end="12941" title="Jean Pitard" label="Jean Pitard"/>
<link wikidata="Q774306" start="12961" end="12968" title="surgeon" label="surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410" start="12984" end="12988" title="1228" label="1228"/>
<link wikidata="Q958876" start="12993" end="13015" title="John I of Chalon-Arlay" label="John I of Chalon-Arlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q838107" start="13034" end="13055" title="House of Chalon-Arlay" label="House of Chalon-Arlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506" start="13061" end="13065" title="1258" label="1258"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892044" start="13070" end="13091" title="Juan Núñez II de Lara" label="Juan Núñez II de Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502286" start="13111" end="13124" title="House of Lara" label="House of Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530" start="13130" end="13134" title="1276" label="1276"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804838" start="13139" end="13156" title="Lanfranc of Milan" label="Lanfranc of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694950" start="13206" end="13212" title="Lu Zhi (poet)" label="Lu Zhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438" start="13264" end="13268" title="1243" label="1243"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379659" start="13273" end="13298" title="Margaret of Villehardouin" label="Margaret of Villehardouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11509672" start="13333" end="13341" title="Nichigen" label="Nichigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q736311" start="13352" end="13360" title="Buddhism in Japan" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510" start="13383" end="13387" title="1262" label="1262"/>
<link wikidata="Q96628709" start="13392" end="13408" title="Robert FitzPayne, 1st Baron FitzPayne" label="Robert FitzPayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469476" start="13451" end="13463" title="Stephen Ákos" label="Stephen Ákos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493428" start="13488" end="13496" title="Oligarch (Kingdom of Hungary)" label="oligarch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39960" wikidata="Q5744" url="?curid=39960" title="1316">
<text>Year 1316 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXVI]]) was a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
=== January – March ===
* January 4 – Sultan Alauddin Khalji of the Delhi Sultanate dies after a 19-year reign at Delhi. He is succeeded by his 5-year-old son, Shihabuddin Omar, with the support of Alauddin&#x27;s general Malik Kafur. During his reign, a power struggle occurs between Malik Kafur and the Khalji family.
* January 28 – Llywelyn Bren leads a revolt against English rule in Wales. After disregarding an order to appear before King Edward II, Llywelyn Bren raises a rebel army and lays siege to Caerphilly Castle. The revolt spreads throughout the south Wear Cove (the Wales valley), and other castles are attacked. Edward sends an expeditionary force led by Humphrey de Bohun to suppress the rebellion. In March, after a battle at Morgraig Castle Llywelyn Bren is forced to break off the Caerphilly siege after six weeks and surrenders on March 18. 
* February 8 – After only 35 days of ruling the Delhi Sultanate as regent, Malik Kafur is assassinated by Sultan Alauddin&#x27;s former bodyguards. 
* February 14 – Battle of Skaithmuir: Scottish forces under James Douglas, Lord of Douglas defeat an English raiding party near Coldstream. During the skirmish, Edmond de Caillou (nephew of Piers Gaveston) is killed.
* February 22 – Battle of Picotin: Catalan forces led by Prince Ferdinand of Majorca, claimant to the Principality of Achaea, defeat the army of Princess Matilda of Hainaut, on the Peloponnese. During the battle, the Catalans kill 500 Burgundians and 700 native troops. The remnants of the Princess&#x27;s army withdraw in haste, pursued by the Catalan cavalry; before they turn back to loot the abandoned Achaean camp.
* March 12 – At Belgrade, Stefan Vladislav II becomes the new King of Syrmia (now part of Serbia) upon the death of his father, Stefan Dragutin. 
* March 18 – After leading a six-week-long revolt from Wales against England&#x27;s , and retreating to Glamorgan, Welsh rebel Llywelyn Bren finally surrenders to King Edward&#x27;s general, Humphrey de Bohun at Ystradfellte.

=== April – June ===
*April 14 – Qutb al-Din Mubarak, the 17-year-old son of Alauddin Khalji, succeeds him and ascends the throne as ruler of the Delhi Sultanate.
* May 2 – In an attempt to stir the Irish nobles into rebellion against English rule, Edward Bruce, brother of King Robert the Bruce of Scotland is crowned High King of Ireland.
* June 5 – King Louis X of France (&quot;Louis the Quarrelsome&quot;) dies, possibly from poisoning, during a game of tennis at Vincennes, leaving his pregnant wife Clementia of Hungary as his widow. Following Louis&#x27; death, his 23-year-old brother Philip is made regent for the remainder of Clementia&#x27;s pregnancy. There are several potential candidates for the role of regent, his uncle Charles, Count of Valois and Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy.

=== July – September ===
* July 5 – Battle of Manolada: Latin forces under Louis of Burgundy, supported by Byzantine troops sent by governor Michael Kantakouzenos, defeat the Catalan army under Ferdinand of Majorca. During the battle, Ferdinand is killed and John II of Nivelet, who claims the Principality of Achaea is executed on the field as a traitor. His lands are given to Louis&#x27; Burgundian followers. Louis of Burgundy and his wife, Matilda of Hainaut, become the joint rulers of Achaea.
* July 29 – 10th day of 7th month of 5 Shōwa; In Japan, Hōjō Takatoki becomes the 14th regent of the Kamakura shogunate.
* August 2 – Matilda of Hainaut becomes the sole leader of the Principality of Achaea, after her husband, Prince Louis of Burgundy, dies of poisoning one month after having secured his position during the Battle of Mandolada. 
* August 5 – Battle of Gransee: A North German-Danish alliance, led by Henry II, Lord of Mecklenburg (&quot;Henry the Lion&quot;), decisively defeats the forces under Waldemar the Great at Schulzendorf. During the battle, Waldemar escapes the battlefield, but his army – which consists largely of knights in armor — is massacred. Later, the victorious alliance negotiates a peace treaty at Zehdenick.
* August 7 – After an interregnum (&quot;sede vacante&quot;) of two years, due to disagreements between the cardinals, French cardinal Jacques Duèze, Bishop of Avignon, is elected as successor to Pope Clement V, who died in 1314. 
* August 10 – Second Battle of Athenry: Norman rule is retained during the Bruce campaign in Ireland, at the cost of over 5,000 dead.
* August 17 – Brothers Albert II and Waldemar I become the joint rulers of the Principality of Anhalt-Zerbst in Germany upon the death of their father, Prince Albert I.
* September 5 – The coronation of Jacques Deuze as Pope John XXII takes place at Avignon in France, as he becomes the 196th pontiff of the Roman Catholic Church. His papacy will last until 1334.

=== October – December ===
* October 1 – Birger, King of Sweden, issues a letter of protection to the women of the Karelian people in Finland, at the time a part of the Kingdom of Sweden. The letter is the oldest document in the National Archives of Sweden.
* October 30 – A papal court in Avignon, with Cardinal Berengar Fredol the Elder presiding, rules that Juan Fernández was properly elected Bishop of León (now in Spain), dismissing a challenge by Juan García. Fernández had been elected a year before, but his confirmation by the Pope was delayed because of the challenge. Before Fernández can travel to Avignon, however, he passes away on December 17.
* November 16 – John of the House of Capet is born four months after the death of his father, King Louis X of France and, as the eldest (and only) son of King Louis, becomes King John I of France from the moment of his birth, with his uncle, Prince Philip the Tall, serving as regent. John dies, four days after his birth, on November 20.
* November 20 – Upon the death of the infant John I, Philip the Tall, eldest surviving brother of King Louis X of France, becomes King Philip V
* December 16 – Abu Sa&#x27;id Bahadur Khan becomes the new Mongol Ikhanate of the Middle East upon the death of his father, the Ikhan Öljaitü.

=== By place ===
==== England ====
* The Pound sterling experiences the greatest year of inflation in its history, at 100.04 percent, losing over half its value.

== Births ==
* March 2 – Robert II, king of Scotland (House of Stuart) (d. 1390)
* April 11 – Édouard I, French nobleman, knight and marshal (d. 1351)
* May 14 – Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor (d. 1378)
* August 15 – John of Eltham, English nobleman and prince (d. 1336)
* November 7 – Simeon of Moscow, Russian Grand Prince (d. 1353)
* November 15 – John the Posthumous, King of France (d. 1316)
* &quot;date unknown&quot; 
** An-Nasir Ahmad, Sultan of Egypt, Mamluk ruler (House of Bahri) (d. 1344)
** Ch&#x27;oe Yŏng, Korean nobleman and general (d. 1388)
** Fa Ngum, Tai nobleman and ruler of Lan Xang (d. 1393)
** Henry II, Duke of Świdnica, Polish nobleman, knight and co-ruler (d. 1345)
** Ibn Arafa, Tunisian scholar, imam and theologian (d. 1401)
** John Beauchamp, English nobleman and admiral (d. 1360)
** Magnus Eriksson, king of Sweden and Norway from the House of Bjälbo (d. 1374)
** Nicholas Eymerich, Spanish inquisitor and theologian (d. 1399)
** Niphon of Kafsokalyvia, Greek monk, mystic and writer (d. 1411)
** Otho Holand, English nobleman, knight and governor (d. 1359)
** Renaud de Carteret, French nobleman and rebel leader (d. 1382)
** Robert de Herle, English nobleman, knight and admiral (d. 1364)
** Simon Sudbury, English cleric, bishop and archbishop (d. 1381)

== Deaths ==
* January 4 – Alauddin Khalji, Indian governor and ruler (b. 1266)
* February 18 – Nicholas II of Werle, German nobleman (b. 1274)
* March 2 – Marjorie Bruce, Scottish noblewoman and princess
* March 12 – Stefan Dragutin, king of Serbia (House of Nemanjić)
* March 13 – John Devereux, Anglo-Norman nobleman (b. 1250)
* May 4 – Reginald of Bar, French archdeacon, bishop and writer
* May 5 – Elizabeth of Rhuddlan, English noblewoman (b. 1282)
* June 5 – Louis the Quarrelsome, king of France (b. 1289)
* June 29 – Henry Woodlock, English prior and bishop (b. 1250)
* July 5 – (Battle of Manolada)
** Ferdinand of Majorca, Spanish nobleman and prince
** John II of Nivelet, Latin nobleman, knight and prince
* July 10 – Leszek of Dobrzyń, Polish nobleman and prince 
* July 18 – Yasokjin, Mongol noblewoman and queen consort
* July 27 – Theobald de Verdun, English nobleman (b. 1278)
* August 2 – Louis of Burgundy, French nobleman and prince
* August 17 – Albert I, German nobleman (House of Ascania)
* August 30 – Giovanni Pipino I, Italian nobleman and knight
* September 10 – John FitzGerald, Anglo-Norman nobleman
* November 20 – John the Posthumous, king of France
* November 26 – Robert Wishart, Scottish bishop (b. 1240)
* December 16 – Öljaitü, Mongol viceroy and ruler (b. 1282)
* December 17 – Juan Fernández, Spanish bishop-elect
* December 18 – Gilbert Segrave, English bishop (b. 1266)
* December 22 – Giles of Rome, Italian theologian (b. 1243)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Berenguer Estañol, Latin nobleman and vicar general
** Edmond de Caillou, French nobleman and favourite
** Geoffroy d&#x27;Ablis, French Dominican priest and inquisitor
** Guillaume Guiart, French chronicler and poet
** Guo Shoujing, Chinese astronomer and engineer (b. 1231)
** John the Lame, Scottish nobleman and admiral
** Malik Kafur, Indian general, governor and viceroy (nawab)
** Matilda of Brandenburg, German noblewoman and regent
** Michael Kantakouzenos, Byzantine general and governor
** Najm al-Din al-Tufi, Arab scholar and theologian (b. 1276)
** Sang Sapurba, Indonesian nobleman and ruler (b. 1245)
** Shihab-ud-din Omar, Indian ruler of the Delhi Sultanate 
** Simon Montagu, English nobleman and admiral (b. 1259)
** Ulrich of Sanneck, German nobleman and knight (b. 1255)
** Vytenis, Lithuanian nobleman and Grand Prince (b. 1260)
** William Ros, Scottish nobleman and claimant (b. 1255)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5744" start="5" end="9" title="1316" label="1316"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744" start="11" end="37" title="1316" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXVI]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q217019" start="45" end="75" title="leap year starting on Thursday" label="leap year starting on Thursday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="83" end="98" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168" start="140" end="149" title="January 4" label="January 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q335362" start="159" end="174" title="Alauddin Khalji" label="Alauddin Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="182" end="197" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="228" end="233" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863366" start="274" end="290" title="Shihabuddin Omar" label="Shihabuddin Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181417" start="336" end="347" title="Malik Kafur" label="Malik Kafur"/>
<link wikidata="Q919071" start="419" end="432" title="Khalji dynasty" label="Khalji family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285" start="436" end="446" title="January 28" label="January 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088032" start="449" end="462" title="Llywelyn Bren" label="Llywelyn Bren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961814" start="486" end="507" title="English rule in Wales" label="English rule in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="559" end="568" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q682601" start="622" end="639" title="Caerphilly Castle" label="Caerphilly Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710291" start="681" end="690" title="Wear Cove" label="Wear Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527958" start="786" end="803" title="Humphrey de Bohun, 4th Earl of Hereford" label="Humphrey de Bohun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9704504" start="859" end="874" title="Morgraig Castle" label="Morgraig Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323" start="980" end="990" title="February 8" label="February 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="1026" end="1041" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181417" start="1053" end="1064" title="Malik Kafur" label="Malik Kafur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332" start="1129" end="1140" title="February 14" label="February 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872388" start="1143" end="1163" title="Battle of Skaithmuir" label="Battle of Skaithmuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q648516" start="1187" end="1217" title="James Douglas, Lord of Douglas" label="James Douglas, Lord of Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018874" start="1255" end="1265" title="Coldstream" label="Coldstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338942" start="1288" end="1305" title="Edmond de Caillou" label="Edmond de Caillou"/>
<link wikidata="Q710482" start="1317" end="1331" title="Piers Gaveston, 1st Earl of Cornwall" label="Piers Gaveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351" start="1346" end="1357" title="February 22" label="February 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515504" start="1360" end="1377" title="Battle of Picotin" label="Battle of Picotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367881" start="1408" end="1428" title="Ferdinand of Majorca" label="Ferdinand of Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q332005" start="1446" end="1468" title="Principality of Achaea" label="Principality of Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q287015" start="1498" end="1516" title="Matilda of Hainaut" label="Matilda of Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="1525" end="1536" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402" start="1766" end="1774" title="March 12" label="March 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="1780" end="1788" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q661663" start="1790" end="1809" title="Stefan Vladislav II" label="Stefan Vladislav II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412664" start="1826" end="1840" title="King of Syrmia" label="King of Syrmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q290786" start="1892" end="1907" title="Stefan Dragutin" label="Stefan Dragutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422" start="1912" end="1920" title="March 18" label="March 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="1965" end="1970" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1979" end="1986" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q870815" start="2014" end="2023" title="Glamorgan" label="Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088032" start="2037" end="2050" title="Llywelyn Bren" label="Llywelyn Bren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527958" start="2101" end="2118" title="Humphrey de Bohun, 4th Earl of Hereford" label="Humphrey de Bohun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009284" start="2122" end="2134" title="Ystradfellte" label="Ystradfellte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500" start="2159" end="2167" title="April 14" label="April 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179907" start="2170" end="2189" title="Qutbuddin Mubarak Shah" label="Qutb al-Din Mubarak"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="2283" end="2298" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545" start="2302" end="2307" title="May 2" label="May 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q385362" start="2386" end="2398" title="Edward Bruce" label="Edward Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="2416" end="2432" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q889997" start="2456" end="2476" title="High King of Ireland" label="High King of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622" start="2480" end="2486" title="June 5" label="June 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q8384" start="2494" end="2511" title="Louis X of France" label="Louis X of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="2596" end="2602" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193819" start="2606" end="2615" title="Vincennes" label="Vincennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q230081" start="2643" end="2663" title="Clementia of Hungary" label="Clementia of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8433" start="2731" end="2737" title="Philip V of France" label="Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="2746" end="2752" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q270438" start="2875" end="2899" title="Charles, Count of Valois" label="Charles, Count of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q707899" start="2904" end="2928" title="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696" start="2958" end="2964" title="July 5" label="July 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817235" start="2967" end="2985" title="Battle of Manolada" label="Battle of Manolada"/>
<link wikidata="Q717968" start="3006" end="3023" title="Louis of Burgundy" label="Louis of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928136" start="3072" end="3093" title="Michael Kantakouzenos (died 1316)" label="Michael Kantakouzenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12878300" start="3190" end="3208" title="John II of Nivelet" label="John II of Nivelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q332005" start="3225" end="3247" title="Principality of Achaea" label="Principality of Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q717968" start="3344" end="3361" title="Louis of Burgundy" label="Louis of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q287015" start="3376" end="3394" title="Matilda of Hainaut" label="Matilda of Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717" start="3433" end="3440" title="July 29" label="July 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324807" start="3470" end="3475" title="Shōwa (1312–1317)" label="Shōwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355334" start="3487" end="3500" title="Hōjō Takatoki" label="Hōjō Takatoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785" start="3554" end="3562" title="August 2" label="August 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q287015" start="3565" end="3583" title="Matilda of Hainaut" label="Matilda of Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q332005" start="3615" end="3637" title="Principality of Achaea" label="Principality of Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q717968" start="3665" end="3682" title="Louis of Burgundy" label="Louis of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783" start="3781" end="3789" title="August 5" label="August 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236911" start="3792" end="3809" title="Battle of Gransee" label="Battle of Gransee"/>
<link wikidata="Q71254" start="3850" end="3879" title="Henry II, Lord of Mecklenburg" label="Henry II, Lord of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q565434" start="3946" end="3964" title="Waldemar, Margrave of Brandenburg-Stendal" label="Waldemar the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q581119" start="3968" end="3980" title="Schulzendorf" label="Schulzendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q184481" start="4169" end="4178" title="Zehdenick" label="Zehdenick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781" start="4182" end="4190" title="August 7" label="August 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q48017" start="4202" end="4213" title="Sede vacante" label="interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="4288" end="4296" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="4315" end="4328" title="Pope John XXII" label="Jacques Duèze"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="4376" end="4390" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779" start="4413" end="4422" title="August 10" label="August 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141460" start="4425" end="4449" title="Second Battle of Athenry" label="Second Battle of Athenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978527" start="4486" end="4511" title="Bruce campaign in Ireland" label="Bruce campaign in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827" start="4547" end="4556" title="August 17" label="August 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q876779" start="4568" end="4577" title="Albert II, Prince of Anhalt-Zerbst" label="Albert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q297194" start="4582" end="4592" title="Waldemar I" label="Waldemar I"/>
<link wikidata="Q706152" start="4624" end="4653" title="Principality of Anhalt-Zerbst" label="Principality of Anhalt-Zerbst"/>
<link wikidata="Q877045" start="4697" end="4712" title="Albert I, Prince of Anhalt-Zerbst" label="Prince Albert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2854" start="4716" end="4727" title="September 5" label="September 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="4765" end="4779" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="4795" end="4802" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4853" end="4874" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007" start="4903" end="4907" title="1334" label="1334"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913" start="4939" end="4948" title="October 1" label="October 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q434782" start="4951" end="4973" title="Birger, King of Sweden" label="Birger, King of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q213470" start="5025" end="5040" title="Karelian people" label="Karelian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724971" start="5139" end="5166" title="National Archives of Sweden" label="National Archives of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2950" start="5170" end="5180" title="October 30" label="October 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="5200" end="5207" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q521012" start="5223" end="5248" title="Berengar Fredol the Elder" label="Berengar Fredol the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q115152656" start="5271" end="5285" title="Juan Fernández (bishop of León)" label="Juan Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q15699" start="5317" end="5321" title="León, Spain" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029" start="5572" end="5583" title="November 16" label="November 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q8404" start="5586" end="5612" title="John I of France" label="John of the House of Capet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8384" start="5669" end="5686" title="Louis X of France" label="Louis X of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q8433" start="5812" end="5834" title="Philip V of France" label="Prince Philip the Tall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024" start="5911" end="5922" title="November 20" label="November 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q8433" start="6039" end="6052" title="Philip V of France" label="King Philip V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410" start="6055" end="6066" title="December 16" label="December 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q335301" start="6069" end="6096" title="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Bahadur Khan" label="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Bahadur Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q297065" start="6188" end="6195" title="Öljaitü" label="Öljaitü"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="6239" end="6253" title="Pound sterling" label="Pound sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="6287" end="6296" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390" start="6376" end="6383" title="March 2" label="March 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q312592" start="6386" end="6395" title="Robert II of Scotland" label="Robert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="6405" end="6413" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="6415" end="6430" title="House of Stuart" label="House of Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375" start="6436" end="6440" title="1390" label="1390"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501" start="6444" end="6452" title="April 11" label="April 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q274328" start="6455" end="6464" title="Édouard I de Beaujeu" label="Édouard I"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="6473" end="6481" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104" start="6506" end="6510" title="1351" label="1351"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561" start="6514" end="6520" title="May 14" label="May 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q155669" start="6523" end="6553" title="Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306" start="6558" end="6562" title="1378" label="1378"/>
<link wikidata="Q2774" start="6566" end="6575" title="August 15" label="August 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q561807" start="6578" end="6592" title="John of Eltham, Earl of Cornwall" label="John of Eltham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028" start="6626" end="6630" title="1336" label="1336"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989" start="6634" end="6644" title="November 7" label="November 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q297102" start="6647" end="6663" title="Simeon of Moscow" label="Simeon of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116" start="6690" end="6694" title="1353" label="1353"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982" start="6698" end="6709" title="November 15" label="November 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q8404" start="6712" end="6731" title="John I of France" label="John the Posthumous"/>
<link wikidata="Q237131" start="6741" end="6747" title="France during the Middle Ages" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q482338" start="6789" end="6820" title="An-Nasir Ahmad, Sultan of Egypt" label="An-Nasir Ahmad, Sultan of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q248786" start="6836" end="6850" title="Bahri dynasty" label="House of Bahri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073" start="6856" end="6860" title="1344" label="1344"/>
<link wikidata="Q490391" start="6865" end="6880" title="Ch&amp;#x27;oe Yŏng" label="Ch&amp;#x27;oe Yŏng"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365" start="6914" end="6918" title="1388" label="1388"/>
<link wikidata="Q532364" start="6923" end="6930" title="Fa Ngum" label="Fa Ngum"/>
<link wikidata="Q853477" start="6958" end="6966" title="Lan Xang" label="Lan Xang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390" start="6971" end="6975" title="1393" label="1393"/>
<link wikidata="Q553884" start="6980" end="7006" title="Henry II, Duke of Świdnica" label="Henry II, Duke of Świdnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077" start="7049" end="7053" title="1345" label="1345"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147436" start="7058" end="7067" title="Ibn Arafa" label="Ibn Arafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q125482" start="7087" end="7091" title="imam" label="imam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6110" start="7111" end="7115" title="1401" label="1401"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809684" start="7120" end="7134" title="John Beauchamp, 1st Baron Beauchamp of Warwick" label="John Beauchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150" start="7169" end="7173" title="1360" label="1360"/>
<link wikidata="Q314457" start="7178" end="7193" title="Magnus Eriksson" label="Magnus Eriksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="7203" end="7209" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="7214" end="7220" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269" start="7250" end="7254" title="1374" label="1374"/>
<link wikidata="Q718567" start="7259" end="7276" title="Nicholas Eymerich" label="Nicholas Eymerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664338" start="7286" end="7296" title="inquisitor" label="inquisitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422" start="7316" end="7320" title="1399" label="1399"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039474" start="7325" end="7347" title="Niphon of Kafsokalyvia" label="Niphon of Kafsokalyvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6155" start="7383" end="7387" title="1411" label="1411"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108705" start="7392" end="7403" title="Otho Holand" label="Otho Holand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143" start="7447" end="7451" title="1359" label="1359"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424958" start="7456" end="7474" title="Sir Renaud de Carteret, 8th Seigneur of Saint Ouen" label="Renaud de Carteret"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335" start="7513" end="7517" title="1382" label="1382"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351407" start="7522" end="7537" title="Robert de Herle" label="Robert de Herle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185" start="7580" end="7584" title="1364" label="1364"/>
<link wikidata="Q924163" start="7589" end="7602" title="Simon Sudbury" label="Simon Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331" start="7646" end="7650" title="1381" label="1381"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168" start="7668" end="7677" title="January 4" label="January 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q335362" start="7680" end="7695" title="Alauddin Khalji" label="Alauddin Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517" start="7727" end="7731" title="1266" label="1266"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343" start="7735" end="7746" title="February 18" label="February 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q108998" start="7749" end="7769" title="Nicholas II of Werle" label="Nicholas II of Werle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527" start="7791" end="7795" title="1274" label="1274"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390" start="7799" end="7806" title="March 2" label="March 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q291049" start="7809" end="7823" title="Marjorie Bruce" label="Marjorie Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402" start="7860" end="7868" title="March 12" label="March 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q290786" start="7871" end="7886" title="Stefan Dragutin" label="Stefan Dragutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415003" start="7896" end="7902" title="Kingdom of Serbia (medieval)" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q746782" start="7904" end="7921" title="Nemanjić dynasty" label="House of Nemanjić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400" start="7925" end="7933" title="March 13" label="March 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q23584947" start="7936" end="7949" title="John Devereux, Lord of Munsley" label="John Devereux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487" start="7977" end="7981" title="1250" label="1250"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549" start="7985" end="7990" title="May 4" label="May 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2127902" start="7993" end="8008" title="Reginald of Bar (bishop of Metz)" label="Reginald of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550" start="8049" end="8054" title="May 5" label="May 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435894" start="8057" end="8078" title="Elizabeth of Rhuddlan" label="Elizabeth of Rhuddlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541" start="8103" end="8107" title="1282" label="1282"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622" start="8111" end="8117" title="June 5" label="June 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q8384" start="8120" end="8141" title="Louis X of France" label="Louis the Quarrelsome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551" start="8162" end="8166" title="1289" label="1289"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659" start="8170" end="8177" title="June 29" label="June 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730471" start="8180" end="8194" title="Henry Woodlock" label="Henry Woodlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696" start="8233" end="8239" title="July 5" label="July 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817235" start="8243" end="8261" title="Battle of Manolada" label="Battle of Manolada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367881" start="8266" end="8286" title="Ferdinand of Majorca" label="Ferdinand of Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q12878300" start="8319" end="8337" title="John II of Nivelet" label="John II of Nivelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689" start="8375" end="8382" title="July 10" label="July 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133392" start="8385" end="8402" title="Leszek of Dobrzyń" label="Leszek of Dobrzyń"/>
<link wikidata="Q2730" start="8434" end="8441" title="July 18" label="July 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q12610735" start="8444" end="8452" title="Yasokjin" label="Yasokjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719" start="8492" end="8499" title="July 27" label="July 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917476" start="8502" end="8520" title="Theobald de Verdun, 2nd Baron Verdun" label="Theobald de Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533" start="8543" end="8547" title="1278" label="1278"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785" start="8551" end="8559" title="August 2" label="August 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q717968" start="8562" end="8579" title="Louis of Burgundy" label="Louis of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827" start="8610" end="8619" title="August 17" label="August 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q877045" start="8622" end="8630" title="Albert I, Prince of Anhalt-Zerbst" label="Albert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q168352" start="8649" end="8665" title="House of Ascania" label="House of Ascania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818" start="8669" end="8678" title="August 30" label="August 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q67214816" start="8681" end="8698" title="Giovanni Pipino da Barletta" label="Giovanni Pipino I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853" start="8730" end="8742" title="September 10" label="September 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q180574" start="8745" end="8760" title="John FitzGerald, 1st Earl of Kildare" label="John FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024" start="8786" end="8797" title="November 20" label="November 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q8404" start="8800" end="8819" title="John I of France" label="John the Posthumous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019" start="8838" end="8849" title="November 26" label="November 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459814" start="8852" end="8866" title="Robert Wishart" label="Robert Wishart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435" start="8888" end="8892" title="1240" label="1240"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410" start="8896" end="8907" title="December 16" label="December 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q297065" start="8910" end="8917" title="Öljaitü" label="Öljaitü"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="8926" end="8933" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413" start="8956" end="8967" title="December 17" label="December 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q115152656" start="8970" end="8984" title="Juan Fernández (bishop of León)" label="Juan Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438" start="9009" end="9020" title="December 18" label="December 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561203" start="9023" end="9038" title="Gilbert Segrave" label="Gilbert Segrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636" start="9067" end="9078" title="December 22" label="December 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q380647" start="9081" end="9094" title="Giles of Rome" label="Giles of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438" start="9119" end="9123" title="1243" label="1243"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891261" start="9155" end="9172" title="Berenguer Estañol" label="Berenguer Estañol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044528" start="9193" end="9206" title="vicar general" label="vicar general"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338942" start="9210" end="9227" title="Edmond de Caillou" label="Edmond de Caillou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996375" start="9249" end="9258" title="favourite" label="favourite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206703" start="9262" end="9283" title="Geoffroy d&amp;#x27;Ablis" label="Geoffroy d&amp;#x27;Ablis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="9292" end="9301" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5616048" start="9327" end="9343" title="Guillaume Guiart" label="Guillaume Guiart"/>
<link wikidata="Q733082" start="9375" end="9387" title="Guo Shoujing" label="Guo Shoujing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417" start="9425" end="9429" title="1231" label="1231"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275635" start="9434" end="9447" title="John of Argyll" label="John the Lame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181417" start="9482" end="9493" title="Malik Kafur" label="Malik Kafur"/>
<link wikidata="Q23017648" start="9533" end="9538" title="nawab" label="nawab"/>
<link wikidata="Q20755001" start="9543" end="9565" title="Matilda of Brandenburg, Duchess of Pomerania" label="Matilda of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="9589" end="9595" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928136" start="9599" end="9620" title="Michael Kantakouzenos (died 1316)" label="Michael Kantakouzenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q15446588" start="9656" end="9675" title="Najm al-Din al-Tufi" label="Najm al-Din al-Tufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530" start="9709" end="9713" title="1276" label="1276"/>
<link wikidata="Q224649" start="9718" end="9730" title="Sang Sapurba" label="Sang Sapurba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440" start="9766" end="9770" title="1245" label="1245"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863366" start="9775" end="9793" title="Shihabuddin Omar" label="Shihab-ud-din Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="9815" end="9830" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23617465" start="9835" end="9848" title="Simon Montagu, 1st Baron Montagu" label="Simon Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507" start="9883" end="9887" title="1259" label="1259"/>
<link wikidata="Q12805035" start="9892" end="9909" title="Ulrich of Sanneck" label="Ulrich of Sanneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501" start="9942" end="9946" title="1255" label="1255"/>
<link wikidata="Q557859" start="9951" end="9958" title="Vytenis" label="Vytenis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508" start="10001" end="10005" title="1260" label="1260"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020818" start="10010" end="10021" title="William Ros, 1st Baron Ros" label="William Ros"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39961" wikidata="Q5745" url="?curid=39961" title="1317">
<text>Year 1317 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXVII]]) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
=== January – March ===
* January 9 – The 23-year-old Philip the Tall, younger brother of the late King Louis X of France, is hastily crowned King of France, as King Philip V, at Rheims. The only son of King Louis X had been born posthumously, but died after four days. Supporters of King Louis felt that his eldest daughter, Joan II of Navarre, should have been crowned as the monarch. Mass protests follow in Artois, Champagne and Burgundy. The coronation of a brother, instead of the eldest daughter, as the successor to the throne sets the precedent for the Salic law, providing that the eldest male heir inherits the throne. Philip V reorganizes the French army by extending the military obligations of the realm. Each town and castellany is responsible for providing a specified number of fully equipped troops – such as sergeants and infantry militias, while towns in economically advanced areas like Flanders become a major source of men and money. At the same time, the &quot;arriére ban&quot; (military recruitment) is generally commuted in favour for taxation.
* February 1 – Manuel Pessanha of Genoa is appointed as the first Chief Admiral of Portugal (&quot;Almirante-mor&quot;) by King Denis, and charged with organizing a permanent navy for the kingdom, with 20 warships and hiring Genoese captains to recruit sailors. The organization of the Portuguese Royal Navy is completed by December 12.
* February 16 – (10th day of 1st month of 6 Shōwa) An earthquake of estimated 7.0 magnitude strikes Kyoto. On February 22, an aftershock of 6.0 magnitude follows the first quake. 
* March 15 – Pope John XXII admonishes King Frederick III of Sicily to take severe measures against the Fraticelli, the Spiritual Franciscans who have broken with the Roman Catholic Church doctrine. 
* March 17 – In Germany, Waldemar the Great becomes the sole ruler of the reunited Margraviate of Brandenburg upon the death of his cousin, John V, Margrave of Brandenburg-Salzwedel. Waldemar had been the Margrave of Brandenburg-Stendal since 1308.
* March 23 – In France, Hugues Géraud, the Roman Catholic Bishop of Cahors, is arrested along with plotting to assassinate Pope John XXII (with poisoned bread) and to use evil magic against him and two of his advisors, Bertrand du Pouget and Gaucelme de Jean. Following a trial, Géraud is convicted of witchcraft and sacrilege, and executed on August 30.
* March 31 – Pope John XXII claims imperial rights of government in Italy for the papacy. He erects the dioceses of Luçon, Maillezais, and Tulle and issues the decretal &quot;Spondent Pariter&quot; prohibiting alchemy.

=== April – June ===
* April 7 – Louis of Toulouse is canonized as a saint in the Roman Catholic Church by Pope John XXII.
* April 11 – In Italy&#x27;s Republic of Massa, coinage is resumed by arrangement of the Republic and of the Benzi family.
* April 27 – John XXII orders the Spiritual Franciscans, including the French priest Bernard Délicieux, to come to Avignon and answer for their disobedience. Upon arrival, Délicieux is arrested and interrogated.
* May 13 – King Edward II restores the dower lands that had been surrendered by Margaret de Clare, widow of Piers Gaveston.
* May 22 – Pursuant to the papal order of April 27, the first of the Spiritual Franciscans (&quot;Fraticelli&quot;) appear before Pope John XXII to be confronted over their disobedience.
* June 13 – Cardinal Jacques de Via, Bishop of Avignon and nephew of Pope John XXII, is found dead. A court will conclude on August 30 that de Via was murdered by witchcraft.
* June 23 – Thawun Gyi, Burmese monarch of the principality of Toungoo, is assassinated by his younger brother, Thawun Nge, who takes his place.

=== July – September ===
* July 5 – Mongol Prince Abu Sa&#x27;id Bahadur Khan becomes the ruler of the Ilkhanate, the Mongol-controlled area of the Middle East.
* July 22 – Alexander de Bicknor is consecrated by the Pope as the Archbishop of Dublin.
*August 21 – Hugues Géraud, the Catholic Bishop of Cahors who is implicated in a plot to assassinate Pope John XXII, is personally questioned by the Pope. Géraud is convicted on August 30 of witchcraft, sacrilege and the June 13 murder of Cardinal Jacques de Via, and is burned at the stake as punishment.
* September 1 – Near Rushyford in County Durham, English knight Gilbert Middleton begins a rebellion against King Edward II. Middleton attacks and takes hostage the newly elected Bishop of Durham, Louis de Beaumont, Louis&#x27; brother Henry de Beaumont, and two cardinals, Gauscelin de Jean and Luca Fieschi. The cardinals are set free, while the Beaumonts are imprisoned at Mitford Castle for the next seven weeks.

=== October – December ===
* October 7 – Pope John XXII issues the bull &quot;Quorundam exigit&quot;, imposing a more lenient treatment of supporters of the Franciscan cause of &quot;unconditional poverty&quot;.
* October 17 – Sir Gilbert Middleton releases the Bishop of Durham, Louis de Beaumont, and the bishop&#x27;s brother Henry after being paid a ransom of 500 marks (2,000 troy ounces) of silver.
* November 9 – William II, son of King Frederick III of Sicily, becomes the new Duke of Athens upon the death of his older brother, Manfred of Sicily.
* November 13 – Yahballaha III, Patriarch of the Church of the East in Byzantium, dies after serving 26 years as leader of the Eastern Orthodox Church. Timothy II of Seleucia-Ctesiphon will be elected to succeed him.
* November 25 – Treaty of Templin: After ending the war between the Margraviate of Brandenburg and Denmark, Brandenburg is forced to negotiate a truce. King Eric VI, his ally Duke Henry the Lion and Waldemar the Great sign a peace treaty in Templin. Brandenburg agrees to transfer Burg Stargard and Arnsberg castle to Mecklenburg. They also surrender the territories of Schlawe-Stolp, located on the Baltic coast, to Pomerania.
* December 11 – King Birger Magnusson has his brothers, Dukes Eric Magnusson and Valdemar Magnusson, captured and thrown into a dungeon during the Nyköping Banquet – as a revenge for their imprisonment of him in the Håtuna games (see 1306). As the brothers soon starve to death in the dungeon, their followers rebel against Birger, throwing Sweden into civil war.
* December 12 – The Portuguese Royal Navy, with 20 warships, is created by order of King Denis. The Navy has 20 armed galleys as warships, under the command of Admiral Manuel Pessanha and will celebrate its 700th anniversary in 2017 as the oldest continuously serving navy in the world.

===Date unknown===
* A Hungarian document mentions for the first time Basarab I as leader of Wallachia (historians estimate he was on the throne since about 1310). Basarab will become the first voivode of Wallachia as an independent state, and founder of the House of Basarab (until 1352).
* The Great Famine of 1315–1317 comes to an end. Crop harvests return to normal – but it will be another five years before food supplies are completely replenished in Northern Europe. Simultaneously, the people are so weakened by diseases such as pneumonia, bronchitis, and tuberculosis. Historians debate the toll, but it is estimated that 10–25% of the population of many cities and towns dies.

== Births ==
* March 21 – Isabel de Verdun, English noblewoman (House of Clare) (d. 1349)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Blanche of Valois, queen consort of Germany and Bohemia (d. 1348)
** Euphemia of Sweden, Swedish noblewoman and princess (d. 1370)
** Coloman, Hungarian nobleman, prince, prelate and bishop (d. 1375)
** Godfrey de Foljambe, English nobleman and Chief Justice (d. 1376)
** Ichijō Tsunemichi, Japanese nobleman (&quot;kugyō&quot;) and regent (d. 1365)
** John II, Sicilian nobleman and prince (House of Barcelona) (d. 1348)
** Michael Szécsényi, Hungarian nobleman, cleric and bishop (d. 1377) 
** Ralph de Spigurnell, English nobleman, knight and admiral (d. 1373)
** Vuk Kosača, Bosnian nobleman (&quot;knyaz&quot;), magnate and ruler (d. 1359)

== Deaths ==
* February 6 – Brinolfo Algotsson, Swedish bishop and theologian (b. 1240)
* February 7 – Robert de Clermont, French nobleman and prince (b. 1256)
* February 11 – Ralph Fitzwilliam, English nobleman and knight (b. 1256)
* April 6 – Guy IV, French nobleman and Grand Butler (House of Châtillon)
* April 19 – Nitchō, Japanese Buddhist monk, cleric and scholar (b. 1252)
* April 20 – Agnes of Montepulciano, Italian prioress and saint (b. 1268)
* May 23 – Guy of Avesnes, French bishop (House of Avesnes) (b. 1253) 
* June 23 – Thawun Gyi, Burmese founder and ruler of Toungoo (b. 1258)
* June 25 – Henry of Harclay, English philosopher and chancellor (b. 1270)
* August 14 – Bernard de Castanet, French diplomat and bishop (b. 1240)
* September 21 – Viola of Teschen, queen consort of Bohemia and Poland 
* October 8 – Fushimi, Japanese emperor and calligrapher (b. 1265)
* October 26 – Alice of Hainault, French noblewoman (House of Avesnes) 
* November 9 – Manfred of Sicily, Sicilian nobleman and prince (b. 1306) 
* November 13 – Yahballaha III, Turkic patriarch of the Church of the East 
* November 28 – Yishan Yining, Chinese monk and calligrapher (b. 1247)
* December 15 – Maria of Bytom, queen consort of Hungary and Croatia
* December 24 – Jean de Joinville, French historian and writer (b. 1224)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Dujam II, Croatian nobleman and oligarch (House of Frankopan)
** Gerard of Bologna, Italian Carmelite theologian and philosopher
** Guillemette of Neufchâtel, Swiss noblewoman (&quot;suo jure&quot;) (b. 1260)
** Irene Violante of Montferrat, Byzantine empress consort (b. 1274)
** John I Orsini, Latin nobleman, knight and ruler (House of Orsini)
** John the Illustrious, German nobleman and knight (b. 1302)
** Malise III of Strathearn, Scottish nobleman and politician (b. 1257)
** Parsoma (&quot;the Naked&quot;), Egyptian Coptic hermit and saint (b. 1257)
** Ram Khamhaeng the Great, Tai ruler of Sukhothai (b. 1239)
** Robert of Burgundy, French nobleman and knight (b. 1300)
** Roger Brabazon, English lawyer and Chief Justice (b. 1247)
** Stephen de Dunnideer, English bishop-elect
** Tolberto III, Italian nobleman (House of Caminesi) (b. 1263)
** Wolfert II van Borselen, Dutch nobleman and knight (b. 1280)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5745" start="5" end="9" title="1317" label="1317"/>
<link wikidata="Q5745" start="11" end="38" title="1317" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXVII]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235673" start="46" end="78" title="common year starting on Saturday" label="common year starting on Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="86" end="101" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238" start="143" end="152" title="January 9" label="January 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q8433" start="171" end="186" title="Philip V of France" label="Philip the Tall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8384" start="221" end="238" title="Louis X of France" label="Louis X of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="259" end="273" title="King of France" label="King of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="296" end="302" title="Reims" label="Rheims"/>
<link wikidata="Q230031" start="443" end="461" title="Joan II of Navarre" label="Joan II of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q159987" start="528" end="534" title="Artois" label="Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q273827" start="536" end="545" title="Champagne (province)" label="Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="550" end="558" title="Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152507" start="679" end="688" title="Salic law" label="Salic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q157070" start="1025" end="1033" title="County of Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312" start="1191" end="1201" title="February 1" label="February 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320514" start="1204" end="1219" title="Manuel Pessanha" label="Manuel Pessanha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="1223" end="1228" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683736" start="1261" end="1280" title="Admiral of Portugal" label="Admiral of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q212890" start="1312" end="1322" title="Denis of Portugal" label="King Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q588089" start="1475" end="1496" title="Portuguese Navy" label="Portuguese Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342" start="1528" end="1539" title="February 16" label="February 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324807" start="1570" end="1575" title="Shōwa (1312–1317)" label="Shōwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="1626" end="1631" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403" start="1708" end="1716" title="March 15" label="March 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="1719" end="1733" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q367226" start="1750" end="1773" title="Frederick III of Sicily" label="Frederick III of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q420576" start="1810" end="1820" title="Fraticelli" label="Fraticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419" start="1908" end="1916" title="March 17" label="March 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q565434" start="1931" end="1949" title="Waldemar, Margrave of Brandenburg-Stendal" label="Waldemar the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="1989" end="2015" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Margraviate of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q557218" start="2046" end="2087" title="John V, Margrave of Brandenburg-Salzwedel" label="John V, Margrave of Brandenburg-Salzwedel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445" start="2157" end="2165" title="March 23" label="March 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142547" start="2179" end="2192" title="Hugues Géraud" label="Hugues Géraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q23047" start="2223" end="2229" title="Cahors" label="Cahors"/>
<link wikidata="Q828652" start="2374" end="2392" title="Bertrand du Pouget" label="Bertrand du Pouget"/>
<link wikidata="Q731352" start="2397" end="2413" title="Gaucelme de Jean" label="Gaucelme de Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461" start="2512" end="2520" title="March 31" label="March 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="2523" end="2537" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q838931" start="2578" end="2583" title="Kingdom of Italy (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q871565" start="2626" end="2631" title="Diocese of Luçon" label="Luçon"/>
<link wikidata="Q871677" start="2633" end="2643" title="Ancient Diocese of Maillezais" label="Maillezais"/>
<link wikidata="Q174451" start="2649" end="2654" title="Diocese of Tulle" label="Tulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183753" start="2670" end="2678" title="decretal" label="decretal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966963" start="2685" end="2701" title="Spondent Pariter" label="Spondent Pariter"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="2720" end="2727" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505" start="2753" end="2760" title="April 7" label="April 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q196157" start="2763" end="2780" title="Louis of Toulouse" label="Louis of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501" start="2855" end="2863" title="April 11" label="April 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2869" end="2874" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60838139" start="2882" end="2899" title="Republic of Massa" label="Republic of Massa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533" start="2978" end="2986" title="April 27" label="April 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q420576" start="3010" end="3031" title="Fraticelli" label="Spiritual Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759654" start="3061" end="3078" title="Bernard Délicieux" label="Bernard Délicieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="3091" end="3098" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560" start="3190" end="3196" title="May 13" label="May 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="3199" end="3213" title="Edward II of England" label="King Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609611" start="3268" end="3285" title="Margaret de Clare" label="Margaret de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q710482" start="3296" end="3310" title="Piers Gaveston, 1st Earl of Cornwall" label="Piers Gaveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581" start="3314" end="3320" title="May 22" label="May 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614" start="3501" end="3508" title="June 13" label="June 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406613" start="3520" end="3534" title="Jacques de Via" label="Jacques de Via"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="3662" end="3672" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668" start="3676" end="3683" title="June 23" label="June 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q21931852" start="3686" end="3696" title="Thawun Gyi" label="Thawun Gyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13067018" start="3706" end="3713" title="List of rulers of Toungoo" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193412" start="3737" end="3744" title="Toungoo" label="Toungoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21932475" start="3786" end="3796" title="Thawun Nge" label="Thawun Nge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696" start="3847" end="3853" title="July 5" label="July 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q335301" start="3870" end="3897" title="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Bahadur Khan" label="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Bahadur Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="3923" end="3932" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725" start="3983" end="3990" title="July 22" label="July 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720471" start="3993" end="4013" title="Alexander de Bicknor" label="Alexander de Bicknor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727389" start="4048" end="4068" title="Archbishop of Dublin" label="Archbishop of Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823" start="4071" end="4080" title="August 21" label="August 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142547" start="4083" end="4096" title="Hugues Géraud" label="Hugues Géraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="4171" end="4185" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406613" start="4318" end="4332" title="Jacques de Via" label="Jacques de Via"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859" start="4378" end="4389" title="September 1" label="September 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380895" start="4397" end="4406" title="Rushyford" label="Rushyford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18527807" start="4440" end="4457" title="Gilbert Middleton" label="Gilbert Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537248" start="4573" end="4590" title="Louis de Beaumont" label="Louis de Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q645900" start="4612" end="4629" title="Henry de Beaumont" label="Henry de Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q731352" start="4650" end="4667" title="Gauscelin de Jean" label="Gauscelin de Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264976" start="4672" end="4684" title="Luca Fieschi" label="Luca Fieschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881554" start="4752" end="4766" title="Mitford Castle" label="Mitford Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926" start="4823" end="4832" title="October 7" label="October 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962" start="5008" end="5018" title="October 17" label="October 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q18527807" start="5025" end="5042" title="Gilbert Middleton" label="Gilbert Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537248" start="5074" end="5091" title="Louis de Beaumont" label="Louis de Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991" start="5201" end="5211" title="November 9" label="November 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060357" start="5214" end="5224" title="William II, Duke of Athens" label="William II"/>
<link wikidata="Q367226" start="5238" end="5261" title="Frederick III of Sicily" label="Frederick III of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q334714" start="5279" end="5293" title="Duke of Athens" label="Duke of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388172" start="5331" end="5348" title="Manfred, Duke of Athens" label="Manfred of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984" start="5352" end="5363" title="November 13" label="November 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627955" start="5366" end="5380" title="Yahballaha III" label="Yahballaha III"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="5399" end="5417" title="Church of the East" label="Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807268" start="5502" end="5534" title="Timothy II of Seleucia-Ctesiphon" label="Timothy II of Seleucia-Ctesiphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020" start="5569" end="5580" title="November 25" label="November 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456445" start="5583" end="5600" title="Treaty of Templin" label="Treaty of Templin"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="5635" end="5661" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Margraviate of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="5666" end="5673" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q359601" start="5724" end="5731" title="Eric VI of Denmark" label="Eric VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q71254" start="5747" end="5761" title="Henry II, Lord of Mecklenburg" label="Henry the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q565434" start="5766" end="5784" title="Waldemar, Margrave of Brandenburg-Stendal" label="Waldemar the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q519157" start="5808" end="5815" title="Templin" label="Templin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45888" start="5848" end="5861" title="Burg Stargard" label="Burg Stargard"/>
<link wikidata="Q20329" start="5866" end="5874" title="Wesenberg, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern" label="Arnsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q109057" start="5885" end="5896" title="Mecklenburg" label="Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484174" start="5937" end="5950" title="Lands of Schlawe and Stolp" label="Schlawe-Stolp"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="5967" end="5979" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q696640" start="5984" end="5993" title="Duchy of Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363" start="5997" end="6008" title="December 11" label="December 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q434782" start="6016" end="6032" title="Birger, King of Sweden" label="Birger Magnusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q547911" start="6057" end="6071" title="Eric Magnusson (duke)" label="Eric Magnusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369581" start="6076" end="6094" title="Valdemar, Duke of Finland" label="Valdemar Magnusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495544" start="6142" end="6158" title="Nyköping Banquet" label="Nyköping Banquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573051" start="6211" end="6223" title="Håtuna games" label="Håtuna games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5716" start="6229" end="6233" title="1306" label="1306"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="6336" end="6342" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369" start="6361" end="6372" title="December 12" label="December 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q588089" start="6379" end="6400" title="Portuguese Navy" label="Portuguese Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212890" start="6443" end="6453" title="Denis of Portugal" label="King Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188924" start="6477" end="6483" title="galley" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320514" start="6527" end="6542" title="Manuel Pessanha" label="Manuel Pessanha"/>
<link wikidata="Q737867" start="6599" end="6644" title="List of navies" label="oldest continuously serving navy in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q324748" start="6717" end="6726" title="Basarab I of Wallachia" label="Basarab I"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="6740" end="6749" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729" start="6804" end="6808" title="1310" label="1310"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="6841" end="6848" title="voivode" label="voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275486" start="6906" end="6922" title="House of Basarab" label="House of Basarab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112" start="6930" end="6934" title="1352" label="1352"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988505" start="6943" end="6968" title="Great Famine of 1315–1317" label="Great Famine of 1315–1317"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="7104" end="7119" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="7184" end="7193" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173022" start="7195" end="7205" title="bronchitis" label="bronchitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="7211" end="7223" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433" start="7350" end="7358" title="March 21" label="March 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077823" start="7361" end="7377" title="Isabel de Verdun, Baroness Ferrers of Groby" label="Isabel de Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095290" start="7399" end="7413" title="de Clare" label="House of Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090" start="7419" end="7423" title="1349" label="1349"/>
<link wikidata="Q237501" start="7455" end="7472" title="Blanche of Valois" label="Blanche of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q175211" start="7491" end="7498" title="Kingdom of Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q42585" start="7503" end="7510" title="Kingdom of Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6085" start="7515" end="7519" title="1348" label="1348"/>
<link wikidata="Q463711" start="7524" end="7542" title="Euphemia of Sweden" label="Euphemia of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217" start="7580" end="7584" title="1370" label="1370"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122993" start="7589" end="7596" title="Coloman, Bishop of Győr" label="Coloman"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="7608" end="7616" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q725440" start="7626" end="7633" title="prelate" label="prelate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277" start="7649" end="7653" title="1375" label="1375"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839472" start="7658" end="7677" title="Godfrey de Foljambe" label="Godfrey de Foljambe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679071" start="7700" end="7713" title="Lord Chief Justice of Ireland" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282" start="7718" end="7722" title="1376" label="1376"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147658" start="7727" end="7744" title="Ichijō Tsunemichi" label="Ichijō Tsunemichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138036" start="7771" end="7776" title="kugyō" label="kugyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190" start="7799" end="7803" title="1365" label="1365"/>
<link wikidata="Q557092" start="7808" end="7815" title="John, Duke of Randazzo" label="John II"/>
<link wikidata="Q661534" start="7847" end="7865" title="House of Barcelona" label="House of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q38286853" start="7880" end="7897" title="Michael Szécsényi" label="Michael Szécsényi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289" start="7941" end="7945" title="1377" label="1377"/>
<link wikidata="Q61787429" start="7951" end="7970" title="Ralph de Spigurnell" label="Ralph de Spigurnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261" start="8013" end="8017" title="1373" label="1373"/>
<link wikidata="Q13566362" start="8022" end="8032" title="Vuk Kosača" label="Vuk Kosača"/>
<link wikidata="Q273613" start="8058" end="8063" title="knyaz" label="knyaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q903810" start="8072" end="8079" title="magnate" label="magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143" start="8094" end="8098" title="1359" label="1359"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320" start="8116" end="8126" title="February 6" label="February 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q332860" start="8129" end="8147" title="Brinolfo Algotsson" label="Brinolfo Algotsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435" start="8183" end="8187" title="1240" label="1240"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322" start="8191" end="8201" title="February 7" label="February 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q266309" start="8204" end="8222" title="Robert, Count of Clermont" label="Robert de Clermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502" start="8255" end="8259" title="1256" label="1256"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335" start="8263" end="8274" title="February 11" label="February 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287488" start="8277" end="8294" title="Ralph Fitzwilliam" label="Ralph Fitzwilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506" start="8336" end="8343" title="April 6" label="April 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q348322" start="8346" end="8352" title="Guy IV, Count of Saint-Pol" label="Guy IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549471" start="8374" end="8386" title="Grand Butler of France" label="Grand Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090871" start="8388" end="8406" title="House of Châtillon" label="House of Châtillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523" start="8410" end="8418" title="April 19" label="April 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400219" start="8421" end="8427" title="Nitchō" label="Nitchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q736311" start="8438" end="8446" title="Buddhism in Japan" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497" start="8476" end="8480" title="1252" label="1252"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524" start="8484" end="8492" title="April 20" label="April 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720655" start="8495" end="8517" title="Agnes of Montepulciano" label="Agnes of Montepulciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520" start="8550" end="8554" title="1268" label="1268"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583" start="8558" end="8564" title="May 23" label="May 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q463181" start="8567" end="8581" title="Guy of Avesnes" label="Guy of Avesnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q574503" start="8598" end="8614" title="Avesnes family" label="House of Avesnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498" start="8620" end="8624" title="1253" label="1253"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668" start="8629" end="8636" title="June 23" label="June 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q21931852" start="8639" end="8649" title="Thawun Gyi" label="Thawun Gyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q519718" start="8680" end="8687" title="Toungoo dynasty" label="Toungoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506" start="8692" end="8696" title="1258" label="1258"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662" start="8700" end="8707" title="June 25" label="June 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722572" start="8710" end="8726" title="Henry of Harclay" label="Henry of Harclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q61061" start="8752" end="8762" title="Chancellor (education)" label="chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522" start="8767" end="8771" title="1270" label="1270"/>
<link wikidata="Q2775" start="8775" end="8784" title="August 14" label="August 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q361855" start="8787" end="8806" title="Bernard de Castanet" label="Bernard de Castanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891" start="8847" end="8859" title="September 21" label="September 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q438477" start="8862" end="8878" title="Viola of Teschen" label="Viola of Teschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="8909" end="8915" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924" start="8919" end="8928" title="October 8" label="October 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q373949" start="8931" end="8938" title="Emperor Fushimi" label="Fushimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516" start="8978" end="8982" title="1265" label="1265"/>
<link wikidata="Q2953" start="8986" end="8996" title="October 26" label="October 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151034" start="8999" end="9016" title="Alice of Hainault" label="Alice of Hainault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991" start="9058" end="9068" title="November 9" label="November 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388172" start="9071" end="9088" title="Manfred, Duke of Athens" label="Manfred of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q5716" start="9123" end="9127" title="1306" label="1306"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984" start="9132" end="9143" title="November 13" label="November 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627955" start="9146" end="9160" title="Yahballaha III" label="Yahballaha III"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="9186" end="9204" title="Church of the East" label="Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017" start="9208" end="9219" title="November 28" label="November 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499160" start="9222" end="9235" title="Yishan Yining" label="Yishan Yining"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482" start="9271" end="9275" title="1247" label="1247"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383" start="9279" end="9290" title="December 15" label="December 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q271503" start="9293" end="9307" title="Maria of Bytom" label="Maria of Bytom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056854" start="9326" end="9333" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1301–1526)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789596" start="9338" end="9345" title="Croatia in personal union with Hungary" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705" start="9348" end="9359" title="December 24" label="December 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q328747" start="9362" end="9379" title="Jean de Joinville" label="Jean de Joinville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402" start="9413" end="9417" title="1224" label="1224"/>
<link wikidata="Q20949280" start="9449" end="9457" title="Dujam II Frankopan" label="Dujam II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493428" start="9481" end="9489" title="Oligarch (Kingdom of Hungary)" label="oligarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q943292" start="9491" end="9509" title="Frankopan family" label="House of Frankopan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760962" start="9514" end="9531" title="Gerard of Bologna" label="Gerard of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q186277" start="9541" end="9550" title="Carmelites" label="Carmelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120529" start="9581" end="9606" title="Guillemette of Neufchâtel" label="Guillemette of Neufchâtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699324" start="9632" end="9640" title="suo jure" label="suo jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508" start="9652" end="9656" title="1260" label="1260"/>
<link wikidata="Q270611" start="9661" end="9689" title="Irene of Montferrat" label="Irene Violante of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527" start="9721" end="9725" title="1274" label="1274"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556477" start="9730" end="9743" title="John I Orsini" label="John I Orsini"/>
<link wikidata="Q855303" start="9779" end="9794" title="Orsini family" label="House of Orsini"/>
<link wikidata="Q557218" start="9799" end="9819" title="John V, Margrave of Brandenburg-Salzwedel" label="John the Illustrious"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612" start="9852" end="9856" title="1302" label="1302"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753644" start="9861" end="9885" title="Malise III, Earl of Strathearn" label="Malise III of Strathearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504" start="9924" end="9928" title="1257" label="1257"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140010" start="9933" end="9940" title="Parsoma" label="Parsoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="9982" end="9988" title="hermit" label="hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q349249" start="10012" end="10035" title="Ram Khamhaeng" label="Ram Khamhaeng the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="10050" end="10059" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434" start="10064" end="10068" title="1239" label="1239"/>
<link wikidata="Q528666" start="10073" end="10091" title="Robert of Burgundy (died 1317)" label="Robert of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609" start="10124" end="10128" title="1300" label="1300"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357900" start="10133" end="10147" title="Roger Brabazon" label="Roger Brabazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610921" start="10195" end="10215" title="Stephen de Dunnideer" label="Stephen de Dunnideer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992385" start="10241" end="10253" title="Tolberto III da Camino" label="Tolberto III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700655" start="10273" end="10290" title="Da Camino" label="House of Caminesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512" start="10296" end="10300" title="1263" label="1263"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344149" start="10305" end="10328" title="Wolfert II van Borselen" label="Wolfert II van Borselen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536" start="10360" end="10364" title="1280" label="1280"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39962" wikidata="Q5755" url="?curid=39962" title="1318">
<text>Year 1318 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXVIII]]) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
=== January – March ===
* January 23 – Pope John XXII issues the papal bull &quot;Gloriosam ecclesiam&quot;, excommunicating the Fraticelli, or Spiritual Franciscans from the Roman Catholic Church. The group is known for pursuing strictly the Franciscan ideal of Apostolic poverty and attempting to force others to do so. The Pope cites as reasons for the excommunication that the adherents are guilty of making accusations of corruption, against the Church, denial of the authority of priests, refusal to take oaths to the church, teaching that priests could not confer sacraments, and claiming to be the only group to be true observers of the Gospel.
* January 26 – Sir Gilbert Middleton, an English knight who had rebelled against King Edward II and kidnapped the Bishop of Durham on September 1, is convicted of treason and then executed by being hanged, drawn and quartered.
* February 12 – In Italy, Cangrande I della Scala, Lord of Verona successfully takes Padua. Led by Jacopo I da Carrara, the Paduan Greater Council agrees to cede the territories of Monselice, Este, Castelbaldo and Montagnana to Cangrande for life.
* February 14 – In Germany, Henry II becomes the new Margrave of Brandenburg-Stendal upon the death of his father Henry Lackland.
* March 27 – King Philip of France and Navarre reaches an agreement with the Capetian House of Burgundy to settle dissatisfaction over his claim of the crown as the brother of the late Louis X, ahead of Joan of Burgundy, the 4-year-old daughter of Louis X. King Philip agrees that Joan will arrange for Joan to eventually become the Queen of Navarre. 
* March 29 – (Bunpō 2, 26th day of 2nd month) Japan&#x27;s Emperor Hanazono abdicates the throne after a 9-year reign. He is succeeded by his cousin, Go-Daigo, who will rule until 1339).

=== April – June ===
* April 1 
**Pope John XXII creates the Archdiocese of Soltaniyeh (now located in northwestern Iran), bringing the Roman Catholic hierarchy to the Ilkhanate in Persia, with the Dominican missionary Francesco da Perugia (Francon de Perouse) as the first Archbishop. Francesco and six bishops arrive on August 1. 
**After the appointment of Guglielmo di Balaeto as rector by Pope John XXII with broad powers before the city of Benevento, the inhabitants rise against the Pope and demand some political autonomy. Finally, the rebellion is crushed by papal forces. 
* April 2 – After a two-day battle, Scottish forces under James the Black retake Berwick-upon-Tweed. The fall of Berwick is a severe blow for King Edward II, and its loss is compounded by the fall of the Northumbrian castles of Wark-on-Tweed (Carham Castle), Harbottle and Mitford.
* April 16 – An agreement with Birger, King of Sweden is made to release his two brothers Valdemar, Duke of Finland and Eric Magnusson, Duke of Södermanland, who had been imprisoned at Nyköping Castle since December 10. The treaty is brokered by Valdemar&#x27;s wife Ingeborg Eriksdottir of Norway and Eric&#x27;s wife, Princess Ingeborg of Norway, who pledge for Valdemar and Eric to renounce all claims to the Swedish throne. However, Valdemar and Eric have already died inside the prison, and the discovery leads to a rebellion against King Birger. 
* April 30 – The coronation ceremony of Go-Daigo as Emperor of Japan is held. 
* May 7 – At the marketplace in the French city of Marseille, four of the most defiant members of the Fraticelli (or Spiritual Franciscans) are found guilty of heresy and burned at the stake. 
* May 10 – Battle of Dysert O&#x27;Dea: An Irish confederation defeats the Hiberno-Normans under Richard de Clare. During the battle, some 500 men are killed, along with 80 English nobles.
* May – Having captured Berwick-upon-Tweed, Scottish forces under King Robert the Bruce raid Yorkshire and burn Northallerton, Boroughbridge and Knaresborough (where some 140 houses are destroyed). They also terrorize the citizens of Ripon, who are spared destruction, on payment of 1,000 marks.
* June 11 – John Hotham is appointed as the Lord Chancellor of England, the highest ranking office for a member of parliament, by King Edward II.
* June 12 – Russians destroy areas of Finland and burn Kuusisto castle in 1318. They rob Turku on the 12th of June. 
* June 13 – Robert, King of Naples delivers an ultimatum to Matilda of Hainaut, ruler of the Greek Principality of Achaea, to accept marriage to John of Gravina or to lose her right to rule.
* June 18 – The arranged marriage of 6-year-old Joan of Burgundy and 12-year-old Philip of Navarre is held as part of a contract for Joan and Philip to eventually become the co-monarchs of Navarre. The two will succeed to the monarchy in 1328.
* June 27 – The reign of King Birger of Sweden ends as supporters of his late brothers, Valdemar and Eric, storm the Nyköping Castle. Birger and his wife flee to Stegeborg Castle, then flee again when the rebels capture the stronghold in August.

=== July – September ===
* July 13 – Rashid al-Din Hamadani, the Grand Vizier of the Ilkhanate in Iran during the reign of the Mongol Ilkhan Öljaitü, is convicted of the 1316 murder of the Ilkhan, and is executed (along with his son Ibrahim Izzaddin).
* July 22 – (22 Jumada I 718) In what is now northwestern Algeria, Abu Tashufin I assassinates his father, Abu Hammu I, Sultan of Tlemcen, and becomes the new monarch.
* July 25 – In Italy, Jacopo I da Carrara becomes the first Lord of Padua, founding the Carraresi dynasty that will rule the independent city state for almost 90 years before its conquest and annexation by the Republic of Venice following a war in 1405.
* August 9 – Treaty of Leake: Edward II signs an agreement with the &quot;Middle Party&quot; led by his cousin, Earl Thomas of Lancaster, and his court followers at East Leake in Nottinghamshire. 
* September 13 – Pope John XXII appoints a commission of three members (Uberto d&#x27;Ormont, Bishop of Naples; Angelo Tignosi, Bishop of Viterbo; and notary Pandulpho de Sabbello) to take evidence on the matter of the canonization of Thomas Aquinas. Testimony is taken of 42 witnesses between July 21 and September 18, 1319.
* September 22 – Otto the Mild, becomes ruler over the Duchy of Brunswick-Lüneburg in Lower Saxony, after the death of his father Albert the Fat

=== October – December ===
* October 14 – Battle of Faughart: A Hibernian and Norman force defeats a Scotch-Irish army commanded by Edward Bruce, who had proclaimed himself High King of Ireland. Edward Bruce is killed in the battle, ending the Bruce campaign in Ireland. 
* November 22 – Grand Prince Mikhail of Tver is summoned by Özbeg Khan at Sarai, the capital of the Golden Horde. After his arrival, he is executed.
* December 3 – The Parliament of Scotland meets at Scone and votes to designate Robert Stewart, grandson of King Robert the Bruce as the heir presumptive. Robert Stewart is the son of Robert the Bruce&#x27;s late daughter Marjorie Bruce and of Walter Stewart. On the birth of David as Robert the Bruce&#x27;s son in 1324, Robert Stewart will become second in line for the throne, eventually becoming King Robert II in 1371.

== Births ==
* June 18 – Eleanor of Woodstock, English princess and regent (d. 1355)
* June 29 – Yusuf I al-Muyyad billah, Nasrid ruler of Granada (d. 1354)
* September 11 – Eleanor of Lancaster, English noblewoman (d. 1372)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Albert II, German nobleman (House of Mecklenburg) (d. 1379)
** Anne of Austria, German princess (House of Habsburg) (d. 1343)
** Baha&#x27; al-Din Naqshband, Persian Sufi religious leader (d. 1389)
** Bogislaw V the Great, German nobleman and knight (d. 1374)
** Contance of Aragon, Spanish noblewoman and queen (d. 1346)
** David de la Hay, Scottish nobleman and High Constable (d. 1346)
** Kitabatake Akiie, Japanese nobleman (Minamoto clan) (d. 1338)
** Margaret Audley, English noblewoman and landowner (d. 1349)
** Margaret of Tyrol, Austrian princess (House of Gorizia) (d. 1369)
** Maurice FitzGerald, Irish nobleman and Lord Justice (d. 1390)
** Wenceslaus I, Polish nobleman, knight and co-ruler (d. 1364)

== Deaths ==
* January 17 – Erwin von Steinbach, German architect (b. 1244)
* February 14 
** Henry Lackland, German nobleman and ruler (b. 1256)
** Margaret of France, queen consort of England (b. 1279)
* March 11 – Amanieu II, French nobleman and archbishop (b. 1232)
* April 26 – Matilda of Brunswick-Lüneburg, German co-ruler (b. 1276)
* May 10 – Richard de Clare, English nobleman, knight and steward
* May 26 – Fujiwara no Kishi, Japanese empress consort (b. 1252)
* June 23 – Gilles I Aycelin de Montaigu, French counselor (b. 1252)
* July 25 – Nicholas I, Bohemian nobleman, knight and ruler (b. 1255)
* August 14 – Giacomo Colonna, Italian priest and cardinal (b. 1250)
* August 20 – Cassone della Torre, Italian nobleman and patriarch
* September 22 – Albert the Fat, German nobleman (b. 1268)
* October 14 – (Battle of Faughart)
** Edward Bruce, Scottish nobleman and High King 
** Philip Mowbray, Scottish nobleman and governor
* November 22 – Mikhail of Tver, Kievan Grand Prince (b. 1271)
* November 25 – Philip of Ibelin, Outremer nobleman and knight
* November 29 – Heinrich Frauenlob, German musician and poet
* December 16 – Dirk II van Brederode, Dutch nobleman (b. 1256)
* December 19 – Husseini Heravi, Persian poet and writer (b. 1245)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** St. Odisho (Abdisho bar Berika), Syrian bishop and writer
** Eric Magnusson, Swedish prince and knight (House of Bjälbo)
** Gilbert Middleton, English nobleman, knight and rebel leader
** Henry of Hachberg-Sausenberg, German nobleman (b. 1300)
** Jamal al-Din al-Watwat, Egyptian scholar and writer (b. 1235)
** Jean IV de Beaumont, French nobleman, knight and marshal
** John II Doukas of Thessaly, Byzantine nobleman and ruler (&quot;sebastokrator&quot;)
** John de Soules, Scoto-Norman landowner (House of de Soules)
** Konoe Tsunehira, Japanese nobleman (Fujiwara clan) (b. 1287)
** Rashid-al-Din Hamadani, Persian historian and writer (b. 1247)
** Thomas I Komnenos Doukas, Byzantine nobleman (assassinated) (b. 1288)
** Valdemar Magnusson, Swedish nobleman and prince (b. 1283)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5755" start="5" end="9" title="1318" label="1318"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755" start="11" end="39" title="1318" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXVIII]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235670" start="47" end="77" title="common year starting on Sunday" label="common year starting on Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="85" end="100" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276" start="142" end="152" title="January 23" label="January 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="155" end="169" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q420576" start="245" end="255" title="Fraticelli" label="Fraticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282" start="771" end="781" title="January 26" label="January 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q18527807" start="788" end="805" title="Gilbert Middleton" label="Gilbert Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q877524" start="967" end="994" title="hanged, drawn and quartered" label="hanged, drawn and quartered"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336" start="998" end="1009" title="February 12" label="February 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q785349" start="1022" end="1045" title="Cangrande I della Scala" label="Cangrande I della Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680184" start="1047" end="1061" title="Lords of Verona" label="Lord of Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="1081" end="1086" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q429760" start="1095" end="1114" title="Jacopo I da Carrara" label="Jacopo I da Carrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q34602" start="1177" end="1186" title="Monselice" label="Monselice"/>
<link wikidata="Q34607" start="1188" end="1192" title="Este, Italy" label="Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q34423" start="1194" end="1205" title="Castelbaldo" label="Castelbaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34605" start="1210" end="1220" title="Montagnana" label="Montagnana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332" start="1246" end="1257" title="February 14" label="February 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q657689" start="1272" end="1280" title="Henry II, Margrave of Brandenburg-Stendal" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q555384" start="1358" end="1372" title="Henry I, Margrave of Brandenburg" label="Henry Lackland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457" start="1376" end="1384" title="March 27" label="March 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q8433" start="1387" end="1420" title="Philip V of France" label="King Philip of France and Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642657" start="1451" end="1477" title="Capetian House of Burgundy" label="Capetian House of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8384" start="1559" end="1566" title="Louis X of France" label="Louis X"/>
<link wikidata="Q230031" start="1577" end="1593" title="Joan II of Navarre" label="Joan of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459" start="1728" end="1736" title="March 29" label="March 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q440503" start="1785" end="1801" title="Emperor Hanazono" label="Emperor Hanazono"/>
<link wikidata="Q313942" start="1876" end="1884" title="Emperor Go-Daigo" label="Go-Daigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051" start="1906" end="1910" title="1339" label="1339"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510" start="1937" end="1944" title="April 1" label="April 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="1975" end="1986" title="Archdiocese" label="Archdiocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531" start="1990" end="2000" title="Soltaniyeh" label="Soltaniyeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511" start="2499" end="2506" title="April 2" label="April 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q648516" start="2555" end="2570" title="James Douglas, Lord of Douglas" label="James the Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q504678" start="2578" end="2596" title="Berwick-upon-Tweed" label="Berwick-upon-Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="2644" end="2653" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17546463" start="2725" end="2738" title="Wark on Tweed Castle" label="Wark-on-Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654774" start="2756" end="2765" title="Harbottle Castle" label="Harbottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881554" start="2770" end="2777" title="Mitford Castle" label="Mitford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519" start="2781" end="2789" title="April 16" label="April 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q434782" start="2810" end="2832" title="Birger, King of Sweden" label="Birger, King of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369581" start="2869" end="2894" title="Valdemar, Duke of Finland" label="Valdemar, Duke of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q547911" start="2899" end="2935" title="Eric Magnusson (duke)" label="Eric Magnusson, Duke of Södermanland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779071" start="2964" end="2979" title="Nyköping Castle" label="Nyköping Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494383" start="3046" end="3076" title="Ingeborg Eriksdottir of Norway" label="Ingeborg Eriksdottir of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q467530" start="3108" end="3126" title="Ingeborg of Norway" label="Ingeborg of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536" start="3334" end="3342" title="April 30" label="April 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q313942" start="3372" end="3380" title="Emperor Go-Daigo" label="Go-Daigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="3384" end="3400" title="Emperor of Japan" label="Emperor of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553" start="3413" end="3418" title="May 7" label="May 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="3462" end="3471" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q420576" start="3513" end="3523" title="Fraticelli" label="Fraticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557" start="3606" end="3612" title="May 10" label="May 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870943" start="3615" end="3642" title="Battle of Dysert O&amp;#x27;Dea" label="Battle of Dysert O&amp;#x27;Dea"/>
<link wikidata="Q921901" start="3679" end="3694" title="Hiberno-Normans" label="Hiberno-Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330181" start="3701" end="3717" title="Richard de Clare, Steward of Forest of Essex" label="Richard de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q119" start="3795" end="3798" title="May" label="May"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="3864" end="3880" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="3886" end="3895" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q920381" start="3905" end="3918" title="Northallerton" label="Northallerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569056" start="3920" end="3933" title="Boroughbridge" label="Boroughbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q535902" start="3938" end="3951" title="Knaresborough" label="Knaresborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q661529" start="4027" end="4032" title="Ripon" label="Ripon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617" start="4091" end="4098" title="June 11" label="June 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239960" start="4101" end="4112" title="John Hotham (bishop)" label="John Hotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="4133" end="4159" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619" start="4237" end="4244" title="June 12" label="June 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614" start="4354" end="4361" title="June 13" label="June 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q290720" start="4364" end="4386" title="Robert, King of Naples" label="Robert, King of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q287015" start="4412" end="4430" title="Matilda of Hainaut" label="Matilda of Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q332005" start="4451" end="4473" title="Principality of Achaea" label="Principality of Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q576665" start="4497" end="4512" title="John of Gravina" label="John of Gravina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670" start="4545" end="4552" title="June 18" label="June 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q230031" start="4591" end="4607" title="Joan II of Navarre" label="Joan of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q505112" start="4624" end="4641" title="Philip III of Navarre" label="Philip of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5802" start="4781" end="4785" title="1328" label="1328"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664" start="4789" end="4796" title="June 27" label="June 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779071" start="4904" end="4919" title="Nyköping Castle" label="Nyköping Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q661338" start="4949" end="4965" title="Stegeborg Castle" label="Stegeborg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687" start="5061" end="5068" title="July 13" label="July 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q328782" start="5071" end="5093" title="Rashid al-Din Hamadani" label="Rashid al-Din Hamadani"/>
<link wikidata="Q297065" start="5175" end="5182" title="Öljaitü" label="Öljaitü"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725" start="5288" end="5295" title="July 22" label="July 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822166" start="5353" end="5367" title="Abu Tashufin I" label="Abu Tashufin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q324772" start="5393" end="5404" title="Abu Hammu I" label="Abu Hammu I"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030701" start="5406" end="5423" title="Kingdom of Tlemcen" label="Sultan of Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720" start="5456" end="5463" title="July 25" label="July 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q429760" start="5476" end="5495" title="Jacopo I da Carrara" label="Jacopo I da Carrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q110516878" start="5514" end="5527" title="Lord of Padua" label="Lord of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279304" start="5542" end="5551" title="Carraresi" label="Carraresi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124" start="5702" end="5706" title="1405" label="1405"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782" start="5710" end="5718" title="August 9" label="August 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837118" start="5721" end="5736" title="Treaty of Leake" label="Treaty of Leake"/>
<link wikidata="Q249183" start="5825" end="5844" title="Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster" label="Thomas of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807493" start="5873" end="5883" title="East Leake" label="East Leake"/>
<link wikidata="Q23092" start="5887" end="5902" title="Nottinghamshire" label="Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848" start="5907" end="5919" title="September 13" label="September 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="5922" end="5936" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q110654560" start="6124" end="6154" title="canonization of Thomas Aquinas" label="canonization of Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889" start="6233" end="6245" title="September 22" label="September 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q553126" start="6248" end="6261" title="Otto the Mild" label="Otto the Mild"/>
<link wikidata="Q556263" start="6286" end="6313" title="Duchy of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Duchy of Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="6317" end="6329" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q75877" start="6361" end="6375" title="Albert II, Duke of Brunswick" label="Albert the Fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922" start="6406" end="6416" title="October 14" label="October 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011697" start="6419" end="6437" title="Battle of Faughart" label="Battle of Faughart"/>
<link wikidata="Q385362" start="6509" end="6521" title="Edward Bruce" label="Edward Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q889997" start="6550" end="6570" title="High King of Ireland" label="High King of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978527" start="6621" end="6646" title="Bruce campaign in Ireland" label="Bruce campaign in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025" start="6651" end="6662" title="November 22" label="November 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q380373" start="6678" end="6693" title="Mikhail of Tver" label="Mikhail of Tver"/>
<link wikidata="Q335097" start="6709" end="6719" title="Özbeg Khan" label="Özbeg Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q477152" start="6723" end="6728" title="Sarai (city)" label="Sarai"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="6749" end="6761" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298" start="6800" end="6810" title="December 3" label="December 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="6817" end="6839" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q869660" start="6849" end="6854" title="Scone" label="Scone"/>
<link wikidata="Q312592" start="6878" end="6892" title="Robert II of Scotland" label="Robert Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="6911" end="6927" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q291049" start="7020" end="7034" title="Marjorie Bruce" label="Marjorie Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100898" start="7042" end="7056" title="Walter Stewart, 6th High Steward of Scotland" label="Walter Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q239486" start="7074" end="7079" title="David II of Scotland" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255" start="7216" end="7220" title="1371" label="1371"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670" start="7238" end="7245" title="June 18" label="June 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q447129" start="7248" end="7268" title="Eleanor of Woodstock" label="Eleanor of Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="7291" end="7297" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123" start="7302" end="7306" title="1355" label="1355"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659" start="7310" end="7317" title="June 29" label="June 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141886" start="7320" end="7344" title="Yusuf I of Granada" label="Yusuf I al-Muyyad billah"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="7362" end="7369" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118" start="7374" end="7378" title="1354" label="1354"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851" start="7382" end="7394" title="September 11" label="September 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325750" start="7397" end="7417" title="Eleanor of Lancaster" label="Eleanor of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258" start="7442" end="7446" title="1372" label="1372"/>
<link wikidata="Q64251" start="7478" end="7487" title="Albert II, Duke of Mecklenburg" label="Albert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="7496" end="7504" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q700158" start="7506" end="7526" title="House of Mecklenburg" label="House of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316" start="7532" end="7536" title="1379" label="1379"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260556" start="7541" end="7556" title="Anne of Austria, Duchess of Bavaria" label="Anne of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="7575" end="7592" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072" start="7598" end="7602" title="1343" label="1343"/>
<link wikidata="Q32075" start="7607" end="7634" title="Baha&amp;#x27; al-Din Naqshband" label="Baha&amp;#x27; al-Din Naqshband"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="7644" end="7648" title="Sufism" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371" start="7670" end="7674" title="1389" label="1389"/>
<link wikidata="Q469354" start="7679" end="7699" title="Bogislaw V, Duke of Pomerania" label="Bogislaw V the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269" start="7732" end="7736" title="1374" label="1374"/>
<link wikidata="Q774870" start="7741" end="7759" title="Constance of Aragon, Queen of Majorca" label="Contance of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6080" start="7794" end="7798" title="1346" label="1346"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241482" start="7803" end="7818" title="David de la Hay" label="David de la Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679364" start="7842" end="7856" title="Lord High Constable of Scotland" label="High Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036864" start="7870" end="7886" title="Kitabatake Akiie" label="Kitabatake Akiie"/>
<link wikidata="Q599881" start="7907" end="7920" title="Minamoto clan" label="Minamoto clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044" start="7926" end="7930" title="1338" label="1338"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040852" start="7935" end="7950" title="Margaret Audley, 2nd Baroness Audley" label="Margaret Audley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090" start="7989" end="7993" title="1349" label="1349"/>
<link wikidata="Q236290" start="7998" end="8015" title="Margaret, Countess of Tyrol" label="Margaret of Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q698981" start="8036" end="8052" title="House of Gorizia" label="House of Gorizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211" start="8058" end="8062" title="1369" label="1369"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200495" start="8067" end="8085" title="Maurice FitzGerald, 4th Earl of Kildare" label="Maurice FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259405" start="8106" end="8118" title="Lords Justices of Ireland" label="Lord Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375" start="8123" end="8127" title="1390" label="1390"/>
<link wikidata="Q442091" start="8132" end="8144" title="Wenceslaus I of Legnica" label="Wenceslaus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185" start="8187" end="8191" title="1364" label="1364"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264" start="8209" end="8219" title="January 17" label="January 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q68243" start="8222" end="8241" title="Erwin von Steinbach" label="Erwin von Steinbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439" start="8264" end="8268" title="1244" label="1244"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332" start="8272" end="8283" title="February 14" label="February 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q555384" start="8288" end="8302" title="Henry I, Margrave of Brandenburg" label="Henry Lackland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502" start="8334" end="8338" title="1256" label="1256"/>
<link wikidata="Q235480" start="8343" end="8361" title="Margaret of France, Queen of England" label="Margaret of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="8380" end="8387" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534" start="8392" end="8396" title="1279" label="1279"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398" start="8400" end="8408" title="March 11" label="March 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739859" start="8411" end="8421" title="Amanieu II (archbishop of Auch)" label="Amanieu II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418" start="8458" end="8462" title="1232" label="1232"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532" start="8466" end="8474" title="April 26" label="April 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561260" start="8477" end="8506" title="Matilda of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Matilda of Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530" start="8528" end="8532" title="1276" label="1276"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557" start="8536" end="8542" title="May 10" label="May 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330181" start="8545" end="8561" title="Richard de Clare, Steward of Forest of Essex" label="Richard de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586" start="8602" end="8608" title="May 26" label="May 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507527" start="8611" end="8628" title="Fujiwara no Kishi" label="Fujiwara no Kishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497" start="8659" end="8663" title="1252" label="1252"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668" start="8667" end="8674" title="June 23" label="June 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524483" start="8677" end="8705" title="Gilles I Aycelin de Montaigu" label="Gilles I Aycelin de Montaigu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720" start="8736" end="8743" title="July 25" label="July 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q638363" start="8746" end="8756" title="Nicholas I, Duke of Troppau" label="Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501" start="8798" end="8802" title="1255" label="1255"/>
<link wikidata="Q2775" start="8806" end="8815" title="August 14" label="August 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522094" start="8818" end="8833" title="Giacomo Colonna (cardinal)" label="Giacomo Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487" start="8867" end="8871" title="1250" label="1250"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824" start="8875" end="8884" title="August 20" label="August 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q3662024" start="8887" end="8906" title="Cassone della Torre" label="Cassone della Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889" start="8941" end="8953" title="September 22" label="September 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q75877" start="8956" end="8970" title="Albert II, Duke of Brunswick" label="Albert the Fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520" start="8992" end="8996" title="1268" label="1268"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922" start="9000" end="9010" title="October 14" label="October 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011697" start="9014" end="9032" title="Battle of Faughart" label="Battle of Faughart"/>
<link wikidata="Q385362" start="9037" end="9049" title="Edward Bruce" label="Edward Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q889997" start="9073" end="9082" title="High King of Ireland" label="High King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184111" start="9087" end="9101" title="Philip Mowbray" label="Philip Mowbray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025" start="9136" end="9147" title="November 22" label="November 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q380373" start="9150" end="9165" title="Mikhail of Tver" label="Mikhail of Tver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523" start="9191" end="9195" title="1271" label="1271"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020" start="9199" end="9210" title="November 25" label="November 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380909" start="9213" end="9229" title="Philip of Ibelin (died 1318)" label="Philip of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016" start="9262" end="9273" title="November 29" label="November 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q62702" start="9276" end="9294" title="Heinrich Frauenlob" label="Heinrich Frauenlob"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410" start="9323" end="9334" title="December 16" label="December 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009898" start="9337" end="9358" title="Dirk II van Brederode" label="Dirk II van Brederode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502" start="9379" end="9383" title="1256" label="1256"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451" start="9387" end="9398" title="December 19" label="December 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q31886255" start="9401" end="9416" title="Husseini Heravi" label="Husseini Heravi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440" start="9446" end="9450" title="1245" label="1245"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120416" start="9482" end="9492" title="Abdisho bar Berika" label="St. Odisho"/>
<link wikidata="Q547911" start="9543" end="9557" title="Eric Magnusson (duke)" label="Eric Magnusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752059" start="9586" end="9601" title="House of Bjälbo" label="House of Bjälbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18527807" start="9606" end="9623" title="Gilbert Middleton" label="Gilbert Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q77870" start="9670" end="9698" title="Henry, Margrave of Hachberg-Sausenberg" label="Henry of Hachberg-Sausenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609" start="9720" end="9724" title="1300" label="1300"/>
<link wikidata="Q12205849" start="9729" end="9751" title="Jamal al-Din al-Watwat" label="Jamal al-Din al-Watwat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425" start="9785" end="9789" title="1235" label="1235"/>
<link wikidata="Q649477" start="9794" end="9813" title="Jean IV de Beaumont" label="Jean IV de Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q574704" start="9854" end="9880" title="John II Doukas of Thessaly" label="John II Doukas of Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q392519" start="9918" end="9931" title="sebastokrator" label="sebastokrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640161" start="9942" end="9956" title="John de Soules (died 1318)" label="John de Soules"/>
<link wikidata="Q85755967" start="9982" end="10000" title="de Soules" label="House of de Soules"/>
<link wikidata="Q17229187" start="10005" end="10020" title="Konoe Tsunehira" label="Konoe Tsunehira"/>
<link wikidata="Q641628" start="10041" end="10054" title="Fujiwara clan" label="Fujiwara clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549" start="10060" end="10064" title="1287" label="1287"/>
<link wikidata="Q328782" start="10069" end="10091" title="Rashid-al-Din Hamadani" label="Rashid-al-Din Hamadani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482" start="10126" end="10130" title="1247" label="1247"/>
<link wikidata="Q878381" start="10135" end="10159" title="Thomas I Komnenos Doukas" label="Thomas I Komnenos Doukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550" start="10199" end="10203" title="1288" label="1288"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369581" start="10208" end="10226" title="Valdemar, Duke of Finland" label="Valdemar Magnusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543" start="10260" end="10264" title="1283" label="1283"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39963" wikidata="Q5767" url="?curid=39963" title="1319">
<text>Year 1319 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXIX]]) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
=== January – March ===
* January 14 – The Earl of Pembroke and the Earl of Hereford persuade Walter Reynolds, Archbishop of Canterbury, to consecrate Stephen Gravesend as the Bishop of London. 
* January 20 – A convocation at York is held by order of the Archbishop, William Melton, after orders sent by him to the Bishops of Durham and of Carlisle on November 28, 1318 to bring all abbots, priors, archdeacons and convents in their jurisdiction to appear before him &quot;in octabis Sancti Hilarii proxime futuris&quot; (on the next octave of Saint Hillary).
* February 6 – (14 Dhu al-Hijjah 718 AH) Rumaythah ibn Abi Numayy and Sayf al-Din Bahadur al-Ibrahimi, both former Emirs of Mecca, are arrested by the incumbent Emir, Shams al-Din Aq Sunqur al-Nasiri and taken from Mecca to Cairo for imprisonment. Rumaythah is charged with having provided support to his brother, Humaydah ibn Abi Numayy and al-Ibrahimi is accused of allowing Humaydah to escape. Rumaythah is pardoned a month later after arriving in Cairo.
* March 14 – The Military Order of Christ (&quot;Ordem Militar de Cristo&quot;) is established in Portugal by King Denis of Portugal after Pope John XXII issues the papal bull &quot;Ad ea ex quibus&quot;. The new Order is the revival of former Knights Templar who had aided the Kingdom of Portugal in its post-war reconstruction.

=== April – June ===
* April 19 – Philip I, Prince of Taranto, in his capacity as King of Albania, gives the title of Philip, Despot of Romania to his second eldest son Prince Philip II. Despite the mention of Romania, the despotate is a part of Albania, and the title gives rights of Philip II to Epirus in Greece. 
* May 8 – King Haakon V Magnusson of Norway dies at the age of 49 with no sons, leaving the throne empty until the nobles can agree on his successor. Havtore Jonsson manages a guardianship government until the nobles choose Magnus VII Eriksson, son of Haakon&#x27;s daughter Ingeborg.
* June 20 – Within the Mongol Empire, Özbeg Khan of the Golden Horde (the Mongol-controlled area of what is now Uzbekistan and Russia) fights a battle against the Ilkhanate (the Mongol-controlled Middle East) in an attempt to expand the Golden Horde&#x27;s territory, with a confrontation in Ilkhanate territory at Mianeh (now in Iran). The troops of Özbeg Khan are supplemented with rebels led by an Ilkhanate prince, Yasa&#x27;ur. The Ilkhan Sultan, Abu Sa&#x27;id Bahadur Khan and his general, Amir Chupan, lead the defenders to victory and take many of the rebel officers prisoner. Afterward, 36 emirs and seven viceroys are executed for treason, including Qurumushi of Georgia and Irinjin of Anatolia. 
* June 25 – Battle of the Vega of Granada: Castilian forces of 12,000 troops, led by the regents Don Pedro of Castile and Don Juan of Castile are defeated by a Moorish relief army at Granada during their attempt . Both regents are killed in the fighting. Pedro and Juan had summoned their Catilian vassals to assemble an expeditionary army in Córdoba, as part of an attempt to restore the deposed Sultan Nasr to the Granadan throne.

=== July – September ===
* July 8 – Magnus Eriksson is elected King of Sweden. His mother Ingeborg of Norway is given a place in the regency.
* July 21 – Canonization of Thomas Aquinas: The taking of testimony from more than 40 witnesses is started by Bishop Uberto d&#x27;Ormont of Naples, Bishop Angelo Tignosi of Viterbo, and notary Pandulpho de Sabbello, and will continue until September 18.
* July 23 – Battle of Chios: A Knights Hospitaller-Genoese fleet (some 30 ships) led by Albert of Schwarzburg defeats a Turkish fleet, off Chios.
* August 12 – The Duchy of Bavaria, split between two brothers since 1294, is reunited upon the death of Rudolf the Stammerer, Duke of Upper Bavaria. Ludwig the Barbarian, King of the Romans and Duke of Lower Bavaria. In 1328, Ludwig will later be elected the Holy Roman Emperor as Louis IV.
* August 14 – At the age of 11, Henry the Child becomes the Margrave of Brandenburg in Germany upon the death of his first cousin and guardian, Waldemar the Great. Because of Henry&#x27;s age, the Duke of Pomerania, Wartislaw IV controls as Brandenburg as regent. Upon Henry II&#x27;s death 11 months later, the House of Ascania&#x27;s dynasty over Brandenburg will come to an end.
* August – Magnus Eriksson, grandson of the recently-deceased King Haakon V and already proclaimed King of Sweden, is recognized by the Norwegian assembly as King Magnus VII of Norway, thus establishing a personal union with Sweden and Norway. 
* September 6 – As a reward for his victory at the Battle of Mianeh, General Chupan of the Ilkhanate is allowed to marry Sati Beg, the sister of the Ilkhanate Sultan Abu Sa&#x27;id. 
* September 13 – Pope John XXII issues the papal bull &quot;Imminente Nobis&quot;, declaring that the Pope has the right of appointment to all clerical offices (archbishops, bishops, abbots, priors and collegiate and monasterial leaders) in the Roman Catholic Church, ending the right of the individual chapters to elect their own leaders.
* September 20 – Battle of Myton: Scottish forces (some 15,000 men) led by James the Black, Lord Douglas, defeat an English army in an encounter known as the &quot;Chapter of Myton&quot; because of the large number of clergymen involved. David Dalrymple, Lord Hailes, writes 460 years later, &quot;The English were instantly routed. Three thousand were left dead on the field, and great part of fugitives drowned in the Swale. In this action there fell three thousand ecclesiastics, [20th September.] According to the savage peasantry of those times, this rout was termed by the Scots, the &quot;Chapter of Mitton&quot;.&quot; After the battle, King Edward II is forced to raise the siege at Berwick Castle and retreats south of the River Trent, allowing the Scots to ravage Cumberland and Westmorland unmolested. Queen Isabella, who is in York at this time, manages to escape to safety at Nottingham.

=== October – December ===
* October 17 – Prince Jaime of Aragon marries the 12-year-old Princess Leonor of Castile at Gandesa, but announces at the conclusion of the mass that &quot;his decision was to never rule&quot; the Kingdom of Aragon as a sovereign or even to remain in secular life, but to instead enter a monastery to pursue a life &quot;under a religious rule.&quot; King Jaime II informs Leonor&#x27;s grandmother (Queen Maria de Molina) of the situation on October 22, and Queen Maria demands the return of Leonor immediately. Having renounced his royal rights, Prince Jaime finds afterward that he will not be allowed to enter a monastery either.
* October 29 – (Gen&#x27;ō 1, 15th day of 9th month) Nichiin of Japan&#x27;s Daimoku sect refutes all other sects of Buddhism during an interrogation by the Kamakura shogunate, permitting the sect to continue.
* November 13 – King Eric VI of Denmark dies after a 33-year reign at Roskilde, leaving a vacancy that will not be filled until the January election of his brother Christopher II. During his rule, he attempts to control the routes of the Hanseatic League. The Hanse, an association of Baltic merchants, expels the English and Scots, and gains a monopoly of trade with Norway. 
* December 21 – Representatives of England&#x27;s King Edward II and Scotland&#x27;s King Robert the Bruce sign a two-year truce. Hostilities are to cease until Christmas Day, 1321, with the Scots to build no new castles in the sheriffdoms of Berwick , Roxburgh, and Dumfries, and the English were to either transfer the Harbottle garrison in Northumberland to Scotland, or to destroy it. A long-term peace is still far off because of Edward&#x27;s arrogant refusal to relinquish his claims of sovereignty over the Scots.

== Births ==
* March 20 – Laurence Hastings, English nobleman (d. 1348)
* April 26 – John the Good, king of France (d. 1364)
* September 5 – Peter IV, king of Aragon (d. 1387)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Andrea II Muzaka, Albanian nobleman (d. 1372)
** Charles of Blois-Châtillon, French nobleman (d. 1364)
** Giulia della Rena, Italian nun, friar and saint (d. 1367)
** Hasan Kuchak, Mongol nobleman and prince (d. 1343)
** Haydar Amuli, Persian mystic and philosopher (d. 1385)
** Henry V of Iron, Polish nobleman and knight (d. 1369)
** James I, French nobleman and &quot;prince du sang&quot; (d. 1362)
** Joan of Penthièvre, Breton noblewoman (d. 1384)
** Kikuchi Takemitsu, Japanese general (d. 1373)
** Leonardo di Montaldo, doge of Genoa (d. 1384)
** María de la Cerda, Spanish noblewoman (d. 1375)
** Märta Ulfsdotter, Swedish noblewoman (d. 1371)
** Matteo II, Italian nobleman and co-ruler (d. 1355)
** Philip III, French nobleman and knight (d. 1337)
** Robert Marney, English knight and politician (d. 1400)
** Stephen II, German nobleman and co-ruler (d. 1375)
** Walter Paveley, English nobleman and knight (d. 1375)
** William Dacre, English nobleman and knight (d. 1361)

== Deaths ==
* January 12 – Kamāl al-Dīn al-Fārisī, Persian scientist (b. 1267)
* May 8 – Haakon V Magnusson, king of Norway (b. 1270)
* May 19 – Louis of Évreux, son of King Philip the Bold (b. 1276)
* June 25 – (Battle of the Vega of Granada)
** John of Castile, Spanish nobleman and prince (b. 1262)
** Peter of Castile, Spanish nobleman and prince (b. 1290)
* August 12 – Rudolf I, German nobleman and knight (b. 1274)
* August 14 – Waldemar the Great, German nobleman (b. 1280)
* September 23 – Henry of Wierzbna, Polish priest and bishop
* October 18 – William Montagu, English nobleman and knight
* November 1 – Uguccione della Faggiuola, Italian condottieri
* November 2 – John Sandale, English bishop and chancellor
* November 5 – Simone Ballachi, Italian monk and friar (b. 1240)
* November 8 – Bokguk, Korean Grand Princess and queen
* November 11 – Beatrice of Luxembourg, queen of Hungary
* November 13 – Eric VI Menved, king of Denmark (b. 1274)
* December 28 – Mattia de Nazarei, Italian abbess (b. 1253)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Agnes Haakonsdatter, Norwegian princess (b. 1290)
** Andrea I, Albanian prince (House of Muzaka) (b. 1279)
** Bernard VI, French nobleman (House of Armagnac)
** Guan Daosheng, Chinese painter and poet (b. 1262)
** Ingeborg Magnusdotter, queen of Denmark (b. 1277)
** Jan Sindewint, Flemish monk, theologian and writer
** Jordan Óge de Exeter, Anglo-Irish knight and sheriff
** Qadi Baydawi, Persian jurist, theologian and writer
** Remigio dei Girolami, Italian theologian and writer

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5767" start="5" end="9" title="1319" label="1319"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767" start="11" end="37" title="1319" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXIX]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235687" start="45" end="75" title="common year starting on Monday" label="common year starting on Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="83" end="98" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257" start="140" end="150" title="January 14" label="January 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247422" start="157" end="173" title="Aymer de Valence, 2nd Earl of Pembroke" label="Earl of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527958" start="182" end="198" title="Humphrey de Bohun, 4th Earl of Hereford" label="Earl of Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565877" start="208" end="223" title="Walter Reynolds" label="Walter Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="225" end="249" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609346" start="265" end="282" title="Stephen Gravesend" label="Stephen Gravesend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587771" start="290" end="306" title="Bishop of London" label="Bishop of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267" start="311" end="321" title="January 20" label="January 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363910" start="370" end="380" title="Archbishop of York" label="Archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015555" start="382" end="396" title="William Melton" label="William Melton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320" start="677" end="687" title="February 6" label="February 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q29840947" start="716" end="740" title="Rumaythah ibn Abi Numayy" label="Rumaythah ibn Abi Numayy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15109402" start="790" end="804" title="Emirs of Mecca" label="Emirs of Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404" start="1135" end="1143" title="March 14" label="March 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q840941" start="1150" end="1174" title="Military Order of Christ" label="Military Order of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q212890" start="1243" end="1265" title="King Denis of Portugal" label="King Denis of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="1377" end="1392" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523" start="1487" end="1495" title="April 19" label="April 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q712759" start="1498" end="1525" title="Philip I, Prince of Taranto" label="Philip I, Prince of Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5858060" start="1582" end="1607" title="Philip, Despot of Romania" label="Philip, Despot of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q187684" start="1762" end="1768" title="Despotate of Epirus" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555" start="1783" end="1788" title="May 8" label="May 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q313153" start="1791" end="1814" title="Haakon V" label="King Haakon V Magnusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="1818" end="1824" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q314457" start="2005" end="2024" title="Magnus IV of Sweden" label="Magnus VII Eriksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666" start="2068" end="2075" title="June 20" label="June 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q335097" start="2104" end="2114" title="Özbeg Khan" label="Özbeg Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="2122" end="2134" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="2229" end="2238" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q720392" start="2381" end="2387" title="Mianeh, East Azerbaijan" label="Mianeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q335097" start="2417" end="2427" title="Özbeg Khan" label="Özbeg Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819247" start="2485" end="2497" title="Yasa&amp;#x27;ur" label="Yasa&amp;#x27;ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q335301" start="2518" end="2545" title="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Bahadur Khan" label="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Bahadur Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q471985" start="2563" end="2574" title="Chupan" label="Amir Chupan"/>
<link wikidata="Q110827000" start="2727" end="2736" title="Qurumushi" label="Qurumushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q90055087" start="2752" end="2759" title="Irinjin" label="Irinjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662" start="2776" end="2783" title="June 25" label="June 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q5803812" start="2786" end="2815" title="Battle of the Vega of Granada" label="Battle of the Vega of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469933" start="2871" end="2891" title="Peter of Castile, Lord of Cameros" label="Don Pedro of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q926544" start="2896" end="2915" title="John of Castile, Lord of Valencia de Campos" label="Don Juan of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="2957" end="2964" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="3117" end="3124" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2692" start="3235" end="3241" title="July 8" label="July 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q314457" start="3244" end="3259" title="Magnus Eriksson" label="Magnus Eriksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q467530" start="3298" end="3316" title="Ingeborg of Norway" label="Ingeborg of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727" start="3352" end="3359" title="July 21" label="July 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q110654560" start="3362" end="3392" title="Canonization of Thomas Aquinas" label="Canonization of Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722" start="3607" end="3614" title="July 23" label="July 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207122" start="3617" end="3632" title="Battle of Chios (1319)" label="Battle of Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="3636" end="3655" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="3656" end="3663" title="Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146778" start="3693" end="3714" title="Albert of Schwarzburg" label="Albert of Schwarzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q160483" start="3744" end="3749" title="Chios" label="Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777" start="3753" end="3762" title="August 12" label="August 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q61211" start="3856" end="3876" title="Rudolf I, Duke of Bavaria" label="Rudolf the Stammerer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57161" start="3901" end="3921" title="Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ludwig the Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="3923" end="3941" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="4011" end="4029" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2775" start="4045" end="4054" title="August 14" label="August 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q657689" start="4075" end="4090" title="Henry II, Margrave of Brandenburg-Stendal" label="Henry the Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q313536" start="4103" end="4126" title="Margrave of Brandenburg" label="Margrave of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q565434" start="4187" end="4205" title="Waldemar, Margrave of Brandenburg-Stendal" label="Waldemar the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q319946" start="4259" end="4271" title="Wartislaw IV, Duke of Pomerania" label="Wartislaw IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q168352" start="4355" end="4371" title="House of Ascania" label="House of Ascania"/>
<link wikidata="Q122" start="4427" end="4433" title="August" label="August"/>
<link wikidata="Q314457" start="4436" end="4451" title="Magnus Eriksson" label="Magnus Eriksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q387834" start="4561" end="4579" title="Thing (assembly)" label="Norwegian assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="4630" end="4644" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="4650" end="4656" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="4661" end="4667" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858" start="4672" end="4683" title="September 6" label="September 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q454124" start="4791" end="4799" title="Sati Beg" label="Sati Beg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848" start="4855" end="4867" title="September 13" label="September 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="4870" end="4884" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="4896" end="4906" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892" start="5195" end="5207" title="September 20" label="September 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871832" start="5210" end="5225" title="Battle of Myton" label="Battle of Myton"/>
<link wikidata="Q648516" start="5268" end="5283" title="James Douglas, Lord of Douglas" label="James the Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232806" start="5431" end="5459" title="David Dalrymple, Lord Hailes" label="David Dalrymple, Lord Hailes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396347" start="5609" end="5618" title="River Swale" label="the Swale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="5843" end="5852" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q678714" start="5885" end="5899" title="Berwick Castle" label="Berwick Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19714" start="5926" end="5937" title="River Trent" label="River Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23360" start="5968" end="5978" title="Cumberland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23326" start="5983" end="5994" title="Westmorland" label="Westmorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q228642" start="6013" end="6021" title="Isabella of France" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="6033" end="6037" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="6083" end="6093" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962" start="6125" end="6135" title="October 17" label="October 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466099" start="6145" end="6160" title="James of Aragon (monk)" label="Jaime of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q271810" start="6194" end="6211" title="Eleanor of Castile (1307–1359)" label="Leonor of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="6320" end="6337" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Kingdom of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312735" start="6474" end="6487" title="James II of Aragon" label="King Jaime II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2951" start="6759" end="6769" title="October 29" label="October 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057510" start="6834" end="6841" title="Daimoku" label="Daimoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q736839" start="6914" end="6932" title="Kamakura shogunate" label="Kamakura shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984" start="6969" end="6980" title="November 13" label="November 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q359601" start="6988" end="7006" title="Eric VI of Denmark" label="Eric VI of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q26563" start="7037" end="7045" title="Roskilde" label="Roskilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q350186" start="7131" end="7145" title="Christopher II of Denmark" label="Christopher II"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="7205" end="7221" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603" start="7346" end="7357" title="December 21" label="December 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="7434" end="7450" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427" start="7882" end="7890" title="March 20" label="March 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500641" start="7893" end="7910" title="Laurence Hastings, 1st Earl of Pembroke" label="Laurence Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="7920" end="7928" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6085" start="7933" end="7937" title="1348" label="1348"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532" start="7941" end="7949" title="April 26" label="April 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q169992" start="7952" end="7965" title="John II of France" label="John the Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q237131" start="7975" end="7981" title="France in the Middle Ages" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185" start="7986" end="7990" title="1364" label="1364"/>
<link wikidata="Q2854" start="7994" end="8005" title="September 5" label="September 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q336823" start="8008" end="8016" title="Peter IV of Aragon" label="Peter IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="8026" end="8032" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6359" start="8037" end="8041" title="1387" label="1387"/>
<link wikidata="Q13036992" start="8073" end="8089" title="Andrea II Muzaka" label="Andrea II Muzaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258" start="8113" end="8117" title="1372" label="1372"/>
<link wikidata="Q454063" start="8122" end="8148" title="Charles, Duke of Brittany" label="Charles of Blois-Châtillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769257" start="8179" end="8196" title="Giulia della Rena" label="Giulia della Rena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202" start="8231" end="8235" title="1367" label="1367"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111415" start="8240" end="8252" title="Hasan Kuchak" label="Hasan Kuchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072" start="8285" end="8289" title="1343" label="1343"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128841" start="8294" end="8306" title="Haydar Amuli" label="Haydar Amuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350" start="8343" end="8347" title="1385" label="1385"/>
<link wikidata="Q481530" start="8352" end="8367" title="Henry V of Iron" label="Henry V of Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211" start="8400" end="8404" title="1369" label="1369"/>
<link wikidata="Q628624" start="8409" end="8416" title="James I, Count of La Marche" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753066" start="8444" end="8458" title="prince du sang" label="prince du sang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166" start="8469" end="8473" title="1362" label="1362"/>
<link wikidata="Q257621" start="8478" end="8496" title="Joan of Penthièvre" label="Joan of Penthièvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347" start="8520" end="8524" title="1384" label="1384"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379919" start="8529" end="8546" title="Kikuchi Takemitsu" label="Kikuchi Takemitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261" start="8569" end="8573" title="1373" label="1373"/>
<link wikidata="Q3830408" start="8578" end="8598" title="Leonardo Montaldo" label="Leonardo di Montaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="8608" end="8613" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652529" start="8627" end="8644" title="María de la Cerda" label="María de la Cerda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277" start="8669" end="8673" title="1375" label="1375"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968637" start="8678" end="8694" title="Märta Ulfsdotter" label="Märta Ulfsdotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255" start="8719" end="8723" title="1371" label="1371"/>
<link wikidata="Q711567" start="8728" end="8737" title="Matteo II Visconti" label="Matteo II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123" start="8773" end="8777" title="1355" label="1355"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084728" start="8782" end="8792" title="Philip III, Marquis of Namur" label="Philip III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039" start="8825" end="8829" title="1337" label="1337"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347364" start="8834" end="8847" title="Robert Marney" label="Robert Marney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108" start="8883" end="8887" title="1400" label="1400"/>
<link wikidata="Q63178" start="8892" end="8902" title="Stephen II, Duke of Bavaria" label="Stephen II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965802" start="8946" end="8960" title="Walter Paveley" label="Walter Paveley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007529" start="9003" end="9016" title="William Dacre, 2nd Baron Dacre" label="William Dacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159" start="9050" end="9054" title="1361" label="1361"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248" start="9072" end="9082" title="January 12" label="January 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q426523" start="9085" end="9107" title="Kamāl al-Dīn al-Fārisī" label="Kamāl al-Dīn al-Fārisī"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519" start="9131" end="9135" title="1267" label="1267"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555" start="9139" end="9144" title="May 8" label="May 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q313153" start="9147" end="9165" title="Haakon V of Norway" label="Haakon V Magnusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196956" start="9175" end="9181" title="Kingdom of Norway (872–1397)" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522" start="9186" end="9190" title="1270" label="1270"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578" start="9194" end="9200" title="May 19" label="May 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q352940" start="9203" end="9218" title="Louis, Count of Évreux" label="Louis of Évreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q172203" start="9227" end="9247" title="Philip III of France" label="King Philip the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530" start="9252" end="9256" title="1276" label="1276"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662" start="9260" end="9267" title="June 25" label="June 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q5803812" start="9271" end="9300" title="Battle of the Vega of Granada" label="Battle of the Vega of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q926544" start="9305" end="9320" title="John of Castile, Lord of Valencia de Campos" label="John of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510" start="9354" end="9358" title="1262" label="1262"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469933" start="9363" end="9379" title="Peter of Castile, Lord of Cameros" label="Peter of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552" start="9413" end="9417" title="1290" label="1290"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777" start="9421" end="9430" title="August 12" label="August 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q61211" start="9433" end="9441" title="Rudolf I, Duke of Bavaria" label="Rudolf I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527" start="9474" end="9478" title="1274" label="1274"/>
<link wikidata="Q2775" start="9482" end="9491" title="August 14" label="August 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q565434" start="9494" end="9512" title="Waldemar, Margrave of Brandenburg-Stendal" label="Waldemar the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536" start="9534" end="9538" title="1280" label="1280"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888" start="9542" end="9554" title="September 23" label="September 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q69756" start="9557" end="9574" title="Henry of Wierzbna" label="Henry of Wierzbna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964" start="9603" end="9613" title="October 18" label="October 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262160" start="9616" end="9631" title="William Montagu, 2nd Baron Montagu" label="William Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997" start="9663" end="9673" title="November 1" label="November 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q941306" start="9676" end="9701" title="Uguccione della Faggiuola" label="Uguccione della Faggiuola"/>
<link wikidata="Q273108" start="9711" end="9722" title="condottieri" label="condottieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996" start="9725" end="9735" title="November 2" label="November 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256605" start="9738" end="9750" title="John Sandale" label="John Sandale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993" start="9784" end="9794" title="November 5" label="November 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q20030845" start="9797" end="9812" title="Simone Ballachi" label="Simone Ballachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435" start="9841" end="9845" title="1240" label="1240"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990" start="9849" end="9859" title="November 8" label="November 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q6855202" start="9862" end="9868" title="Princess Bokguk" label="Bokguk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987" start="9904" end="9915" title="November 11" label="November 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q265501" start="9918" end="9940" title="Beatrice of Luxembourg" label="Beatrice of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056854" start="9951" end="9958" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1301–1526)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984" start="9961" end="9972" title="November 13" label="November 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q359601" start="9975" end="9989" title="Eric VI of Denmark" label="Eric VI Menved"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="9999" end="10006" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832" start="10019" end="10030" title="December 28" label="December 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q21003757" start="10033" end="10050" title="Mattia de Nazarei" label="Mattia de Nazarei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646408" start="10060" end="10066" title="abbess" label="abbess"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498" start="10071" end="10075" title="1253" label="1253"/>
<link wikidata="Q46666" start="10107" end="10126" title="Agnes Haakonsdatter" label="Agnes Haakonsdatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q97574380" start="10160" end="10168" title="Andrea I Muzaka" label="Andrea I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956199" start="10187" end="10202" title="Muzaka family" label="House of Muzaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534" start="10208" end="10212" title="1279" label="1279"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979534" start="10217" end="10227" title="Bernard VI, Count of Armagnac" label="Bernard VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q16034353" start="10246" end="10263" title="House of Armagnac" label="House of Armagnac"/>
<link wikidata="Q24036419" start="10268" end="10281" title="Guan Daogao" label="Guan Daosheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883688" start="10321" end="10342" title="Ingeborg Magnusdotter of Sweden" label="Ingeborg Magnusdotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531" start="10365" end="10369" title="1277" label="1277"/>
<link wikidata="Q95694343" start="10374" end="10387" title="Jan Sindewint" label="Jan Sindewint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277204" start="10428" end="10448" title="Jordan Óge de Exeter" label="Jordan Óge de Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q287573" start="10484" end="10496" title="Qadi Baydawi" label="Qadi Baydawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636083" start="10539" end="10559" title="Remigio dei Girolami" label="Remigio dei Girolami"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39964" wikidata="Q5769" url="?curid=39964" title="1321">
<text>Year 1321 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXXI]]) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
=== January – March ===
* January 19 – King Edward II of England appoints the Archbishop of York; the Bishops of Carlisle, Worcester, and Winchester; the Earls of Pembroke, Hereford, and Badlesmere; and six other people to negotiate with Scotland for a final peace treaty or an extension of the Pembroke treaty of 1319 before its expiration on Christmas Day.
* January 20 – The English Parliament appoints a commission to inquire about illegal confederacies in Wales against the King.
*January 30 – The Welsh Earls of Hereford, Arundel, and Surrey, and 26 other people are forbidden from attending any meetings to discuss matters affecting King Edward II. 
*February 10 – By papal verdict announced in the Polish town of Brześć, the Teutonic Knights are ordered to return the coastal region of Gdańsk Pomerania to Poland, having annexed and occupied it since 1308. The Teutonic Order appeals the judgment and continues fighting against Poland, with a new Polish–Teutonic War breaking out soon afterward.
* March 22 – The first Genkō era begins in Japan after the end of the Gen&#x27;ō era.

=== April – June ===
* April 8 – In the Delhi Sultanate of India, European Dominican missionaries who had accompanied Jordanus are killed while stranded on Salsette Island. Jordan escaped and continued his ministry.
* April 12 – Sweden&#x27;s governing council votes to bar foreigners from the royal palace, and to request that the Norwegian council admonish the regent Ingeborg to avoid taking advice from foreigners when making decisions. Ingeborg, who was serving as regent for her minor son, King Magnus, ruler of Sweden and Norway, had become infamous for making decisions without consultation from the councils of either of the kingdoms.
* April 14 – Prince Wenceslaus of Płock allies with the Teutonic Knights of Poland and signs an agreement at the city of Golub, pledging to prevent Lithuanian troops from passing through his principality. 
* April 19 – On Easter, civil war erupts in Byzantium as Andronikos Palaiologos begins a rebellion against his grandfather, the Byzantine Emperor Andronikos II Palaiologos. The 24-year-old Andronikos is joined by Theodore Synadenos and John Kantakouzenos in the rebellion. 
* May 4 – The German play &quot;Ludus de decem virginibus&quot;, a dramatization of the New Testament Parable of the Ten Virgins, is first performed.
* May 5 – Wars of the Rügen Succession: Dukes Otto I of Pomerania, Vartislav IV of Pomerania-Wolgast and Barnim III of Pomerania-Stettin reach a mutual inheritance contract with Vitslav III of Rügen.
* May 8 – In Egypt&#x27;s Mamluk Sultanate, a campaign by Muslims starts against the Christian settlements of the Coptic Orthodox Church. Over 60 churches and monasteries are burned. 
* May 16 – Johan de Bosco, a French person diagnosed with leprosy, claims that a fellow leper, &quot;Geraldus&quot; is attempting to spread their disease by contaminating wells, fountains, and rivers with bags of powder that will give leprosy to anyone who drinks from the water source. Rumors spread in southern France that French Jews are responsible, and is known as the 1321 lepers&#x27; plot. 
* June 6 – Andronikos II Palaiologos concludes a peace agreement and divides the Byzantine Empire in two. Andronikos III is recognized as co-emperor and receives Thrace and Macedonia. He rewards his followers and gives them towns and regions to administer. Adrianople becomes the new capital.
* June 9 – Guillaume Agasse, the head of a leper house in Pamiers, claims in a statement to Bishop Jacques Founier (later Pope Benedict XII) that he had learned that more than fifty officials of leper houses had conspired with the Emirate of Granada to spread leprosy throughout France. 
* June 21 – King Philip V of France orders that all lepers be imprisoned and interrogated. Those found guilty, often under torture, are to be burnt at the stake.
* June 23 – Pope John XXII approves a second inquiry into the matter of the canonization of Thomas Aquinas, with four commissioners to take testimony of witnesses.

=== July – September ===
* July 1 – María de Molina, grandmother of and regent for 12-year-old King Alfonso XI of Castile, dies at the age of 56, two relatives assume the regency and split Castile between themselves while chaos exists inside the Spanish kingdom. Alfonso&#x27;s uncle, Don Juan Manuel de Ivrea, and cousin Juan de Castilla y Haro (called Juan el Tuerto or Juan the One-Eyed) remain in power until Alfonso XI reaches majority on 13 August 1325. 
* July 15 – In England, the &quot;Parliament of Whitebands&quot; convenes with only 38 barons present, to remove suspect counsellors to the King. 
* July 24 – A marriage contract is signed on behalf of Princess Euphemia, the 4-year-old sister of King Magnus of Sweden and Norway, and daughter of the regent Ingeborg of Norway, to eventually marry Albert of Mecklenburg the 3-year-old son of Henry I, Lord of Mecklenburg. The marriage will not take place until almost 15 years later.
* August 14 – King Edward II agrees to the demands from his barons to send Hugh Despenser the Elder and his son Hugh Despenser the Younger into exile. The Despensers helped Edward in the administration of his financial and land management affairs. This gives them both the opportunity to frustrate the ambitions of the barons and also the chance to enrich themselves. 
* September 14 – Italian author Dante Alighieri, known for &quot;The Inferno&quot;, dies of malaria at Ravenna after having undertaken a diplomatic mission in the Republic of Venice.

=== October – December ===
* October 29 – King Stefan Milutin dies after a 39-year reign. His son Stefan Konstantin claims the Serbian throne, but Konstantin&#x27;s elder half-brother Stefan Uroš III starts a civil war and succeeds him.
* October 31 – Edward II captures Leeds Castle after Margaret de Clare, wife of Bartholomew Badlesmere refuses Queen Isabella admittance in her husband&#x27;s absence. When the Queen seeks to force an entry, Lady Badlesmere instructs her archers to shoot at Isabella and her party, six of whom are killed. After Edward occupies the castle, Lady Badlesmere becomes the first woman to ever be imprisoned in the Tower of London. She will be freed on November 3, 1322.
* November 10 – Canonization of Thomas Aquinas: In Italy, a second inquiry begins at Fossanova, as three commissioners (Pandulpho de Sabbello; Petrus Ferri, Bishop of Anagni; and Andreas, Bishop of Terracina) take testimony from over 100 witnesses until November 27.
* November 27 – In northern Italy, Rinaldo dei Bonacolsi, Duke of Mantua, begins the siege of Mirandola against Francesco I Pico, Duke of Mirandola. Bonaclsi has Pico and his sons Francesco and Tommasino arrested and imprisoned in the Castel d&#x27;Ario. The castle is besieged the next day and lasts 33 days.
* December 8 – Confronting the rebellion of Thomas of Lancaster, the Baron Badlesmere, and Roger Mortimer, King Edward II arrives in Cirencester, then leads troops up the Severn Valley from Gloucester against the rebels.
* December 26 – Faced with an invasion of London during the rebellion of Thomas of Lancaster, by troops led by the English rebel, the Baron Badlesmere, King Edward II of England offers safe conduct for any rebels who come over to the royalist side, but orders the Sheriff of Gloucester to arrest Badlesmere.
* December 28 – (Genko 1, 9th day of 12th month) In Japan, Emperor Go-Daigo begins direct government as the cloistered rule of former Emperor Go-Uda ceases.
* December 31 – the Duke of Mantua completes the siege of Mirandola, taking control of the Duchy, and then orders the castle of Duke Francesco I Pico to be destroyed.

=== By place ===

==== Byzantine Empire ====
* Spring – Byzantine Civil War: Co-Emperor Andronikos III Palaiologos flees Constantinople to Adrianople, where he sets up his court and initiates an uprising against his grandfather, Andronikos II. Syrgiannes Palaiologos leads an expeditionary army towards the capital, forcing the emperor to negotiate.
* Winter – Syrgiannes Palaiologos switches support to Andronikos II Palaiologos, fleeing to Constantinople. Rewarded with the title of &quot;megas doux&quot;, he convinces the emperor to resume the war against Andronikos III.

==== Western Asia ====
* The Anatolian Beylik of Teke, a frontier principality, is established by the Oghuz Turks after the decline of the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum.

=== By topic ===
==== Education ====
* The University of Florence is established by the Republic of Florence.

==== Religion ====
* The Gračanica Monastery is founded by King Stefan Milutin, nicknamed &quot;The Saint King&quot;, on the ruins of a 6th century basilica, located in Kosovo.
* The Spitakavor Monastery, near the Armenian town Yeghegnadzor, is completed.

==== Literature ====
*The &quot;Kebra Nagast&quot; (&quot;The Glory of the Kings&quot;) is translated from Arabic to Ge&#x27;ez, according to its colophon (approximate date).

== Births ==
* January 6 – William de Greystoke, English landowner (d. 1359)
* February 5 – John II, Marquess of Montferrat, Italian nobleman (d. 1372)
* July 5 – Joan of the Tower, queen consort of Scotland (d. 1362)
* August 7 – Bande Nawaz, Indian Sufi scholar and writer (d. 1422)
* August 29 – John of Artois, Count of Eu, French nobleman (d. 1387)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Al-Mansur Abu Bakr, Mamluk ruler of Egypt and Syria (d. 1341)
** He Zhen, Chinese nobleman, general, and politician (d. 1388)
** James I, Aragonese nobleman (House of Barcelona) (d. 1347)
** Johann Wittenborg, German merchant and politician (d. 1363)
** John III of Trebizond (&quot;Megas Komnenos&quot;), Emperor of Trebizond (d. 1362)
** Louis I of Brzeg (&quot;Louis the Wise&quot;), Polish nobleman from the (House of Piast) (d. 1398)
** Nicholas, Count of Holstein-Rendsburg, German nobleman and co-ruler (d. 1397)
** Zhang Shicheng, Chinese rebel leader and ruler (d. 1367)

== Deaths ==
* January 13 – Bonacossa Borri, Italian noblewoman (b. 1254)
* March 18 – Matthew III Csák, Hungarian nobleman and knight
* April 9 – (The &quot;Four Martyrs of Thane&quot;):
** Demetrius of Tiflis, Georgian monk and religious leader 
** James of Padua, Italian monk, preacher and missionary
** Peter of Siena, Italian monk, preacher and missionary 
** Thomas of Tolentino, Italian preacher and missionary 
* April 17 – Blanche of Portugal, Portuguese princess (b. 1259)
* April 22 – Bolesław of Oleśnica, Polish nobleman and co-ruler
* April 27 – Nicolò Albertini, Italian friar, cardinal and statesman
* May 31 – Birger Magnusson, king of Sweden (House of Bjälbo)
* July 1 – María de Molina, queen of Castile and León (b. 1265)
* July 23 – Thomas de Berkeley, English nobleman and diplomat
* July 31 – Ibn al-Banna&#x27; al-Marrakushi, Almohad mathematician
* August 18 – Rinaldo da Concorezzo, Italian archbishop (b. 1245) 
* September 3 – Walter II, Dutch nobleman and co-ruler (b. 1283)
* September 14 – Dante Alighieri, Italian poet and writer (b. 1265)
* October 29 – Stefan Milutin, Serbian king (b. 1253)
* November 9 – Walter Langton, English cleric and bishop (b. 1243)
* November 25 – Nicholas Seagrave, English nobleman and knight
* November 27 – Kunigunde of Bohemia, Czech princess (b. 1265)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Bonacossa Borri, Italian noblewoman (House of Visconti)
** Edmund Butler, Irish Chief Butler, magnate and politician
** Gregory of Raska, Serbian bishop and translator (b. 1275)
** Grigorije II of Ras, Serbian monk-scribe, bishop, and saint
** Guillaume Bélibaste, French preacher and Cathar Perfect
** James of Lausanne, French superior, theologian and writer
** Muhammad ibn Rushayd, Almohad scholar, judge, and writer
** Reginald of Burgundy, French nobleman, knight and co-ruler
** Sinka Sebesi, Hungarian nobleman, landowner and co-ruler
** Witte van Haemstede, Dutch nobleman and prince (b. 1281)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5769" start="5" end="9" title="1321" label="1321"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769" start="11" end="37" title="1321" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXXI]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235690" start="45" end="77" title="common year starting on Thursday" label="common year starting on Thursday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="85" end="100" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266" start="142" end="152" title="January 19" label="January 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="155" end="180" title="King Edward II of England" label="King Edward II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267" start="477" end="487" title="January 20" label="January 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287" start="602" end="612" title="January 30" label="January 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325" start="774" end="785" title="February 10" label="February 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q985649" start="837" end="843" title="Brześć Kujawski" label="Brześć"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="849" end="865" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q583223" start="1071" end="1090" title="Polish–Teutonic War (1326–1332)" label="Polish–Teutonic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435" start="1122" end="1130" title="March 22" label="March 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q509889" start="1137" end="1152" title="Genkō (1321–24)" label="first Genkō era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193925" start="1190" end="1200" title="Gen&amp;#x27;ō" label="Gen&amp;#x27;ō"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503" start="1230" end="1237" title="April 8" label="April 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="1247" end="1262" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="1282" end="1291" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q978884" start="1325" end="1333" title="Jordan Catala" label="Jordanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q117196" start="1363" end="1378" title="Salsette Island" label="Salsette Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499" start="1425" end="1433" title="April 12" label="April 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q467530" start="1577" end="1585" title="Ingeborg of Norway" label="Ingeborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q314457" start="1703" end="1714" title="Magnus IV of Sweden" label="King Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500" start="1853" end="1861" title="April 14" label="April 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q178603" start="1871" end="1890" title="Wenceslaus of Płock" label="Wenceslaus of Płock"/>
<link wikidata="Q325251" start="1972" end="1977" title="Golub-Dobrzyń" label="Golub"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523" start="2059" end="2067" title="April 19" label="April 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="2073" end="2079" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499292" start="2081" end="2110" title="Byzantine civil war of 1321–1328" label="civil war erupts in Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q37063" start="2114" end="2136" title="Andronikos III Palaiologos" label="Andronikos Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q37067" start="2203" end="2228" title="Andronikos II Palaiologos" label="Andronikos II Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782061" start="2270" end="2288" title="Theodore Synadenos" label="Theodore Synadenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q37084" start="2293" end="2311" title="John Kantakouzenos" label="John Kantakouzenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549" start="2333" end="2338" title="May 4" label="May 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125125" start="2433" end="2459" title="Parable of the Ten Virgins" label="Parable of the Ten Virgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550" start="2483" end="2488" title="May 5" label="May 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2203909" start="2491" end="2519" title="Wars of the Rügen Succession" label="Wars of the Rügen Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q319932" start="2527" end="2546" title="Otto I of Pomerania" label="Otto I of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q319946" start="2548" end="2560" title="Vartislav IV" label="Vartislav IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q572065" start="2586" end="2596" title="Barnim III" label="Barnim III"/>
<link wikidata="Q454842" start="2659" end="2679" title="Vitslav III of Rügen" label="Vitslav III of Rügen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555" start="2683" end="2688" title="May 8" label="May 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="2795" end="2817" title="Coptic Orthodox Church" label="Coptic Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574" start="2867" end="2873" title="May 16" label="May 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="2923" end="2930" title="leprosy" label="leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43483" start="3036" end="3040" title="well" label="well"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061047" start="3185" end="3217" title="blood libel" label="that French Jews are responsible"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969805" start="3239" end="3261" title="1321 lepers&amp;#x27; plot" label="1321 lepers&amp;#x27; plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620" start="3266" end="3272" title="June 6" label="June 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3345" end="3361" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="3426" end="3432" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="3437" end="3446" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="3521" end="3531" title="Adrianople" label="Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618" start="3559" end="3565" title="June 9" label="June 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q209834" start="3615" end="3622" title="Pamiers" label="Pamiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170389" start="3679" end="3696" title="Pope Benedict XII" label="Pope Benedict XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="3788" end="3806" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Emirate of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671" start="3847" end="3854" title="June 21" label="June 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q8433" start="3862" end="3880" title="Philip V of France" label="Philip V of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q468455" start="3987" end="4005" title="death by burning" label="burnt at the stake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668" start="4009" end="4016" title="June 23" label="June 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="4019" end="4033" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q110654560" start="4083" end="4113" title="canonization of Thomas Aquinas" label="canonization of Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700" start="4199" end="4205" title="July 1" label="July 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q266025" start="4208" end="4223" title="María de Molina" label="María de Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q298808" start="4272" end="4293" title="Alfonso XI of Castile" label="Alfonso XI of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q373007" start="4457" end="4481" title="Juan Manuel" label="Don Juan Manuel de Ivrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025511" start="4494" end="4517" title="Juan de Castilla y Haro" label="Juan de Castilla y Haro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686" start="4635" end="4642" title="July 15" label="July 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721" start="4782" end="4789" title="July 24" label="July 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q463711" start="4835" end="4852" title="Euphemia of Sweden" label="Princess Euphemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q467530" start="4940" end="4958" title="Ingeborg of Norway" label="Ingeborg of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q64251" start="4980" end="5001" title="Albert II, Duke of Mecklenburg" label="Albert of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q67403" start="5024" end="5052" title="Henry I, Lord of Mecklenburg" label="Henry I, Lord of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2775" start="5118" end="5127" title="August 14" label="August 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="5135" end="5144" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685455" start="5191" end="5215" title="Hugh Despenser the Elder" label="Hugh Despenser the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q711383" start="5228" end="5254" title="Hugh Despenser the Younger" label="Hugh Despenser the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847" start="5487" end="5499" title="September 14" label="September 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="5517" end="5532" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="5588" end="5595" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="5648" end="5666" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2951" start="5698" end="5708" title="October 29" label="October 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q319597" start="5716" end="5730" title="Stefan Milutin" label="Stefan Milutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281457" start="5767" end="5784" title="Stefan Konstantin" label="Stefan Konstantin"/>
<link wikidata="Q314346" start="5853" end="5868" title="Stefan Dečanski" label="Stefan Uroš III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949" start="5908" end="5918" title="October 31" label="October 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q746876" start="5940" end="5952" title="Leeds Castle" label="Leeds Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3846899" start="5959" end="5976" title="Margaret de Clare, Baroness Badlesmere" label="Margaret de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865294" start="5986" end="6008" title="Bartholomew Badlesmere, 1st Baron Badlesmere" label="Bartholomew Badlesmere"/>
<link wikidata="Q228642" start="6017" end="6031" title="Isabella of France" label="Queen Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="6315" end="6330" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988" start="6373" end="6384" title="November 10" label="November 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q110654560" start="6387" end="6417" title="Canonization of Thomas Aquinas" label="Canonization of Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775258" start="6456" end="6465" title="Fossanova" label="Fossanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018" start="6640" end="6651" title="November 27" label="November 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164727" start="6696" end="6710" title="List of rulers of Mantua" label="Duke of Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q42883809" start="6723" end="6741" title="Siege of Mirandola (1321)" label="siege of Mirandola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750110" start="6750" end="6766" title="Francesco I Pico" label="Francesco I Pico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615455" start="6768" end="6785" title="Duchy of Mirandola" label="Duke of Mirandola"/>
<link wikidata="Q42338" start="6873" end="6891" title="Castel d&amp;#x27;Ario" label="Castel d&amp;#x27;Ario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301" start="6950" end="6960" title="December 8" label="December 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q249183" start="6992" end="7011" title="Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster" label="Thomas of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865294" start="7017" end="7033" title="Bartholomew Badlesmere, 1st Baron Badlesmere" label="Baron Badlesmere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3940090" start="7039" end="7053" title="Roger Mortimer, 1st Baron Mortimer of Chirk" label="Roger Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q852772" start="7081" end="7092" title="Cirencester" label="Cirencester"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="7119" end="7132" title="River Severn" label="Severn Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="7138" end="7148" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761" start="7171" end="7182" title="December 26" label="December 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q249183" start="7242" end="7261" title="Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster" label="Thomas of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865294" start="7303" end="7319" title="Bartholomew Badlesmere, 1st Baron Badlesmere" label="Baron Badlesmere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832" start="7479" end="7490" title="December 28" label="December 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q313942" start="7536" end="7552" title="Emperor Go-Daigo" label="Emperor Go-Daigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q865416" start="7585" end="7600" title="cloistered rule" label="cloistered rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q440538" start="7611" end="7625" title="Emperor Go-Uda" label="Emperor Go-Uda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912" start="7636" end="7647" title="December 31" label="December 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499292" start="7858" end="7877" title="Byzantine civil war of 1321–1328" label="Byzantine Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37063" start="7890" end="7916" title="Andronikos III Palaiologos" label="Andronikos III Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="7923" end="7937" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="7941" end="7951" title="Edirne" label="Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q37067" start="8031" end="8044" title="Andronikos II Palaiologos" label="Andronikos II"/>
<link wikidata="Q631290" start="8046" end="8068" title="Syrgiannes Palaiologos" label="Syrgiannes Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q136578" start="8293" end="8303" title="megas doux" label="megas doux"/>
<link wikidata="Q373988" start="8418" end="8432" title="Beylik of Teke" label="Beylik of Teke"/>
<link wikidata="Q494462" start="8481" end="8492" title="Oghuz Turks" label="Oghuz Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q975405" start="8525" end="8541" title="Sultanate of Rum" label="Sultanate of Rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q820887" start="8587" end="8609" title="University of Florence" label="University of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q148540" start="8632" end="8652" title="Republic of Florence" label="Republic of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137661" start="8680" end="8699" title="Gračanica Monastery" label="Gračanica Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q319597" start="8719" end="8733" title="Stefan Milutin" label="Stefan Milutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="8824" end="8830" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064093" start="8838" end="8858" title="Spitakavor Monastery" label="Spitakavor Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q39538" start="8883" end="8895" title="Yeghegnadzor" label="Yeghegnadzor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123371" start="8944" end="8956" title="Kebra Nagast" label="Kebra Nagast"/>
<link wikidata="Q35667" start="9029" end="9039" title="Ge&amp;#x27;ez" label="Ge&amp;#x27;ez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221" start="9103" end="9112" title="January 6" label="January 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840267" start="9115" end="9135" title="William de Greystoke, 2nd Baron Greystoke" label="William de Greystoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143" start="9159" end="9163" title="1359" label="1359"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319" start="9167" end="9177" title="February 5" label="February 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070853" start="9180" end="9211" title="John II, Marquess of Montferrat" label="John II, Marquess of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="9221" end="9229" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258" start="9234" end="9238" title="1372" label="1372"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696" start="9242" end="9248" title="July 5" label="July 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q242322" start="9251" end="9268" title="Joan of the Tower" label="Joan of the Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="9287" end="9295" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166" start="9300" end="9304" title="1362" label="1362"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781" start="9308" end="9316" title="August 7" label="August 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764289" start="9319" end="9330" title="Bande Nawaz" label="Bande Nawaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="9339" end="9343" title="Sufism" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262" start="9367" end="9371" title="1422" label="1422"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816" start="9375" end="9384" title="August 29" label="August 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379693" start="9387" end="9414" title="John of Artois, Count of Eu" label="John of Artois, Count of Eu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6359" start="9436" end="9440" title="1387" label="1387"/>
<link wikidata="Q286582" start="9472" end="9490" title="Al-Mansur Abu Bakr" label="Al-Mansur Abu Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696332" start="9508" end="9513" title="Egypt in the Middle Ages" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="9518" end="9523" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6062" start="9528" end="9532" title="1341" label="1341"/>
<link wikidata="Q6854537" start="9537" end="9544" title="He Zhen (count)" label="He Zhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365" start="9592" end="9596" title="1388" label="1388"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512868" start="9601" end="9608" title="James I, Count of Urgell" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q661534" start="9630" end="9648" title="House of Barcelona" label="House of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082" start="9654" end="9658" title="1347" label="1347"/>
<link wikidata="Q102185" start="9663" end="9680" title="Johann Wittenborg" label="Johann Wittenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176" start="9717" end="9721" title="1363" label="1363"/>
<link wikidata="Q729502" start="9726" end="9747" title="John III of Trebizond" label="John III of Trebizond"/>
<link wikidata="Q178913" start="9789" end="9798" title="Empire of Trebizond" label="Trebizond"/>
<link wikidata="Q480192" start="9812" end="9828" title="Louis I of Brzeg" label="Louis I of Brzeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929625" start="9885" end="9899" title="Silesian Piasts" label="House of Piast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416" start="9905" end="9909" title="1398" label="1398"/>
<link wikidata="Q831327" start="9914" end="9951" title="Nicholas, Count of Holstein-Rendsburg" label="Nicholas, Count of Holstein-Rendsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410" start="9986" end="9990" title="1397" label="1397"/>
<link wikidata="Q704619" start="9995" end="10009" title="Zhang Shicheng" label="Zhang Shicheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202" start="10046" end="10050" title="1367" label="1367"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255" start="10068" end="10078" title="January 13" label="January 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642013" start="10081" end="10096" title="Bonacossa Borri" label="Bonacossa Borri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500" start="10121" end="10125" title="1254" label="1254"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422" start="10129" end="10137" title="March 18" label="March 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q222534" start="10140" end="10156" title="Matthew III Csák" label="Matthew III Csák"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504" start="10190" end="10197" title="April 9" label="April 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q27969152" start="10244" end="10263" title="Demetrius of Tiflis" label="Demetrius of Tiflis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27969155" start="10304" end="10318" title="James of Padua" label="James of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q27969158" start="10361" end="10375" title="Peter of Siena (died 1321)" label="Peter of Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q17609694" start="10419" end="10438" title="Thomas of Tolentino" label="Thomas of Tolentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520" start="10475" end="10483" title="April 17" label="April 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755558" start="10486" end="10505" title="Blanche of Portugal (1259–1321)" label="Blanche of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507" start="10531" end="10535" title="1259" label="1259"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526" start="10539" end="10547" title="April 22" label="April 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q480572" start="10550" end="10570" title="Bolesław of Oleśnica" label="Bolesław of Oleśnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533" start="10603" end="10611" title="April 27" label="April 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q574420" start="10614" end="10630" title="Nicolò Albertini" label="Nicolò Albertini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591" start="10672" end="10678" title="May 31" label="May 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q434782" start="10681" end="10697" title="Birger, King of Sweden" label="Birger Magnusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460755" start="10707" end="10713" title="Kingdom of Sweden (800–1521)" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752059" start="10715" end="10730" title="House of Bjälbo" label="House of Bjälbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700" start="10734" end="10740" title="July 1" label="July 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q266025" start="10743" end="10758" title="María de Molina" label="María de Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="10769" end="10776" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q175276" start="10781" end="10785" title="Kingdom of León" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516" start="10790" end="10794" title="1265" label="1265"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722" start="10798" end="10805" title="July 23" label="July 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795451" start="10808" end="10826" title="Thomas de Berkeley, 1st Baron Berkeley" label="Thomas de Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715" start="10860" end="10867" title="July 31" label="July 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q293608" start="10870" end="10902" title="Ibn al-Banna&amp;#x27; al-Marrakushi" label="Ibn al-Banna&amp;#x27; al-Marrakushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826" start="10928" end="10937" title="August 18" label="August 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935960" start="10940" end="10961" title="Rinaldo da Concorezzo" label="Rinaldo da Concorezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440" start="10986" end="10990" title="1245" label="1245"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860" start="10995" end="11006" title="September 3" label="September 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418336" start="11009" end="11018" title="Walter II, Lord of Egmond" label="Walter II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543" start="11052" end="11056" title="1283" label="1283"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847" start="11060" end="11072" title="September 14" label="September 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="11075" end="11090" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2951" start="11128" end="11138" title="October 29" label="October 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q319597" start="11141" end="11155" title="Stefan Milutin" label="Stefan Milutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498" start="11174" end="11178" title="1253" label="1253"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991" start="11182" end="11192" title="November 9" label="November 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q741881" start="11195" end="11209" title="Walter Langton" label="Walter Langton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438" start="11241" end="11245" title="1243" label="1243"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020" start="11249" end="11260" title="November 25" label="November 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026188" start="11263" end="11280" title="Nicholas Seagrave" label="Nicholas Seagrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018" start="11312" end="11323" title="November 27" label="November 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q459684" start="11326" end="11346" title="Kunigunde of Bohemia" label="Kunigunde of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642013" start="11403" end="11418" title="Bonacossa Borri" label="Bonacossa Borri"/>
<link wikidata="Q212475" start="11440" end="11457" title="visconti of Milan" label="House of Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339352" start="11462" end="11475" title="Edmund Butler, Earl of Carrick" label="Edmund Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q903810" start="11497" end="11504" title="magnate" label="magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12750534" start="11523" end="11539" title="Gregory of Raska" label="Gregory of Raska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529" start="11575" end="11579" title="1275" label="1275"/>
<link wikidata="Q84607204" start="11584" end="11603" title="Grigorije II of Ras" label="Grigorije II of Ras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096439" start="11647" end="11666" title="Guillaume Bélibaste" label="Guillaume Bélibaste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081607" start="11688" end="11702" title="Cathar Perfect" label="Cathar Perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q19663889" start="11706" end="11723" title="James of Lausanne" label="James of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975161" start="11732" end="11740" title="Provincial superior" label="superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147453" start="11767" end="11787" title="Muhammad ibn Rushayd" label="Muhammad ibn Rushayd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345626" start="11827" end="11847" title="Reginald of Burgundy" label="Reginald of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q64148407" start="11889" end="11901" title="Sinka Sebesi" label="Sinka Sebesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224110" start="11949" end="11968" title="Witte van Haemstede" label="Witte van Haemstede"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537" start="12000" end="12004" title="1281" label="1281"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39965" wikidata="Q5773" url="?curid=39965" title="1324">
<text>Year 1324 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXXIV]]) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
=== January – March ===
* January 3 – The Taiding Era begins in China three months after Borjigin Yesün Temür ascends the throne. 
* January 23 – England&#x27;s envoy to France, Ralph Basset, and Raymond-Bernard de Montpezat, decline to obey an order to appear before King Charles IV of France to answer for the October 16 burning of Saint-Sardos. King Charles orders their properties forfeited to the crown.
* February 7 – Siege of Villa di Chiesa: Aragonese forces led by Prince Alfonso the Kind capture the city of Villa di Chiesa due to attrition. The Pisan garrison surrenders after an 8-month siege. It represents the first act of the Aragonese conquest of Sardinia, for the creation of the Kingdom of Sardinia. 
* February 29 – Battle of Lucocisterna: Aragonese forces led by Prince Alfonso defeat a Pisan army, which is disembarked near the area of Capoterra. During the battle, Alfonso loses some 150 knights. On the same day, a Pisan fleet (some 30 galleys) is defeated in the Gulf of Cagliari at Sardinia.
* March 23 – Pope John XXII excommunicates Ludwig the Bavarian, King of the Germans, as Louis had not sought papal approval during his conflict against his rival Frederick the Fair. Ludwig, in turn, declares the pope a heretic, because of John&#x27;s opposition to the view of Christ&#x27;s absolute poverty held by some Franciscans. 
* March 26 – Marie of Luxembourg, Queen of France, dies of injuries after falling from a carriage while she and King Charles IV of France were riding from Paris and Avignon. After she fell, she had gone into labor and given birth prematurely to a daughter, who died shortly afterward.
* March 31 – Hugh IV becomes the new King of Cyprus upon the death of his father, King Henry II. Hugh also inherits Henry&#x27;s nominal title of &quot;King of Jerusalem&quot;.

=== April – June ===
* April 15 – The coronation of King Hugh IV of Cyprus, nephew of the late King Henry II, takes place at the Cathedral of Saint Sophia in Nicosia.
* April 20 – Boleslaw III, Duke of Wroclaw, declares his Polish duchy to be a vassal of the Holy Roman Empire as part of a defense agreement made with Ludwig the Bavarian, King of Germany.
* May 3 – France&#x27;s Consistori del Gay Saber holds its first annual contest to determine the best poet in the Kingdom. Arnaut Vidal de Castelnou d&#x27;Ari wins the first prize, the &quot;violeta d&#x27;aur&quot;. The contest continues for 160 years, ceasing in 1484.
* May 22 – King Ludwig the Bavarian comes to the defense of the Spiritual Franciscans, delivering a sharp criticism of Pope John XXII, whom Ludwig describes as a heretic.
* June 11 – The Byzantine Empire, represented by diplomatic envoy Stephen Syropoulos, signs a treaty with the Republic of Venice, led by the Doge Giovanni Soranzo. 
* June 13 – King Edward II of England dispatches his envoy, Aymer de Valence, 2nd Earl of Pembroke to France in an attempt to negotiate a peaceful end to the Saint-Sardos incident. Stopping at Saint-Riquier 10 days later, Pembroke dies of a heart attack before reaching Paris.
* June 24
**King Charles IV of France issues an order declaring the Duchy of Aquitaine, French territory ruled by King Edward II of England, forfeited to the crown. The move comes after King Edward fails to render homage, as Duke of Aquitaine, to King Charles. A French army of 7,000 men is massed at the border of Aquitaine for an invasion.
**Ludwig the Bavarian, King of the Germans, gives the Duchy of Pomerania (now part of Germany and Poland) to his son, Ludwig, Margrave of Brandenburg, exacerbating the Brandenburg–Pomeranian conflict.

=== July – September ===
* July 5 – A royal wedding takes place in France as King Charles IV marries his cousin Joan of Évreux, the 14-year-old daughter of his uncle, Louis, Count of Évreux.
* July 11 – Pope John XXII declares that Ludwig the Bavarian will be deposed as King of the Germans because of his March 23 excommunication from the Roman Catholic Church. King Ludwig continues his reign and in the 1325 Treaty of Trausnitz made his rival, the Habsburg claimant Friedrich, his co-king. 
* July 19 – (26 Rajab 724 AH) Mansa Musa, the extraordinarily-wealthy Emperor of Africa&#x27;s Mali Empire, arrives in Cairo after three days of camping by the pyramids of Giza, and brings with him a large entourage of fellow Muslim pilgrims and a vast supply of gold. Musa, who is making the pilgrimage to Mecca, meets with Egypt&#x27;s Sultan al-Nasir Muhammad and stays in Cairo for three months before departing with the pilgrims on October 18.
* July 26 – Basarab I, ruler of Wallachia (now part of Romania) is designated by King Károly Róbert of Hungary as a subject of the Hungarian crown.
* August 5 – The Blitar Regency is established on the island of Java (now part of Indonesia) by Java&#x27;s King Jayanegara of Majapahit. &quot;Sejarah Kabupaten Blitar&quot; (&quot;History of Blitar Regency&quot;), Pemerintah Kabupaten Blitar (Blitar Regency Government, 2012)
* August 15 – The coronation of King Christopher II of Denmark (who has ruled since 1320) takes place at Vordingborg, with his son Prince Erik Christoffersen being crowned alongside him as the &quot;samkonge&quot;, a junior co-monarch.
* August 16 – In Italy, Pagano della Torre, Patriarch of Aquileia, is defeated in battle at Vaprio d&#x27;Agogna in Piedmont in his attempt to reclaim Milan from the Visconti family, and abandons further crusades. 
* August 25 – War of Four Lords: In Western Europe, King John the Blind of Bohemia, his uncle Baldwin, Archbishop of Trier, Count Edward I of Bar and Duke Frederick the Fighter of Lorraine, meet at Remich (now in Luxembourg) and make plans to work jointly on besieging the city of Metz (now in France).
* September 4 – James the Unfortunate becomes the new King of Majorca, a set of islands in the Mediterranean Sea off the coast of Spain, upon the death of his uncle, King Sancho the Peaceful.
* September 11 – When the body of King Sancho of Majorca arrives in the French city of Perpignan for interment at the Perpignan Cathedral, a mob attacks the funeral procession and steals valuables that had accompanied the corpse.
* September 15 – War of Four Lords: The armies of Bohemia, Luxembourg, Bar and Lorraine begin their siege of the walled city of Metz, capital of the Messin Republic. The attackers use a new weapon, the cannon, to fire projectiles at high speed against the city walls in order to destroy the city. The group withdraws at the end of the month after plundering the surrounding area. 
* September 22 – The War of Saint-Sardos ends after Charles, Count of Valois forces the surrender of Edmund of Woodstock, 1st Earl of Kent at La Réole, the last English fortress at the Duchy of Aquitaine. A six-month truce follows

=== October – December ===
* October 7 – (Genko 4, 19th day of 9th month) The Shōchū Incident, the plan by Japan&#x27;s Emperor Go-Daigo to overthrow the Kamakura shogunate, is discovered by the shogun&#x27;s security police, the Rokuhara Tandai, and persons involved (other than the Emperor) are arrested and punished.
* October 18 – (28 Shawwal 724 AH) After he and his entourage of Muslim pilgrims have stayed in Cairo for three months, the Emperor Mansa Musa of Africa&#x27;s Mali Empire resumes the group&#x27;s pilgrimage to Mecca
* November 3 – At Kilkenny in Ireland, Petronilla de Meath, the maidservant of Dame Alice Kyteler, becomes the first person in the British Isles to be burned at the stake as a witch. Dame Alice had been able to escape before capture. 
* November 10 – Pope John XXII issues the papal bull &quot;Quia quorundam&quot;, his third major statement concerning apostolic poverty and the Fraticelli, in response to a claim that an earlier bull by Pope Nicholas III had implied that Christ and the apostles had lived without possessions. In addition, Pope John restates the doctrine of Papal infallibility, declaring that &quot;What the Roman pontiffs have once defined in faith and morals with the key of knowledge stands so immutably that it is not permitted to a successor to revoke it.&quot;
* November 22 – In Italy, Marsilio da Carrara becomes the new Lord of Padua upon the death of his uncle, Jacopo I da Carrara. 
* December 25 – The Shōchū era begins in Japan during the reign of the Emperor Go-Daigo.

=== By place ===
==== Asia Minor ====
* Ottoman Sultan Osman I dies after a 25-year reign at Bursa. He is the founder of the Ottoman Empire (first known as a Turkmen principality in the northwest of Anatolia). He is succeeded by his 43-year-old son Orhan I as the second ruler (&quot;bey&quot;), who places his residence at Söğüt in Bilecik Province (approximate date).

=== By topic ===

==== Literature ====
* Marsilius of Padua writes &quot;Defensor pacis&quot; (&quot;The Defender of Peace&quot;), a theological treatise arguing against the power of the clergy and in favor of a secular state.

==== Religion ====
* William of Ockham, English Franciscan friar and philosopher, is summoned by John XXII to the papal court at Avignon and imprisoned.

== Births ==
* March 5 – David II, king of Scotland (Clan Bruce) (d. 1371)
* August 4 – Siraj al-Din al-Bulqini, Egyptian scholar (d. 1403)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Bayan Khutugh, Mongol concubine and empress (d. 1365)
** Catherine of Savoy, Italian noblewoman and ruler (d. 1388)
** Constance of Sicily, Sicilian princess and regent (d. 1355)
** Giovanni Manfredi, Italian nobleman and knight (d. 1373)
** Louis of Durazzo, Italian nobleman and diplomat (d. 1362)
** Tsunenaga, Japanese prince and heir-apparent (d. 1338)
** Vettor Pisani, Venetian nobleman and admiral (d. 1380)
** William the Rich, Marquis of Namur, French nobleman and ruler (d. 1391)

== Deaths ==
* January 8 – Marco Polo, Italian merchant and explorer (b. 1254)
* January 23 – Fulk le Strange, English nobleman and seneschal
* February 11 – Karl von Trier, German knight and Grand Master
* February 26 – Dino Compagni, Italian politician and historian
* March 26 – Marie of Luxembourg, queen of France (b. 1304)
* March 31 – Henry II of Cyprus, king of Jerusalem (b. 1270)
* May 15 – Władysław of Oświęcim, Polish nobleman and ruler
* June 23 – Aymer de Valence, English nobleman and knight
* July 16 – Yohito, former emperor of Japan (b. 1267)
* November 1 – John de Halton, English bishop 
* November 3 – Petronilla de Meath, Irish maidservant (b. 1300)
* November 11 – Henry VII, Count of Schwarzburg-Blankenburg, German nobleman and ruler 
* November 25 – John Botetourt, English governor and admiral
* December 24 – John III, Dutch nobleman and knight (b. 1275)
* &quot;date unknown&quot; 
** Domarat Grzymała, Polish bishop (House of Grzymała)
** Guecellone VII, Italian nobleman (House of Da Camino)
** Helvig of Holstein, queen consort of Sweden (b. )
** Irene of Brunswick, Byzantine empress consort (b. 1293)
** Isabella of Ibelin, queen of Cyprus and Jerusalem (b. 1241)
** Jacopo the Great, Italian nobleman and military leader
** John II, German nobleman and knight (House of Sponheim)
** Konoe Iehira, Japanese nobleman (Fujiwara Clan) (b. 1282)
** Lampert Hermán, Hungarian nobleman and judge royal
** Nijō Tamefuji, Japanese courtier, poet and writer (b. 1275)
** Osman I, Ottoman ruler (House of Osman)
** Ou Shizi, Chinese Confucian scholar and writer (b. 1234)
** Robert Scales, English nobleman, peerage and politician
** Sancho I the Peaceful, King of Majorca (b. 1274)
** Thawun Nge, Burmese nobleman and governor (b. 1260)
** William Liath de Burgh, Irish nobleman and politician

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5773" start="5" end="9" title="1324" label="1324"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773" start="11" end="38" title="1324" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXXIV]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q217041" start="46" end="74" title="leap year starting on Sunday" label="leap year starting on Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="82" end="97" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156" start="139" end="148" title="January 3" label="January 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q8560" start="202" end="222" title="Yesün Temür (Yuan dynasty)" label="Borjigin Yesün Temür"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276" start="246" end="256" title="January 23" label="January 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q58814947" start="291" end="303" title="Ralph Basset, 2nd Baron Basset of Drayton" label="Ralph Basset"/>
<link wikidata="Q174964" start="386" end="406" title="Charles IV of France" label="Charles IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q531091" start="447" end="459" title="Saint-Sardos, Lot-et-Garonne" label="Saint-Sardos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322" start="524" end="534" title="February 7" label="February 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625533" start="537" end="561" title="Siege of Villa di Chiesa" label="Siege of Villa di Chiesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q380088" start="587" end="610" title="Alfonso IV of Aragon" label="Prince Alfonso the Kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q13661" start="631" end="646" title="Iglesias, Sardinia" label="Villa di Chiesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403866" start="754" end="784" title="Aragonese conquest of Sardinia" label="Aragonese conquest of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165154" start="810" end="829" title="Kingdom of Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364" start="834" end="845" title="February 29" label="February 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254898" start="848" end="870" title="Battle of Lucocisterna" label="Battle of Lucocisterna"/>
<link wikidata="Q283723" start="970" end="979" title="Capoterra" label="Capoterra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285264" start="1100" end="1116" title="Golfo di Cagliari" label="Gulf of Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="1120" end="1128" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445" start="1132" end="1140" title="March 23" label="March 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="1143" end="1157" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q57161" start="1173" end="1192" title="Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ludwig the Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q124950" start="1292" end="1310" title="Frederick the Fair" label="Frederick the Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603109" start="1407" end="1437" title="Absolute poverty of Christ" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s absolute poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456" start="1467" end="1475" title="March 26" label="March 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q231798" start="1478" end="1497" title="Marie of Luxembourg, Queen of France" label="Marie of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q237131" start="1508" end="1514" title="France in the Middle Ages" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461" start="1752" end="1760" title="March 31" label="March 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q712809" start="1763" end="1770" title="Hugh IV of Cyprus" label="Hugh IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q213638" start="1787" end="1801" title="King of Cyprus" label="King of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q546497" start="1832" end="1845" title="Henry II of Cyprus" label="King Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q693614" start="1902" end="1919" title="King of Jerusalem" label="King of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497" start="1951" end="1959" title="April 15" label="April 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q712809" start="1985" end="2002" title="Hugh IV of Cyprus" label="Hugh IV of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476251" start="2057" end="2082" title="Selimiye Mosque, Nicosia" label="Cathedral of Saint Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856" start="2086" end="2093" title="Nicosia" label="Nicosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524" start="2097" end="2105" title="April 20" label="April 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q646226" start="2108" end="2137" title="Bolesław III the Generous" label="Boleslaw III, Duke of Wroclaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q57161" start="2246" end="2282" title="Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ludwig the Bavarian, King of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547" start="2286" end="2291" title="May 3" label="May 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491202" start="2308" end="2332" title="Consistori del Gay Saber" label="Consistori del Gay Saber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778163" start="2407" end="2443" title="Arnaut Vidal de Castelnou d&amp;#x27;Ari" label="Arnaut Vidal de Castelnou d&amp;#x27;Ari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639" start="2550" end="2554" title="1484" label="1484"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581" start="2558" end="2564" title="May 22" label="May 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q420576" start="2620" end="2641" title="Fraticelli" label="Spiritual Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="2675" end="2689" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617" start="2729" end="2736" title="June 11" label="June 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614" start="2894" end="2901" title="June 13" label="June 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247422" start="2952" end="2990" title="Aymer de Valence, 2nd Earl of Pembroke" label="Aymer de Valence, 2nd Earl of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q734988" start="3085" end="3098" title="Saint-Riquier" label="Saint-Riquier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665" start="3171" end="3178" title="June 24" label="June 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703611" start="3237" end="3255" title="Duchy of Aquitaine" label="Duchy of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13589668" start="3383" end="3389" title="commendation ceremony" label="homage"/>
<link wikidata="Q57161" start="3513" end="3532" title="Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ludwig the Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q696640" start="3565" end="3583" title="Duchy of Pomerania" label="Duchy of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q61473" start="3629" end="3635" title="Louis V, Duke of Bavaria" label="Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q313536" start="3637" end="3660" title="Margrave of Brandenburg" label="Margrave of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956674" start="3679" end="3710" title="Brandenburg–Pomeranian conflict" label="Brandenburg–Pomeranian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696" start="3740" end="3746" title="July 5" label="July 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q231783" start="3825" end="3839" title="Joan of Évreux" label="Joan of Évreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q352940" start="3880" end="3902" title="Louis, Count of Évreux" label="Louis, Count of Évreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701" start="3906" end="3913" title="July 11" label="July 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="3916" end="3930" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q57161" start="3945" end="3964" title="Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ludwig the Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726" start="4209" end="4216" title="July 19" label="July 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q309333" start="4237" end="4247" title="Mansa Musa" label="Mansa Musa"/>
<link wikidata="Q184536" start="4302" end="4313" title="Mali Empire" label="Mali Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="4326" end="4331" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="4514" end="4519" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q293505" start="4552" end="4569" title="al-Nasir Muhammad" label="al-Nasir Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964" start="4644" end="4654" title="October 18" label="October 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723" start="4658" end="4665" title="July 26" label="July 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q324748" start="4668" end="4677" title="Basarab I of Wallachia" label="Basarab I"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="4688" end="4697" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="4737" end="4755" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="King Károly Róbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783" start="4806" end="4814" title="August 5" label="August 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q11069" start="4821" end="4835" title="Blitar Regency" label="Blitar Regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="4868" end="4872" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q2774" start="5084" end="5093" title="August 15" label="August 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q350186" start="5114" end="5133" title="Christopher II of Denmark" label="King Christopher II"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="5137" end="5144" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608258" start="5187" end="5198" title="Vordingborg" label="Vordingborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774063" start="5213" end="5239" title="Eric Christoffersen of Denmark" label="Prince Erik Christoffersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812" start="5320" end="5329" title="August 16" label="August 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888926" start="5342" end="5360" title="Pagano della Torre" label="Pagano della Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q22644" start="5410" end="5430" title="Vaprio d&amp;#x27;Agogna" label="Vaprio d&amp;#x27;Agogna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="5434" end="5442" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="5469" end="5474" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212475" start="5484" end="5499" title="Visconti of Milan" label="Visconti family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819" start="5535" end="5544" title="August 25" label="August 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q320755" start="5547" end="5564" title="War of Metz" label="War of Four Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q155167" start="5590" end="5604" title="John of Bohemia" label="John the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q152347" start="5627" end="5655" title="Baldwin of Luxembourg" label="Baldwin, Archbishop of Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q670516" start="5663" end="5671" title="Edward I, Count of Bar" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q562051" start="5688" end="5709" title="Frederick IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick the Fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q734284" start="5731" end="5737" title="Remich" label="Remich"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="5746" end="5756" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="5814" end="5818" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855" start="5838" end="5849" title="September 4" label="September 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q727402" start="5852" end="5873" title="James III of Majorca" label="James the Unfortunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q338297" start="5890" end="5905" title="List of monarchs of Majorca" label="King of Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q878340" start="6002" end="6026" title="Sancho of Majorca" label="King Sancho the Peaceful"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851" start="6030" end="6042" title="September 11" label="September 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730" start="6115" end="6124" title="Perpignan" label="Perpignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942355" start="6146" end="6165" title="Perpignan Cathedral" label="Perpignan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846" start="6260" end="6272" title="September 15" label="September 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q320755" start="6275" end="6292" title="War of Metz" label="War of Four Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="6386" end="6390" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6407" end="6422" title="History of Metz#Messin Republic" label="Messin Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="6460" end="6466" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889" start="6641" end="6653" title="September 22" label="September 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q676068" start="6660" end="6679" title="War of Saint-Sardos" label="War of Saint-Sardos"/>
<link wikidata="Q270438" start="6691" end="6715" title="Charles, Count of Valois" label="Charles, Count of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q956563" start="6740" end="6777" title="Edmund of Woodstock, 1st Earl of Kent" label="Edmund of Woodstock, 1st Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q263456" start="6781" end="6789" title="La Réole" label="La Réole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926" start="6900" end="6909" title="October 7" label="October 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q509889" start="6913" end="6918" title="Genkō (1321–24)" label="Genko"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6949" end="6964" title=":ja:正中の変" label="Shōchū Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q938069" start="7101" end="7116" title="Rokuhara Tandai" label="Rokuhara Tandai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964" start="7193" end="7203" title="October 18" label="October 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="7287" end="7292" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q309333" start="7323" end="7333" title="Mansa Musa" label="Mansa Musa"/>
<link wikidata="Q184536" start="7351" end="7362" title="Mali Empire" label="Mali Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="7402" end="7407" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995" start="7410" end="7420" title="November 3" label="November 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q109092" start="7426" end="7434" title="Kilkenny" label="Kilkenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156237" start="7447" end="7466" title="Petronilla de Meath" label="Petronilla de Meath"/>
<link wikidata="Q388039" start="7492" end="7505" title="Alice Kyteler" label="Alice Kyteler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988" start="7645" end="7656" title="November 10" label="November 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q420576" start="7787" end="7797" title="Fraticelli" label="Fraticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q170859" start="7846" end="7863" title="Pope Nicholas III" label="Pope Nicholas III"/>
<link wikidata="Q275016" start="7984" end="8003" title="Papal infallibility" label="Papal infallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025" start="8196" end="8207" title="November 22" label="November 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q956984" start="8220" end="8239" title="Marsilio da Carrara" label="Marsilio da Carrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q110516878" start="8256" end="8269" title="Lords of Padua" label="Lord of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q429760" start="8299" end="8318" title="Jacopo I da Carrara" label="Jacopo I da Carrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745" start="8323" end="8334" title="December 25" label="December 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327153" start="8341" end="8351" title="Shōchū (era)" label="Shōchū era"/>
<link wikidata="Q313942" start="8392" end="8408" title="Emperor Go-Daigo" label="Emperor Go-Daigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83100" start="8466" end="8473" title="Osman I" label="Osman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="8504" end="8509" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8536" end="8550" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="8610" end="8618" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133168" start="8660" end="8667" title="Orhan" label="Orhan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q181217" start="8695" end="8698" title="bey" label="bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q768506" start="8735" end="8740" title="Söğüt" label="Söğüt"/>
<link wikidata="Q46763" start="8744" end="8760" title="Bilecik Province" label="Bilecik Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q315357" start="8823" end="8841" title="Marsilius of Padua" label="Marsilius of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182646" start="8855" end="8869" title="Defensor pacis" label="Defensor pacis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43936" start="9031" end="9048" title="William of Ockham" label="William of Ockham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="9139" end="9146" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392" start="9179" end="9186" title="March 5" label="March 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q239486" start="9189" end="9197" title="David II of Scotland" label="David II"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="9207" end="9215" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q845196" start="9217" end="9227" title="Clan Bruce" label="Clan Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255" start="9233" end="9237" title="1371" label="1371"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784" start="9241" end="9249" title="August 4" label="August 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798541" start="9252" end="9275" title="Siraj al-Din al-Bulqini" label="Siraj al-Din al-Bulqini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6117" start="9298" end="9302" title="1403" label="1403"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388074" start="9334" end="9347" title="Bayan Khutugh" label="Bayan Khutugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q188790" start="9356" end="9365" title="Concubinage" label="concubine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190" start="9382" end="9386" title="1365" label="1365"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538361" start="9391" end="9409" title="Catherine of Savoy-Vaud" label="Catherine of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365" start="9444" end="9448" title="1388" label="1388"/>
<link wikidata="Q774888" start="9453" end="9472" title="Constance of Sicily (1324–1355)" label="Constance of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="9496" end="9502" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123" start="9507" end="9511" title="1355" label="1355"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107255" start="9516" end="9533" title="Giovanni Manfredi" label="Giovanni Manfredi"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="9543" end="9551" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261" start="9567" end="9571" title="1373" label="1373"/>
<link wikidata="Q631524" start="9576" end="9592" title="Louis, Count of Gravina" label="Louis of Durazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166" start="9628" end="9632" title="1362" label="1362"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541669" start="9637" end="9646" title="Prince Tsunenaga" label="Tsunenaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044" start="9686" end="9690" title="1338" label="1338"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122181" start="9695" end="9708" title="Vettor Pisani" label="Vettor Pisani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327" start="9744" end="9748" title="1380" label="1380"/>
<link wikidata="Q527673" start="9753" end="9787" title="William I, Marquis of Namur" label="William the Rich, Marquis of Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378" start="9819" end="9823" title="1391" label="1391"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234" start="9841" end="9850" title="January 8" label="January 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="9853" end="9863" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500" start="9899" end="9903" title="1254" label="1254"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276" start="9907" end="9917" title="January 23" label="January 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q18020354" start="9920" end="9935" title="Fulk le Strange, 1st Baron Strange of Blackmere" label="Fulk le Strange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335" start="9970" end="9981" title="February 11" label="February 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q698963" start="9984" end="9998" title="Karl von Trier" label="Karl von Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359" start="10033" end="10044" title="February 26" label="February 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q716994" start="10047" end="10060" title="Dino Compagni" label="Dino Compagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456" start="10097" end="10105" title="March 26" label="March 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q231798" start="10108" end="10127" title="Marie of Luxembourg, Queen of France" label="Marie of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q237131" start="10138" end="10144" title="France in the Middle Ages" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619" start="10149" end="10153" title="1304" label="1304"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461" start="10157" end="10165" title="March 31" label="March 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q546497" start="10168" end="10186" title="Henry II of Cyprus" label="Henry II of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="10196" end="10205" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522" start="10210" end="10214" title="1270" label="1270"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562" start="10218" end="10224" title="May 15" label="May 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q574041" start="10227" end="10248" title="Władysław of Oświęcim" label="Władysław of Oświęcim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668" start="10278" end="10285" title="June 23" label="June 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247422" start="10288" end="10304" title="Aymer de Valence, 2nd Earl of Pembroke" label="Aymer de Valence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731" start="10336" end="10343" title="July 16" label="July 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q440538" start="10346" end="10352" title="Emperor Go-Uda" label="Yohito"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="10372" end="10377" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519" start="10382" end="10386" title="1267" label="1267"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997" start="10390" end="10400" title="November 1" label="November 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265549" start="10403" end="10417" title="John de Halton" label="John de Halton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995" start="10437" end="10447" title="November 3" label="November 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156237" start="10450" end="10469" title="Petronilla de Meath" label="Petronilla de Meath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609" start="10493" end="10497" title="1300" label="1300"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987" start="10501" end="10512" title="November 11" label="November 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q99923" start="10515" end="10558" title="Henry VII, Count of Schwarzburg-Blankenburg" label="Henry VII, Count of Schwarzburg-Blankenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020" start="10589" end="10600" title="November 25" label="November 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487726" start="10603" end="10617" title="John Botetourt, 1st Baron Botetourt" label="John Botetourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705" start="10650" end="10661" title="December 24" label="December 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634157" start="10664" end="10672" title="John III, Lord of Arkel" label="John III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529" start="10704" end="10708" title="1275" label="1275"/>
<link wikidata="Q9209622" start="10741" end="10757" title="Domarat Grzymała" label="Domarat Grzymała"/>
<link wikidata="Q4148844" start="10774" end="10791" title="Grzymała coat of arms" label="House of Grzymała"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614734" start="10796" end="10810" title="Guecellone VII da Camino" label="Guecellone VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700655" start="10830" end="10848" title="Da Camino" label="House of Da Camino"/>
<link wikidata="Q434728" start="10853" end="10871" title="Helvig of Holstein" label="Helvig of Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460755" start="10890" end="10896" title="Kingdom of Sweden (800–1521)" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622649" start="10906" end="10924" title="Irene of Brunswick" label="Irene of Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5557" start="10956" end="10960" title="1293" label="1293"/>
<link wikidata="Q460955" start="10965" end="10983" title="Isabella of Ibelin, Queen of Cyprus and Jerusalem" label="Isabella of Ibelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q213638" start="10994" end="11000" title="Kingdom of Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436" start="11019" end="11023" title="1241" label="1241"/>
<link wikidata="Q429760" start="11028" end="11044" title="Jacopo I da Carrara" label="Jacopo the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694717" start="11086" end="11093" title="John II, Count of Sponheim-Starkenburg" label="John II"/>
<link wikidata="Q571419" start="11123" end="11140" title="Sponheim family" label="House of Sponheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198711" start="11145" end="11157" title="Konoe Iehira" label="Konoe Iehira"/>
<link wikidata="Q641628" start="11178" end="11191" title="Fujiwara clan" label="Fujiwara Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541" start="11197" end="11201" title="1282" label="1282"/>
<link wikidata="Q30511234" start="11206" end="11220" title="Lampert Hermán" label="Lampert Hermán"/>
<link wikidata="Q716345" start="11245" end="11256" title="judge royal" label="judge royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887237" start="11260" end="11273" title="Nijō Tamefuji" label="Nijō Tamefuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q83100" start="11323" end="11330" title="Osman I" label="Osman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q193383" start="11347" end="11361" title="Ottoman dynasty" label="House of Osman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006982" start="11366" end="11374" title="Ou Shizi" label="Ou Shizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="11384" end="11393" title="Confucianism" label="Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424" start="11417" end="11421" title="1234" label="1234"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351429" start="11426" end="11439" title="Robert Scales, 2nd Baron Scales" label="Robert Scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q878340" start="11485" end="11506" title="Sancho I of Majorca" label="Sancho I the Peaceful"/>
<link wikidata="Q836676" start="11508" end="11523" title="Kingdom of Majorca" label="King of Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527" start="11528" end="11532" title="1274" label="1274"/>
<link wikidata="Q21932475" start="11537" end="11547" title="Thawun Nge" label="Thawun Nge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568793" start="11592" end="11614" title="William Liath de Burgh" label="William Liath de Burgh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39966" wikidata="Q5774" url="?curid=39966" title="1325">
<text>Year 1325 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXXV]]) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
=== January – March ===
* January 7 – Afonso IV becomes the new King of Portugal upon the death of his father, King Denis I.
* February 1 – Sultan Ghiyath al-Din Tughluq is murdered after a 5-year reign at Kara-Manikpur. He is succeeded by his son Muhammad bin Tughluq (Juna Khan) as ruler of the Delhi Sultanate.
* March 9 – Queen Isabella of England, wife of King Edward II of England and sister of King Charles IV of France, departs from England on a mission to Paris to mediate an end to the war between the two kingdoms. She is directed to return to England by midsummer.
* March 12 – At the age of 11, Valdemar III becomes the new ruler of the Duchy of Schleswig upon the death of his father, Eric II, Duke of Schleswig.
* March 13
** The Treaty of Trausnitz is signed between the Duchy of Austria and the Kingdom of Bavaria. Austria&#x27;s ruler, Frederick the Fair, is released from Trausnitz Castle, where he has been imprisoned for two and a half years by Ludwig the Bavarian, King of Germany, since his defeat in the Battle of Mühldorf in 1322. 
** (approximate date) – Tenochtitlan, the predecessor of Mexico City, is founded by the Mexica, led by Tenoch, on an island in Lake Texcoco.
* March 31 – A truce is signed between King Edward II of England (who is also Duke of Aquitaine within France) and King Charles IV of France to end the War of Saint-Sardos. Under terms negotiated by England&#x27;s Queen Isabella (who is King Edward&#x27;s wife and King Charles&#x27;s sister), Edward cedes Agenais (part of modern-day France&#x27;s Lot-et-Garonne département) and pledges to swear homage to King Charles from then on as a condition of keeping the rest of Aquitaine. England is allowed to reclaim Ponthieu and the Duchy of Gascony if Edward will come to Paris to pay him homage. Isabella, unhappy with her marriage to Edward, remains in France indefinitely.

=== April – June ===
* April 20 – Elizabeth de Comyn, daughter of the late Guardian of Scotland, John Comyn III of Badenoch, is forced to sign away her title to her properties in England at Painswick and at Goodrich Castle to Hugh Despenser the Elder after being kidnapped in 1324 and imprisoned in England at Pirbright.
* May 5 – The Istrian Demarcation, setting out the boundaries of disputed Italian territories in the Adriatic Sea peninsula of Istria (part of the modern-day Republic of Croatia), and confirms the agreement between the independent Italian states of Aquileia, Gorizia, and the Venetian Republic. The document is published in three languages (Latin, German and Croatian). 
* May 10 – Pope John XXII issues a papal bull to King Robert of Naples and to Charles, Duke of Calabria demanding the imprisonment of the Fraticelli in Naples and their leader, Fra Enrico da Ceva. The demand, and several subsequent admonitions, is ignored by Robert and Charles.
*May 20 – Led by Michael of Cesena, the Michaelites, a French branch of the Spiritual Franciscans who have been accused of heresy within the Roman Catholic Church in a disagreement over the issue of a vow of poverty, assemble at Lyon in France and agree to make peace with the Church and to make no further disrespectful references to Pope John XXII.
* May 24 – In Germany, Henry II, Lord of Mecklenburg cedes the territories of Prignitz and the Uckermark to the Margraviate of Brandenburg in an unfavorable peace treaty signed at Daber (modern-day Dobra Nowogardzka in Poland).
* June 5 – At Stuttgart in Germany, Ulrich III becomes the new Count of Württemberg upon the death of his father, Eberhard I.
* June 14 – (2 Rajab 725 AH) Ibn Battuta, Moroccan scholar and explorer, sets off from his hometown of Tangier on a &quot;hajj&quot;, or pilgrimage, to Mecca. En route, he travels to Tlemcen, Béjaïa and Tunis, where he stays for two months. For safety, Ibn Battuta joins a caravan to reduce the risk of being robbed. Underway, he takes a bride in Sfax, but soon leaves her due to a dispute with her father. Traveling more than any other explorer before the modern era, he will travel an estimated over the next 30 years, more than twice as much as Zheng He in the 15th century and three times as far as Marco Polo in the 14th century. 
* June 22 – Ismail, Sultan of Granada, begins the siege of Martos in the Spanish Kingdom of Castile, but loses control of his troops, who pillage the city after two weeks.

=== July – September ===
* July 8 – (26 Rajab 725 AH) Sultan Ismail I is murdered in his palace, the Alhambra, after a 9-year reign. The attackers are captured and beheaded. Ismail is succeeded by his 10-year-old son Muhammad IV, who becomes the new ruler of the Emirate of Granada. Vizier Muhammad ibn al-Mahruq, serving as &quot;wakil&quot; (or regent), quarrels for control of the young sultan&#x27;s government.
* August 7 – Battle of Varey: The 16-year-old Guigues VIII, local ruler (&quot;dauphin&quot;) of Vienne, defeats the Savoyard forces at Saint-Jean-le-Vieux. During the battle, a Burgundian cavalry charge is repulsed and is forced back to the Savoyard camp. With the assistance of the Varey garrison, Guigues pillages the camp and takes John I, Count of Auxerre, prisoner.
* August 11 – At Valladolid, Alfonso XI reaches the age of 14 and is proclaimed by the Cortes to have full power as the King of Castile. 
* September 12 – Edward II is persuaded not to go to France by Hugh Despenser the Elder, his chief adviser. He decides to send his 12-year-old son, Prince Edward of Windsor, to go to Paris and to pay homage instead. Before the young Edward departs, he is bestowed with the title of Count of Ponthieu. Charles IV gives his consent for him to receive the English Aquitaine.
* September 21 – Isabella of France conspires with the exiled Roger Mortimer to have Edward II deposed. To build up diplomatic and military support, Isabella has Edward of Windsor engaged to the 12-year-old Philippa of Hainault. She is the daughter of Count William the Good of Hainaut, who is married to Joan of Valois, granddaughter of the late King Philip III of France.
* September 24 – Edward, Prince of Wales pays homage to King Charles IV of France on behalf of his father, King Edward II of England.

=== October – December ===
* October 10 – King Edward II calls for representatives of the three estates (including the knights representative) to meet at Westminster for a session of the English Parliament, beginning on November 18 to discuss the matter of the failure of his wife, Queen Isabella, to return from France. 
* October 18 – King Edward II sends a letter to Pope John XXII (who is in Avignon in France), expressing deep concern for Queen Isabella&#x27;s failure to return home from Paris.
* November 15 – War of the Bucket: At the Battle of Zappolino in northern Italy, the 7,000-man Ghibelline forces backed by the Holy Roman Empire defeat the much stronger (32,000-men) Guelph army under sent by Pope John XXII near Bologna. After the battle, Ghibelline influence in the region is consolidated.
*November 21 – Yuri III Danilovich, Grand Duke of Moscow, is assassinated by Dmitry of Tver, Grand Duke of Vladimir, nicknamed &quot;the Terrible Eyes&quot;. Yuri&#x27;s younger brother, Iván I Danilovich Kalitá, the Grand Duke of Vladimir, inherits Yuri&#x27;s throne and relocates the spiritual capital of the Russian people to Moscow by directing the Metropolitan Peter to move his episcopal see from Kiev. The decision of both Ivan and Peter to relocate gradually makes Moscow the political center of Russia.
*December 1 – King Edward II of England makes one final attempt to save his marriage to Queen Isabella, and sends her a letter ordering her to return from France to England immediately, writing that &quot;Oftentimes have we informed you, both before an after the homage, of our great desire to have you with us, and of our grief of heart at your long absence,&quot; and adds that he is aware of her affair with Roger Mortimer and that &quot;ceasing from all pretenses, delays and excuses, you come to us with all the haste you can.&quot; She declines to come back.
*December 16 – Charles, Count of Valois, uncle of King Charles IV of France and heir apparent to the throne, dies at the age of 55 at Nogent-le-Roi, leaving his son Philip as heir to the throne.

== Births ==
* May 12 – Rupert II, German nobleman and count palatine (d. 1398)
* September 29 – Francesco I da Carrara, Italian nobleman (d. 1393)
* &quot;date unknown&quot; 
** Abraham Cresques, Majorcan Jewish cartographer (d. 1387)
** Antonio Pavoni, Italian priest and inquisitor-general (d. 1374)
** Barnim IV of Pomerania, Polish nobleman and ruler (d. 1365)
** Ch&#x27;oe Mu-sŏn, Korean scientist and military leader (d. 1395)
** Egidiola Gonzaga, Italian noblewoman and heiress (d. 1377)
** Eleanor of Sicily, Sicilian noblewoman and queen (d. 1375)
** Gerhard VI, German nobleman (House of Jülich) (d. 1360)
** Gidō Shūshin, Japanese monk and spiritual teacher (d. 1388)
** Henry of Langenstein, German theologian and writer (d. 1397)
** Inês de Castro, Galician noblewoman and mistress (d. 1355)
** Johanna I, Italian queen-regnant (House of Anjou) (d. 1382)
** Margaret the Barefooted, Italian woman and saint (d. 1395)
** Pandolfo II Malatesta, Italian nobleman and knight (d. 1373) 
** Robert Hales, English Lord Treasurer and admiral (d. 1381)
** Stephen of Montfaucon, French nobleman and knight (d. 1397)
** Yongsan, Korean nobleman, prince and heir apparent (d. 1341)
** Zain al-Din al-&#x27;Iraqi, Persian scholar, jurist and writer (d. 1403)

== Deaths ==
* January 7 – Denis I, King of Portugal (b. 1261)
* January 20 – John Hastings, English nobleman and ruler (b. 1287)
* March 12 – Eric II, German nobleman (House of Estridsen) (b. 1290)
* March 17 – Gérard de Vuippens, Italian cleric, diplomat and bishop
* March 20 – William Ferrers, English nobleman and knight (b. 1272)
* April 3 – Nizamuddin Auliya, Indian scholar (b. 1238)
* April 5 – Ralph de Monthermer, English nobleman and peerage
* June 5 – Eberhard the Illustrious, Count of Württemberg, German nobleman (b. 1265)
* June 23 – Chungseon of Goryeo (Wang Jang), Korean prince (b. 1275)
* July 6 – John Salmon, English cleric, Lord Chancellor and bishop
* July 8 – Ismail I, Nasrid ruler of the Emirate of Granada (b. 1279)
* September 1 – John Segrave, English nobleman and seneschal
* September 29 – Keizan Jōkin, Japanese Zen Master (b. 1268)
* November 7 – Ichijō Uchitsune, Japanese court noble (b. 1291)
* November 21 – Yuri III Danilovich, Russian Grand Prince (b. 1281)
* December 16 – Charles of Valois, French nobleman (b. 1270)
* December 28 – Al-Allama al-Hilli, Persian theologian (b. 1250)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Alice de Toeni, English noblewoman and heiress (b. 1284)
** Amir Khusrau, Indian musician, poet and scholar (b. 1253)
** Baybars al-Mansuri, Mamluk historian and writer (b. 1245)
** Ghiyath al-Din Tughluq, Indian ruler of the Delhi Sultanate
** Hugh de Audley, English nobleman and knight (b. 1276)
** Princess Joguk (Borjigin Jintong), Korean princess of Goryeo (b. 1308)
** Nasir al-Din Shahriyar, Baduspanid nobleman and ruler
** Nikodim I, Serbian monk-scribe, bishop and archbishop
** Pierre Le Tessier, French monk, abbot and cardinal-priest
** Regnaud de La Porte, French cardinal-priest and bishop
** Richard Willoughby, English landowner, lawyer and judge
** Robert de Umfavile, English nobleman and knight (b. 1277)
** Stefan Vladislav II, Serbian nobleman and claimant (b. 1280)
** Thomas de Dundee, Scottish chaplain, prelate and bishop
** Vitslav III, Danish nobleman and prince (House of Wizlaw)
** William de Meones, English cleric, judge and Chief Baron

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5774" start="5" end="9" title="1325" label="1325"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774" start="11" end="37" title="1325" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXXV]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235684" start="45" end="76" title="common year starting on Tuesday" label="common year starting on Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="84" end="99" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228" start="141" end="150" title="January 7" label="January 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q272903" start="153" end="162" title="Afonso IV of Portugal" label="Afonso IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q183426" start="179" end="195" title="King of Portugal" label="King of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q212890" start="226" end="238" title="Denis of Portugal" label="King Denis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312" start="242" end="252" title="February 1" label="February 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391172" start="262" end="284" title="Ghiyath al-Din Tughluq" label="Ghiyath al-Din Tughluq"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367466" start="321" end="334" title="Kara-Manikpur" label="Kara-Manikpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q381830" start="363" end="383" title="Muhammad bin Tughluq" label="Muhammad bin Tughluq"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="412" end="427" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401" start="431" end="438" title="March 9" label="March 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q228642" start="441" end="466" title="Isabella of France" label="Queen Isabella of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402" start="694" end="702" title="March 12" label="March 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q381082" start="723" end="735" title="Valdemar III of Denmark" label="Valdemar III"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="765" end="783" title="Duchy of Schleswig" label="Duchy of Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q476001" start="814" end="840" title="Eric II, Duke of Schleswig" label="Eric II, Duke of Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400" start="844" end="852" title="March 13" label="March 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793997" start="860" end="879" title="Treaty of Trausnitz" label="Treaty of Trausnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q124950" start="969" end="987" title="Frederick the Fair" label="Frederick the Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q57161" start="1081" end="1100" title="Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ludwig the Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q688081" start="1143" end="1161" title="Battle of Mühldorf" label="Battle of Mühldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q13695" start="1196" end="1208" title="Tenochtitlan" label="Tenochtitlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="1229" end="1240" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307681" start="1260" end="1266" title="Mexica" label="Mexica"/>
<link wikidata="Q603756" start="1275" end="1281" title="Tenoch" label="Tenoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q13700" start="1299" end="1311" title="Lake Texcoco" label="Lake Texcoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461" start="1315" end="1323" title="March 31" label="March 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="1357" end="1377" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q429599" start="1391" end="1408" title="Duke of Aquitaine" label="Duke of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174964" start="1433" end="1453" title="Charles IV of France" label="Charles IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q676068" start="1465" end="1484" title="War of Saint-Sardos" label="War of Saint-Sardos"/>
<link wikidata="Q228642" start="1512" end="1541" title="Isabella of France" label="England&amp;#x27;s Queen Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q392459" start="1620" end="1627" title="Agenais" label="Agenais"/>
<link wikidata="Q12578" start="1662" end="1676" title="Lot-et-Garonne" label="Lot-et-Garonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="1677" end="1688" title="Departments of France" label="département"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187484" start="1711" end="1717" title="Homage (feudal)" label="homage"/>
<link wikidata="Q60930" start="1826" end="1834" title="Ponthieu" label="Ponthieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295939" start="1843" end="1859" title="Duchy of Gascony" label="Duchy of Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1883" end="1888" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524" start="2011" end="2019" title="April 20" label="April 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363796" start="2022" end="2040" title="Elizabeth de Comyn" label="Elizabeth de Comyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351307" start="2085" end="2111" title="John Comyn III of Badenoch" label="John Comyn III of Badenoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q998491" start="2298" end="2307" title="Pirbright" label="Pirbright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550" start="2311" end="2316" title="May 5" label="May 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q16115389" start="2323" end="2342" title="Istrian Demarcation" label="Istrian Demarcation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="2410" end="2422" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="2436" end="2442" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="2467" end="2486" title="Republic of Croatia" label="Republic of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836894" start="2558" end="2566" title="Patriarchate of Aquileia" label="Aquileia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991244" start="2568" end="2575" title="County of Gorizia" label="Gorizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="2585" end="2602" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2650" end="2655" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="2657" end="2663" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="2668" end="2676" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557" start="2682" end="2688" title="May 10" label="May 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="2691" end="2705" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="2715" end="2725" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q290720" start="2729" end="2750" title="Robert of Naples" label="King Robert of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q201737" start="2758" end="2783" title="Charles, Duke of Calabria" label="Charles, Duke of Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2818" end="2838" title="Fraticelli#Naples" label="Fraticelli in Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579" start="2960" end="2966" title="May 20" label="May 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352704" start="2976" end="2993" title="Michael of Cesena" label="Michael of Cesena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2999" end="3010" title="Fraticelli#The Michaelites" label="Michaelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q420576" start="3035" end="3056" title="Spiritual Franciscans" label="Spiritual Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="3188" end="3192" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="3294" end="3308" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584" start="3312" end="3318" title="May 24" label="May 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q71254" start="3333" end="3362" title="Henry II, Lord of Mecklenburg" label="Henry II, Lord of Mecklenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132" start="3388" end="3396" title="Prignitz" label="Prignitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q338635" start="3405" end="3414" title="Uckermark" label="Uckermark"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="3422" end="3448" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Margraviate of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q558579" start="3490" end="3495" title="Dobra, Łobez County" label="Daber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622" start="3540" end="3546" title="June 5" label="June 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="3552" end="3561" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q247795" start="3574" end="3584" title="Ulrich III, Count of Württemberg" label="Ulrich III"/>
<link wikidata="Q632782" start="3601" end="3621" title="List of monarchs of Württemberg" label="Count of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q650606" start="3652" end="3662" title="Eberhard I, Count of Württemberg" label="Eberhard I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612" start="3666" end="3673" title="June 14" label="June 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="3693" end="3704" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Battuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="3767" end="3774" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="3786" end="3790" title="hajj" label="hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="3801" end="3811" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="3816" end="3821" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q185134" start="3847" end="3854" title="Tlemcen" label="Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q59975" start="3856" end="3862" title="Béjaïa" label="Béjaïa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="3867" end="3872" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q203494" start="3937" end="3944" title="Caravan (travellers)" label="caravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46325" start="4011" end="4015" title="Sfax" label="Sfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="4212" end="4220" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="4267" end="4277" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663" start="4302" end="4309" title="June 22" label="June 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q563129" start="4312" end="4337" title="Ismail I of Granada" label="Ismail, Sultan of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q695425" start="4359" end="4365" title="Martos" label="Martos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2692" start="4500" end="4506" title="July 8" label="July 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q563129" start="4534" end="4542" title="Ismail I of Granada" label="Ismail I"/>
<link wikidata="Q47476" start="4574" end="4582" title="Alhambra" label="Alhambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346472" start="4690" end="4701" title="Muhammad IV of Granada" label="Muhammad IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="4736" end="4754" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Emirate of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q99441990" start="4763" end="4785" title="Muhammad ibn al-Mahruq" label="Muhammad ibn al-Mahruq"/>
<link wikidata="Q16328720" start="4804" end="4809" title="wakil" label="wakil"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="4820" end="4826" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781" start="4891" end="4899" title="August 7" label="August 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890289" start="4902" end="4917" title="Battle of Varey" label="Battle of Varey"/>
<link wikidata="Q714255" start="4935" end="4947" title="Guigues VIII of Viennois" label="Guigues VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q151999" start="4962" end="4981" title="Dauphiné" label="&amp;quot;dauphin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q26849" start="4986" end="4992" title="Vienne, Isère" label="Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q454581" start="5025" end="5044" title="Saint-Jean-le-Vieux, Ain" label="Saint-Jean-le-Vieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391177" start="5225" end="5249" title="John I, Count of Auxerre" label="John I, Count of Auxerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778" start="5263" end="5272" title="August 11" label="August 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q8356" start="5278" end="5288" title="Valladolid" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q298808" start="5290" end="5300" title="Alfonso XI of Castile" label="Alfonso XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q326470" start="5381" end="5396" title="King of Castile" label="King of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849" start="5401" end="5413" title="September 12" label="September 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685455" start="5462" end="5486" title="Hugh Despenser the Elder" label="Hugh Despenser the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="5554" end="5571" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748460" start="5681" end="5698" title="Count of Ponthieu" label="Count of Ponthieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703611" start="5760" end="5769" title="Duchy of Aquitaine" label="Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891" start="5773" end="5785" title="September 21" label="September 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q229279" start="5978" end="5998" title="Philippa of Hainault" label="Philippa of Hainault"/>
<link wikidata="Q617496" start="6029" end="6045" title="William I, Count of Hainaut" label="William the Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q916305" start="6076" end="6090" title="Joan of Valois, Countess of Hainaut" label="Joan of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q172203" start="6123" end="6143" title="Philip III of France" label="Philip III of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890" start="6147" end="6159" title="September 24" label="September 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="6162" end="6185" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921" start="6309" end="6319" title="October 10" label="October 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="6467" end="6485" title="English Parliament" label="English Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964" start="6604" end="6614" title="October 18" label="October 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="6676" end="6683" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982" start="6783" end="6794" title="November 15" label="November 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968673" start="6797" end="6814" title="War of the Bucket" label="War of the Bucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q402237" start="6823" end="6842" title="Battle of Zappolino" label="Battle of Zappolino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="7010" end="7017" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023" start="7090" end="7101" title="November 21" label="November 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q297295" start="7104" end="7123" title="Yury of Moscow" label="Yuri III Danilovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q170770" start="7125" end="7145" title="Grand Duchy of Moscow" label="Grand Duke of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q982255" start="7166" end="7180" title="Dmitry of Tver" label="Dmitry of Tver"/>
<link wikidata="Q185316" start="7276" end="7300" title="Ivan I of Moscow" label="Iván I Danilovich Kalitá"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434316" start="7306" end="7328" title="Grand Duke of Vladimir" label="Grand Duke of Vladimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652445" start="7443" end="7461" title="Saint Peter of Moscow" label="Metropolitan Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297" start="7603" end="7613" title="December 1" label="December 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410" start="8168" end="8179" title="December 16" label="December 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q270438" start="8182" end="8206" title="Charles, Count of Valois" label="Charles, Count of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q174964" start="8217" end="8232" title="Charles IV of France" label="King Charles IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q501821" start="8301" end="8314" title="Nogent-le-Roi" label="Nogent-le-Roi"/>
<link wikidata="Q170586" start="8332" end="8338" title="Philip VI of France" label="Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559" start="8378" end="8384" title="May 12" label="May 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q62566" start="8387" end="8396" title="Rupert II, Elector Palatine" label="Rupert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="8405" end="8413" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416" start="8437" end="8441" title="1398" label="1398"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882" start="8445" end="8457" title="September 29" label="September 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081129" start="8460" end="8482" title="Francesco I da Carrara" label="Francesco I da Carrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390" start="8505" end="8509" title="1393" label="1393"/>
<link wikidata="Q329893" start="8542" end="8558" title="Abraham Cresques" label="Abraham Cresques"/>
<link wikidata="Q6359" start="8593" end="8597" title="1387" label="1387"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620020" start="8602" end="8616" title="Antonio Pavoni" label="Antonio Pavoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269" start="8660" end="8664" title="1374" label="1374"/>
<link wikidata="Q320929" start="8669" end="8691" title="Barnim IV, Duke of Pomerania" label="Barnim IV of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190" start="8723" end="8727" title="1365" label="1365"/>
<link wikidata="Q497083" start="8732" end="8749" title="Ch&amp;#x27;oe Mu-sŏn" label="Ch&amp;#x27;oe Mu-sŏn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6400" start="8792" end="8796" title="1395" label="1395"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764153" start="8801" end="8817" title="Egidiola Gonzaga" label="Egidiola Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289" start="8854" end="8858" title="1377" label="1377"/>
<link wikidata="Q241635" start="8863" end="8880" title="Eleanor of Sicily" label="Eleanor of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277" start="8916" end="8920" title="1375" label="1375"/>
<link wikidata="Q343243" start="8925" end="8935" title="Gerhard VI of Jülich, Count of Berg and Ravensberg" label="Gerhard VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4534363" start="8954" end="8969" title="House of Jülich" label="House of Jülich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150" start="8975" end="8979" title="1360" label="1360"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335613" start="8984" end="8996" title="Gidō Shūshin" label="Gidō Shūshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365" start="9038" end="9042" title="1388" label="1388"/>
<link wikidata="Q71997" start="9047" end="9067" title="Henry of Langenstein" label="Henry of Langenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410" start="9102" end="9106" title="1397" label="1397"/>
<link wikidata="Q234022" start="9111" end="9125" title="Inês de Castro" label="Inês de Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123" start="9164" end="9168" title="1355" label="1355"/>
<link wikidata="Q235381" start="9173" end="9182" title="Joanna I of Naples" label="Johanna I"/>
<link wikidata="Q939200" start="9207" end="9221" title="Capetian House of Anjou" label="House of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335" start="9227" end="9231" title="1382" label="1382"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760078" start="9236" end="9259" title="Margaret the Barefooted" label="Margaret the Barefooted"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893159" start="9298" end="9319" title="Pandolfo II Malatesta" label="Pandolfo II Malatesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261" start="9353" end="9357" title="1373" label="1373"/>
<link wikidata="Q328065" start="9363" end="9375" title="Robert Hales (knight)" label="Robert Hales"/>
<link wikidata="Q944583" start="9385" end="9399" title="Lord High Treasurer" label="Lord Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331" start="9416" end="9420" title="1381" label="1381"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864346" start="9425" end="9446" title="Stephen of Montfaucon" label="Stephen of Montfaucon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12608702" start="9488" end="9495" title="Prince Yongsan" label="Yongsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6062" start="9543" end="9547" title="1341" label="1341"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664581" start="9552" end="9578" title="Zain al-Din al-&amp;#x27;Iraqi" label="Zain al-Din al-&amp;#x27;Iraqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6117" start="9619" end="9623" title="1403" label="1403"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228" start="9641" end="9650" title="January 7" label="January 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q212890" start="9653" end="9660" title="Denis of Portugal" label="Denis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="9662" end="9678" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="King of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509" start="9683" end="9687" title="1261" label="1261"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267" start="9691" end="9701" title="January 20" label="January 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q16841566" start="9704" end="9717" title="John Hastings, 2nd Baron Hastings" label="John Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549" start="9750" end="9754" title="1287" label="1287"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402" start="9758" end="9766" title="March 12" label="March 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q476001" start="9769" end="9776" title="Eric II, Duke of Schleswig" label="Eric II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518738" start="9795" end="9813" title="House of Estridsen" label="House of Estridsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552" start="9819" end="9823" title="1290" label="1290"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419" start="9827" end="9835" title="March 17" label="March 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512879" start="9838" end="9856" title="Gérard de Vuippens" label="Gérard de Vuippens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427" start="9896" end="9904" title="March 20" label="March 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q19325837" start="9907" end="9922" title="William Ferrers, 1st Baron Ferrers of Groby" label="William Ferrers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524" start="9956" end="9960" title="1272" label="1272"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509" start="9964" end="9971" title="April 3" label="April 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427934" start="9974" end="9991" title="Nizamuddin Auliya" label="Nizamuddin Auliya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433" start="10012" end="10016" title="1238" label="1238"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507" start="10020" end="10027" title="April 5" label="April 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5992313" start="10030" end="10049" title="Ralph de Monthermer, 1st Baron Monthermer" label="Ralph de Monthermer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622" start="10082" end="10088" title="June 5" label="June 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q650606" start="10091" end="10115" title="Eberhard I, Count of Württemberg" label="Eberhard the Illustrious"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516" start="10159" end="10163" title="1265" label="1265"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668" start="10167" end="10174" title="June 23" label="June 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q494012" start="10177" end="10196" title="Chungseon of Goryeo" label="Chungseon of Goryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529" start="10228" end="10232" title="1275" label="1275"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695" start="10236" end="10242" title="July 6" label="July 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256526" start="10245" end="10256" title="John Salmon (bishop)" label="John Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="10274" end="10289" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2692" start="10303" end="10309" title="July 8" label="July 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q563129" start="10312" end="10320" title="Ismail I of Granada" label="Ismail I"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="10342" end="10360" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Emirate of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534" start="10365" end="10369" title="1279" label="1279"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859" start="10373" end="10384" title="September 1" label="September 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528055" start="10387" end="10399" title="John Segrave, 2nd Baron Segrave" label="John Segrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882" start="10434" end="10446" title="September 29" label="September 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615313" start="10449" end="10461" title="Keizan" label="Keizan Jōkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998748" start="10472" end="10482" title="Zen master" label="Zen Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520" start="10487" end="10491" title="1268" label="1268"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989" start="10495" end="10505" title="November 7" label="November 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147663" start="10508" end="10524" title="Ichijō Uchitsune" label="Ichijō Uchitsune"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554" start="10551" end="10555" title="1291" label="1291"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023" start="10559" end="10570" title="November 21" label="November 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q297295" start="10573" end="10592" title="Yury of Moscow" label="Yuri III Danilovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537" start="10619" end="10623" title="1281" label="1281"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410" start="10627" end="10638" title="December 16" label="December 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q270438" start="10641" end="10658" title="Charles, Count of Valois" label="Charles of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522" start="10680" end="10684" title="1270" label="1270"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832" start="10688" end="10699" title="December 28" label="December 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q290506" start="10702" end="10720" title="Al-Allama al-Hilli" label="Al-Allama al-Hilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487" start="10745" end="10749" title="1250" label="1250"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611715" start="10781" end="10795" title="Alice de Toeni, Countess of Warwick" label="Alice de Toeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544" start="10832" end="10836" title="1284" label="1284"/>
<link wikidata="Q207817" start="10841" end="10853" title="Amir Khusrau" label="Amir Khusrau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498" start="10893" end="10897" title="1253" label="1253"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637065" start="10902" end="10920" title="Baybars al-Mansuri" label="Baybars al-Mansuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440" start="10954" end="10958" title="1245" label="1245"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391172" start="10963" end="10985" title="Ghiyath al-Din Tughluq" label="Ghiyath al-Din Tughluq"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="11007" end="11022" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23890898" start="11026" end="11040" title="Hugh de Audley, 1st Baron Audley of Stratton Audley" label="Hugh de Audley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530" start="11074" end="11078" title="1276" label="1276"/>
<link wikidata="Q6677812" start="11083" end="11097" title="Princess Joguk" label="Princess Joguk"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208" start="11137" end="11143" title="Goryeo" label="Goryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5723" start="11148" end="11152" title="1308" label="1308"/>
<link wikidata="Q104540789" start="11157" end="11179" title="Nasir al-Din Shahriyar" label="Nasir al-Din Shahriyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16913762" start="11214" end="11223" title="Nikodim I" label="Nikodim I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772147" start="11271" end="11288" title="Pierre Le Tessier" label="Pierre Le Tessier"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="11303" end="11308" title="abbot" label="abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772051" start="11332" end="11351" title="Regnaud de La Porte" label="Regnaud de La Porte"/>
<link wikidata="Q109927516" start="11390" end="11408" title="Richard Willoughby (judge)" label="Richard Willoughby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351440" start="11449" end="11467" title="Robert de Umfraville, Earl of Angus" label="Robert de Umfavile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531" start="11501" end="11505" title="1277" label="1277"/>
<link wikidata="Q661663" start="11510" end="11529" title="Stefan Vladislav II" label="Stefan Vladislav II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536" start="11565" end="11569" title="1280" label="1280"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795472" start="11574" end="11590" title="Thomas de Dundee" label="Thomas de Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q454842" start="11633" end="11644" title="Vitslav III, Prince of Rügen" label="Vitslav III"/>
<link wikidata="Q571428" start="11674" end="11689" title="Principality of Rügen" label="House of Wizlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020808" start="11694" end="11711" title="William de Meones" label="William de Meones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566863" start="11739" end="11750" title="Chief Baron of the Irish Exchequer" label="Chief Baron"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39967" wikidata="Q5792" url="?curid=39967" title="1327">
<text>Year 1327 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXXVII]]) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
=== January – March ===
* January 13 – In Spain, Marinid Prince Uthman ibn Abi al-Ula, who started an uprising the year before against the Emirate of Granada and its ruler Muhammad IV, arrives at Almería and proceeds to enlist Abu Abdallah Muhammad ibn Abi Sa&#x27;id, Muhammad IV&#x27;s uncle, to be installed as the new Emir, with the name al-Qa&#x27;im bi-amr Allah. 
* January 20 – Imprisoned at Warwickshire, King Edward II of England is forced to abdicate by his estranged wife, Queen Isabella, and her lover, Roger Mortimer.
* January 25 – The 14-year-old Crown Prince, Edward, is proclaimed King of England in London, with his mother Isabella serving as his regent.
* February 1 – The coronation of King Edward III as ruler of England takes place at Westminster Abbey with the approval of the English Parliament. Walter Reynolds, Archbishop of Canterbury, places the crown upon the new King. 
* February 5 – (1st waning of Kason 684 ME, Burmese calendar) In Burma (now Myanmar), Tarabya I becomes the new King of Sagaing, located in northern Myanmar on the Irrawaddy River with a capital in the city of Sagaing. Tarabya succeeds his brother, upon the death of his brother, King Saw Yun, despite the fact that Saw Yun has an heir, Prince Kyaswa.
* February 8 – At Opava (now in the Czech Republic), the Polish Silesian noble Casimir I, Duke of Cieszyn swears homage to the King of Bohemia, John the Blind. In return, Casimir is granted Auschwitz as a fiefdom on February 23.
* February 13
**King Charles I of Hungary and King John of Bohemia sign an alliance agreement at Nagyszombat in Bohemia (now Trnava in the Republic of Slovakia), to proceed against the Austrian Habsburgs who occupy Pressburg (now Bratislava, capital of Slovakia).
**In Bavaria, a large fire breaks out in Munich and is not brought under control for two days. One-third of the buildings in the city are destroyed. 
* February 19 – Other Silesian nobles follow the example of Casimir of Cieszyn at Opava and swear homage to King John of Bohemia, including the Piast nobles Leszek of Racibórz, Siemowit of Bytom and George of Bytom. 
* March 31 – King Charles IV of France makes a peace treaty with England, he returns Aquitaine and Gascony to English rule. Charles receives 50,000 livres and has seized all the English possessions in France. The territories of Limousin, Quercy and Périgord county come under French control.

=== April – June ===
* April 4 – In the civil war in Granada, Prince Uthman ibn Abi al-Ula captures the fortress of Laujar de Andarax (now in the Almeria province of Spain).
* April 5 – Edward II is moved to Berkeley Castle in Gloucestershire. He is kept under the custody of Roger Mortimer&#x27;s son-in-law, Thomas Berkeley and John Maltravers – who are given £5.00 a day to look after Edward and despite records showing luxury goods being bought for him. Edward is possibly mistreated by his captives.
* April 6 (Good Friday) – Francesco Petrarca, Italian scholar and poet, sees a woman he names Laura (possibly Laura de Noves) in the church of Sainte-Claire d&#x27;Avignon, which awakes in him a lasting passion. He writes a series of sonnets and other poems in Italian dedicated to her, which are collected into &quot;Il Canzoniere&quot;, an influential model for Renaissance culture.
* May 31 – In Milan, Ludwig the Bavarian, King of the Romans, becomes the first King of Italy since 1313, when Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor had died. Ludwig is enthroned as King Ludovico IV, the third king with that name (Louis the Blind had ruled as Ludovico III from 900 to 905). 
* June 21 – Queen Ingeborg of Norway marries the Danish nobleman Canute Porse the Elder, but is deposed from political power in Norway.

=== July – September ===
* July 4 – During a banquet given by Galeazzo I Visconti in Milan, an attempt is apparently made to poison the guest of honor, Ludwig the Bavarian, newly crowned as King of Italy. Galeazzo&#x27;s brother, Stefano Visconti, becomes ill after tasting food and drink intended for Ludwig and dies suddenly at home. Stefano&#x27;s brothers Galeazzo, Giovanni, and Luchino, along with his nephew Azzone Visconti, are all imprisoned on orders of the Holy Roman Emperor based on accusations of a fourth brother, Marco Visconti. 
* August 25 – Demasq Kaja, Viceroy of Azerbaijan and of Iraq in the Ilkhanate, the Mongol Empire&#x27;s area of control in the Middle East, is killed in Soltaniyeh after trying to escape arrest on orders of the Ilkhan, Abu Sa&#x27;id Bahadur Khan. Abu Sa&#x27;id had concluded that Demasq&#x27;s father, Amir Chūpān, was attempting to take over the Ilkhanate. 
* September 21 – Less than a year after his arrest, the former King of England, Edward II, is brutally murdered in Berkeley Castle in Gloucestershire.

=== October – December ===
* October 23 – Pope John XXII condemns Marsilius of Padua&#x27;s 1324 treatise &quot;Defensor pacis&quot; (&quot;The Defender of Peace&quot;). The excommunicated Marsilius flees to Germany and seeks protection at the court of King Louis the Bavarian. John also excommunicates Louis and demands that he relinquishes his claim to the imperial crown. 
* October 27 – Elizabeth de Burgh, Queen consort of Scotland as the wife of King Robert the Bruce, is fatally injured when she falls from her horse while traveling with her entourage to Cullen Castle in Banffshire. 
* November 5 – At Barcelona, Prince Alfonso the Kind becomes the new King of Aragon upon the death of his father, King Jaime II, and is enthroned as King Alfonso IV.
* December 11 – Simon Mepeham is elected as England&#x27;s new Archbishop of Canterbury as the candidate of the Earl of Lancaster leader of the regency council. Mepeham defeats the candidate supported by Queen Isabella and Roger Mortimer, and soon works with King Edward III to end Mortimer&#x27;s power in England.
* December 18 – Pope John XXII appoints 10 new Roman Catholic cardinals, the most during his papacy, including Jacques Fournier, who will succeed Pope John as Pope Benedict XII in 1334.
* December 20 – The late King Edward II of England is buried in the Gloucester Cathedral in Gloucestershire, three months after his death.
* December 22 – Ala ud-Din Timurtash, the Viceroy for Anatolia within the Ilkhanate of the Middle East, and the brother of Demasq Kaja, learns that the Ilkhan Abu Sa&#x27;id had arranged for the execution of Demasq. Fearing for his own safety, Timurtash decides to leave and eventually flees to Egypt, but will be executed there on August 12, 1328.

=== By topic ===
==== Literature ====
* Richard of Wallingford, English cleric and abbot, describes the construction of an astronomical clock in his &quot;Tractatus Horologii Astronomici&quot;.

==== Trade and Transport ====
* In China, the Grand Canal, which runs from Beijing to Hangzhou over a distance of 1,800 km, is completed.

== Births ==
* June – Malatesta Ungaro, Italian condottiero (d. 1372)
* October 30 – Andrew, Duke of Calabria (d. 1345)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Charles de La Cerda, Franco-Spanish soldier (d. 1354)
** Elizabeth le Despenser, Baroness Berkeley, English noble (d. 1389)
** Demetrius I Starshy, Prince of Trubczewsk (d. 1399)
** Birger Gregersson, Archbishop of Uppsala (d. 1383)
** Baldus de Ubaldis, Italian jurist (d. 1400)
* &quot;probable&quot; – William Douglas, 1st Earl of Douglas, Scottish nobleman (d. 1384)

== Deaths ==
* January 16 – Nikephoros Choumnos, Byzantine scholar and statesman (b. 1250 or 1255)
* January 29 – Adolf, Count Palatine of the Rhine (b. 1300)
* March 15 – Albert of Schwarzburg, German grand preceptor of the Knights Hospitaller
* April 9 – Walter Stewart, 6th High Steward of Scotland (b. 1293)
* May 28 – Robert Baldock, Lord Privy Seal and Lord Chancellor of England
* May 29 – Jens Grand, Danish archbishop (b. c. 1260)
* July 4 – Stefano Visconti, Milanese nobleman
* August 25 – Demasq Kaja, Ilkhanate member of the Chobanid Family
* September 1 – Foulques de Villaret, French Grand Master of the Knights Hospitaller
* September 21 – Edward Caernarfon, former King of England (b. 1284)
* September 26 – Cecco d&#x27;Ascoli, Italian encyclopaedist, physician and poet (b. 1257)
* October 20 – Teresa d&#x27;Entença, Countess of Urgell (b. 1300)
* October 27 – Elizabeth de Burgh, queen of Robert the Bruce
* November – Chupan, Chobanid prince of the Ilkhanate
* November 2 or November 5 – King James II of Aragon (b. 1267)
* December 19 – Agnes of France, Duchess of Burgundy
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Thomas Cobham, Bishop of Worcester
** Constantine I of Imereti
** David of Hrodna, Lithuanian military leader
** Vital du Four, French theologian (b. 1260)
** Walter Reynolds, Archbishop of Canterbury
** Sir Richard de Exeter, Anglo-Irish knight
* &quot;probable&quot; – Bartholomew of Lucca, Italian historian

==In fiction==
* The action of Umberto Eco&#x27;s novel &quot;The Name of the Rose&quot; (&quot;Il Nome della Rosa&quot;, 1980) takes place during this year.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5792" start="5" end="9" title="1327" label="1327"/>
<link wikidata="Q5792" start="11" end="39" title="1327" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXXVII]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235690" start="47" end="79" title="common year starting on Thursday" label="common year starting on Thursday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="87" end="102" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255" start="144" end="154" title="January 13" label="January 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q67440005" start="182" end="203" title="Uthman ibn Abi al-Ula" label="Uthman ibn Abi al-Ula"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="257" end="275" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Emirate of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346472" start="290" end="301" title="Muhammad IV of Granada" label="Muhammad IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q10400" start="314" end="321" title="Almería" label="Almería"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267" start="491" end="501" title="January 20" label="January 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="532" end="546" title="Edward II of England" label="King Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q228642" start="603" end="617" title="Isabella of France" label="Queen Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q312990" start="634" end="648" title="Roger Mortimer, 1st Earl of March" label="Roger Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279" start="652" end="662" title="January 25" label="January 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="681" end="701" title="Edward III of England" label="Crown Prince, Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="736" end="742" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="784" end="790" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312" start="794" end="804" title="February 1" label="February 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="825" end="840" title="Edward III of England" label="King Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="876" end="893" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565877" start="939" end="954" title="Walter Reynolds" label="Walter Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="956" end="980" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319" start="1021" end="1031" title="February 5" label="February 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239498" start="1063" end="1079" title="Burmese calendar" label="Burmese calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515573" start="1105" end="1114" title="Tarabya I of Sagaing" label="Tarabya I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446223" start="1131" end="1146" title="Sagaing Kingdom" label="King of Sagaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q26076" start="1183" end="1198" title="Irrawaddy River" label="Irrawaddy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018173" start="1229" end="1236" title="Sagaing" label="Sagaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q950771" start="1304" end="1311" title="Saw Yun" label="Saw Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200887" start="1356" end="1369" title="Kyaswa of Sagaing" label="Prince Kyaswa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323" start="1373" end="1383" title="February 8" label="February 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q156080" start="1389" end="1394" title="Opava" label="Opava"/>
<link wikidata="Q689157" start="1450" end="1476" title="Casimir I, Duke of Cieszyn" label="Casimir I, Duke of Cieszyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187484" start="1484" end="1490" title="homage (feudal)" label="homage"/>
<link wikidata="Q155167" start="1515" end="1529" title="John of Bohemia" label="John the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342" start="1561" end="1570" title="Oświęcim" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333" start="1602" end="1613" title="February 13" label="February 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="1621" end="1641" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="Charles I of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q155167" start="1651" end="1666" title="John of Bohemia" label="John of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26175" start="1697" end="1708" title="Trnava" label="Nagyszombat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="1815" end="1824" title="Bratislava" label="Pressburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="1905" end="1911" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340" start="2016" end="2027" title="February 19" label="February 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="2036" end="2043" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q571252" start="2171" end="2189" title="Leszek of Racibórz" label="Leszek of Racibórz"/>
<link wikidata="Q199059" start="2191" end="2208" title="Siemowit of Bytom" label="Siemowit of Bytom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498490" start="2213" end="2228" title="George of Bytom" label="George of Bytom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461" start="2233" end="2241" title="March 31" label="March 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q174964" start="2249" end="2269" title="Charles IV of France" label="Charles IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="2296" end="2303" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703611" start="2316" end="2325" title="Duchy of Aquitaine" label="Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295939" start="2330" end="2337" title="Duchy of Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q237131" start="2432" end="2438" title="France in the Middle Ages" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q55597938" start="2459" end="2467" title="Limousin (province)" label="Limousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895719" start="2469" end="2475" title="Quercy" label="Quercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q850620" start="2480" end="2488" title="Périgord" label="Périgord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508" start="2547" end="2554" title="April 4" label="April 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q67440005" start="2593" end="2614" title="Uthman ibn Abi al-Ula" label="Uthman ibn Abi al-Ula"/>
<link wikidata="Q695536" start="2640" end="2657" title="Laujar de Andarax" label="Laujar de Andarax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507" start="2700" end="2707" title="April 5" label="April 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="2710" end="2719" title="Edward II" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891993" start="2732" end="2747" title="Berkeley Castle" label="Berkeley Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="2751" end="2766" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795452" start="2834" end="2849" title="Thomas de Berkeley, 3rd Baron Berkeley" label="Thomas Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863358" start="2854" end="2869" title="John Maltravers, 1st Baron Maltravers" label="John Maltravers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506" start="3031" end="3038" title="April 6" label="April 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q40317" start="3040" end="3051" title="Good Friday" label="Good Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401" start="3055" end="3073" title="Petrarch" label="Francesco Petrarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q270227" start="3139" end="3153" title="Laura de Noves" label="Laura de Noves"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970" start="3162" end="3168" title="Church (building)" label="church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="3193" end="3200" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80056" start="3263" end="3269" title="sonnet" label="sonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q777574" start="3347" end="3360" title="Il Canzoniere" label="Il Canzoniere"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="3393" end="3404" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591" start="3416" end="3422" title="May 31" label="May 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="3428" end="3433" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57161" start="3435" end="3454" title="Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ludwig the Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="3456" end="3474" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="3494" end="3507" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152717" start="3525" end="3554" title="Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q310435" start="3637" end="3652" title="Louis the Blind" label="Louis the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671" start="3700" end="3707" title="June 21" label="June 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q467530" start="3716" end="3734" title="Ingeborg of Norway" label="Ingeborg of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130213" start="3763" end="3785" title="Canute Porse the Elder" label="Canute Porse the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196956" start="3826" end="3832" title="Kingdom of Norway (872–1397)" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698" start="3862" end="3868" title="July 4" label="July 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q456873" start="3897" end="3916" title="Galeazzo I Visconti" label="Galeazzo I Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="3920" end="3925" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57161" start="3987" end="4006" title="Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ludwig the Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="4025" end="4038" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120971" start="4065" end="4081" title="Stefano Visconti" label="Stefano Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819" start="4383" end="4392" title="August 25" label="August 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255100" start="4395" end="4406" title="Demasq Kaja" label="Demasq Kaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="4449" end="4458" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531" start="4534" end="4544" title="Soltaniyeh" label="Soltaniyeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796438" start="4592" end="4598" title="Ilkhan" label="Ilkhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q335301" start="4600" end="4627" title="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Bahadur Khan" label="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Bahadur Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q471985" start="4685" end="4696" title="Chupan" label="Amir Chūpān"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891" start="4744" end="4756" title="September 21" label="September 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891993" start="4857" end="4872" title="Berkeley Castle" label="Berkeley Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="4876" end="4891" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958" start="4923" end="4933" title="October 23" label="October 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="4941" end="4950" title="Pope John XXII" label="John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q315357" start="4960" end="4978" title="Marsilius of Padua" label="Marsilius of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182646" start="5006" end="5020" title="Defensor pacis" label="Defensor pacis"/>
<link wikidata="Q175211" start="5102" end="5109" title="Kingdom of Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q57161" start="5152" end="5170" title="Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Louis the Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956" start="5272" end="5282" title="October 27" label="October 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q262059" start="5285" end="5303" title="Elizabeth de Burgh" label="Elizabeth de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628227" start="5456" end="5469" title="Cullen Castle" label="Cullen Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q806432" start="5473" end="5483" title="Banffshire" label="Banffshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993" start="5488" end="5498" title="November 5" label="November 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="5504" end="5513" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q380088" start="5515" end="5538" title="Alfonso IV of Aragon" label="Prince Alfonso the Kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q238179" start="5555" end="5569" title="King of Aragon" label="King of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312735" start="5600" end="5613" title="James II of Aragon" label="King Jaime II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363" start="5654" end="5665" title="December 11" label="December 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484377" start="5668" end="5681" title="Simon Mepeham" label="Simon Mepeham"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="5715" end="5739" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q950456" start="5764" end="5781" title="Henry, 3rd Earl of Lancaster" label="Earl of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438" start="5970" end="5981" title="December 18" label="December 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="5984" end="5998" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q170389" start="6127" end="6144" title="Pope Benedict XII" label="Pope Benedict XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007" start="6148" end="6152" title="1334" label="1334"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455" start="6156" end="6167" title="December 20" label="December 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q262500" start="6222" end="6242" title="Gloucester Cathedral" label="Gloucester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="6246" end="6261" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636" start="6295" end="6306" title="December 22" label="December 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111412" start="6309" end="6329" title="Timurtash" label="Ala ud-Din Timurtash"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="6367" end="6376" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q335301" start="6452" end="6466" title="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Bahadur Khan" label="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066873" start="6683" end="6705" title="Richard of Wallingford" label="Richard of Wallingford"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="6726" end="6731" title="abbot" label="abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275" start="6766" end="6784" title="astronomical clock" label="astronomical clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="6873" end="6878" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q31347" start="6884" end="6895" title="Grand Canal (China)" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="6913" end="6920" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="6924" end="6932" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q568061" start="6999" end="7015" title="Malatesta Ungaro" label="Malatesta Ungaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258" start="7041" end="7045" title="1372" label="1372"/>
<link wikidata="Q2950" start="7049" end="7059" title="October 30" label="October 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q501504" start="7062" end="7086" title="Andrew, Duke of Calabria" label="Andrew, Duke of Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077" start="7091" end="7095" title="1345" label="1345"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066628" start="7127" end="7146" title="Charles de La Cerda" label="Charles de La Cerda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118" start="7175" end="7179" title="1354" label="1354"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363805" start="7184" end="7225" title="Elizabeth le Despenser, Baroness Berkeley" label="Elizabeth le Despenser, Baroness Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371" start="7245" end="7249" title="1389" label="1389"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591850" start="7254" end="7273" title="Demetrius I Starshy" label="Demetrius I Starshy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422" start="7300" end="7304" title="1399" label="1399"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640311" start="7309" end="7326" title="Birger Gregersson" label="Birger Gregersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341" start="7354" end="7358" title="1383" label="1383"/>
<link wikidata="Q504929" start="7363" end="7380" title="Baldus de Ubaldis" label="Baldus de Ubaldis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108" start="7401" end="7405" title="1400" label="1400"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033364" start="7432" end="7468" title="William Douglas, 1st Earl of Douglas" label="William Douglas, 1st Earl of Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347" start="7492" end="7496" title="1384" label="1384"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261" start="7514" end="7524" title="January 16" label="January 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538817" start="7527" end="7546" title="Nikephoros Choumnos" label="Nikephoros Choumnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487" start="7584" end="7588" title="1250" label="1250"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501" start="7592" end="7596" title="1255" label="1255"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286" start="7600" end="7610" title="January 29" label="January 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q66882" start="7613" end="7647" title="Adolf, Count Palatine of the Rhine" label="Adolf, Count Palatine of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609" start="7652" end="7656" title="1300" label="1300"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403" start="7660" end="7668" title="March 15" label="March 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146778" start="7671" end="7692" title="Albert of Schwarzburg" label="Albert of Schwarzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504" start="7746" end="7753" title="April 9" label="April 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100898" start="7756" end="7800" title="Walter Stewart, 6th High Steward of Scotland" label="Walter Stewart, 6th High Steward of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588" start="7813" end="7819" title="May 28" label="May 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341820" start="7822" end="7836" title="Robert Baldock" label="Robert Baldock"/>
<link wikidata="Q910308" start="7838" end="7853" title="Lord Privy Seal" label="Lord Privy Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="7858" end="7873" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589" start="7887" end="7893" title="May 29" label="May 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q645888" start="7896" end="7906" title="Jens Grand" label="Jens Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508" start="7933" end="7937" title="1260" label="1260"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698" start="7941" end="7947" title="July 4" label="July 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120971" start="7950" end="7966" title="Stefano Visconti" label="Stefano Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819" start="7988" end="7997" title="August 25" label="August 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255100" start="8000" end="8011" title="Demasq Kaja" label="Demasq Kaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859" start="8055" end="8066" title="September 1" label="September 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439825" start="8069" end="8089" title="Foulques de Villaret" label="Foulques de Villaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891" start="8140" end="8152" title="September 21" label="September 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="8155" end="8172" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward Caernarfon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544" start="8201" end="8205" title="1284" label="1284"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885" start="8209" end="8221" title="September 26" label="September 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q728592" start="8224" end="8243" title="Cecco d&amp;#x27;Ascoli" label="Cecco d&amp;#x27;Ascoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504" start="8292" end="8296" title="1257" label="1257"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959" start="8300" end="8310" title="October 20" label="October 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148686" start="8313" end="8334" title="Teresa d&amp;#x27;Entença" label="Teresa d&amp;#x27;Entença"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609" start="8359" end="8363" title="1300" label="1300"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956" start="8367" end="8377" title="October 27" label="October 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q262059" start="8380" end="8398" title="Elizabeth de Burgh" label="Elizabeth de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="8409" end="8425" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q471985" start="8439" end="8445" title="Chupan" label="Chupan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996" start="8482" end="8492" title="November 2" label="November 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993" start="8496" end="8506" title="November 5" label="November 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q312735" start="8514" end="8532" title="James II of Aragon" label="James II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519" start="8537" end="8541" title="1267" label="1267"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451" start="8545" end="8556" title="December 19" label="December 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q237486" start="8559" end="8595" title="Agnes of France, Duchess of Burgundy" label="Agnes of France, Duchess of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q668508" start="8626" end="8639" title="Thomas Cobham" label="Thomas Cobham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461780" start="8664" end="8688" title="Constantine I of Imereti" label="Constantine I of Imereti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562821" start="8692" end="8707" title="David of Hrodna" label="David of Hrodna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756217" start="8739" end="8752" title="Vital du Four" label="Vital du Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508" start="8776" end="8780" title="1260" label="1260"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565877" start="8785" end="8800" title="Walter Reynolds" label="Walter Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="8802" end="8826" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528690" start="8830" end="8851" title="Sir Richard de Exeter" label="Sir Richard de Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410332" start="8897" end="8917" title="Bartholomew of Lucca" label="Bartholomew of Lucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q12807" start="8969" end="8980" title="Umberto Eco" label="Umberto Eco"/>
<link wikidata="Q172850" start="9000" end="9020" title="The Name of the Rose" label="The Name of the Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="9060" end="9064" title="1980" label="1980"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39968" wikidata="Q5802" url="?curid=39968" title="1328">
<text>Year 1328 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXXVIII]]) was a leap year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;
* January 17 – Louis the Bavarian is crowned Emperor at Rome&#x27;s St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica. Being excommunicated by the Pope, the ceremony is carried out by three Italian bishops. 
* January 24 – Philippa of Hainault marries King Edward III of England a year after his coronation. The marriage produces ten children, the eldest of whom is Edward the Black Prince.
* May 1 – Treaty of Edinburgh–Northampton: England recognises Scotland as an independent nation, after the Wars of Scottish Independence.
* May 12 – Antipope Nicholas V is consecrated at St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica in Rome by the bishop of Venice. 
* May 26 – William of Ockham secretly leaves Avignon, under threat from Pope John XXII.
* May 29 – King Philip VI of France is crowned, founding the House of Valois, after the death of King Charles IV of France, who has no sons to inherit.
* August 23 – Battle of Cassel: French troops stop an uprising of Flemish farmers.
* Undated – The Augustiner-Bräu is first recorded as the brewery of an Augustinian monastery at Munich.&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;

== Births ==
* April 1 – Blanche of France, Duchess of Orléans (d. 1393)
* May 7 – Louis VI the Roman, Duke of Bavaria and Elector of Brandenburg (d. 1365)
* June 25 – William de Montagu, 2nd Earl of Salisbury, English military leader (d. 1397)
* September 29 – Joan of Kent, princess of Wales, spouse of Edward the Black Prince (d. 1385)
* October 9 – King Peter I of Cyprus (d. 1369)
* October 21 – Hongwu Emperor of China (d. 1398)
* November 11 – Roger Mortimer, 2nd Earl of March, English military leader (d. 1360)
* November 25 – Antipope Benedict XIII, born Pedro Martínez de Luna (d. 1423)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Archibald Douglas, 3rd Earl of Douglas (&quot;Archibald the Grim&quot;, &quot;Black Archibald&quot;), Scottish magnate and warrior (d. 1400)
** Emperor Go-Murakami of Japan (d. 1368)

== Deaths ==
* February 1 – King Charles IV of France (b. 1294)
* August 15 – Yesün Temür, emperor of the Yuan dynasty (b. 1293)
* August 23 – Nicolaas Zannekin, Flemish peasant leader (in the battle of Cassel)
* September 26 – Ibn Taymiyyah, Islamic scholar and philosopher of Harran (b. 1263)
* October 12 (or 13) – Clementia of Hungary, Queen consort of France and Navarre (b. 1293)
* November 16 – Prince Hisaaki, Japanese shōgun (b. 1276)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Meister Eckhart, German theologian (b. 1260)
** Andronikos Angelos Palaiologos, Byzantine nobleman and governor (b. ca. 1282)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5802" start="5" end="9" title="1328" label="1328"/>
<link wikidata="Q5802" start="11" end="40" title="1328" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXXVIII]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q217036" start="48" end="76" title="leap year starting on Friday" label="leap year starting on Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="84" end="99" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264" start="137" end="147" title="January 17" label="January 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q57161" start="150" end="168" title="Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Louis the Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="203" end="228" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278" start="321" end="331" title="January 24" label="January 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q229279" start="334" end="354" title="Philippa of Hainault" label="Philippa of Hainault"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="368" end="389" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q184854" start="477" end="500" title="Edward the Black Prince" label="Edward the Black Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544" start="504" end="509" title="May 1" label="May 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q321886" start="512" end="543" title="Treaty of Edinburgh–Northampton" label="Treaty of Edinburgh–Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="545" end="552" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="564" end="572" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368240" start="609" end="638" title="Wars of Scottish Independence" label="Wars of Scottish Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559" start="642" end="648" title="May 12" label="May 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q348611" start="651" end="670" title="Antipope Nicholas V" label="Antipope Nicholas V"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="718" end="722" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="730" end="736" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="740" end="746" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586" start="751" end="757" title="May 26" label="May 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q43936" start="760" end="777" title="William of Ockham" label="William of Ockham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="794" end="801" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="821" end="835" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589" start="839" end="845" title="May 29" label="May 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q170586" start="853" end="872" title="Philip VI of France" label="Philip VI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q182135" start="898" end="913" title="House of Valois" label="House of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q174964" start="939" end="959" title="Charles IV of France" label="Charles IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821" start="991" end="1000" title="August 23" label="August 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237467" start="1003" end="1019" title="Battle of Cassel (1328)" label="Battle of Cassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q242485" start="1055" end="1062" title="Flemish people" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q153546" start="1088" end="1103" title="Augustiner-Bräu" label="Augustiner-Bräu"/>
<link wikidata="Q214528" start="1143" end="1154" title="Augustinians" label="Augustinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="1168" end="1174" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510" start="1212" end="1219" title="April 1" label="April 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669924" start="1222" end="1259" title="Blanche of France, Duchess of Orléans" label="Blanche of France, Duchess of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390" start="1264" end="1268" title="1393" label="1393"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553" start="1272" end="1277" title="May 7" label="May 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q60831" start="1280" end="1298" title="Louis VI the Roman" label="Louis VI the Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190" start="1347" end="1351" title="1365" label="1365"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662" start="1355" end="1362" title="June 25" label="June 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474950" start="1365" end="1406" title="William de Montagu, 2nd Earl of Salisbury" label="William de Montagu, 2nd Earl of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410" start="1436" end="1440" title="1397" label="1397"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882" start="1444" end="1456" title="September 29" label="September 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q234156" start="1459" end="1471" title="Joan of Kent" label="Joan of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q184854" start="1502" end="1525" title="Edward the Black Prince" label="Edward the Black Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350" start="1530" end="1534" title="1385" label="1385"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923" start="1538" end="1547" title="October 9" label="October 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q546469" start="1555" end="1572" title="Peter I of Cyprus" label="Peter I of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211" start="1577" end="1581" title="1369" label="1369"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960" start="1585" end="1595" title="October 21" label="October 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q9957" start="1598" end="1612" title="Hongwu Emperor" label="Hongwu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416" start="1626" end="1630" title="1398" label="1398"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987" start="1634" end="1645" title="November 11" label="November 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q679266" start="1648" end="1681" title="Roger Mortimer, 2nd Earl of March" label="Roger Mortimer, 2nd Earl of March"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150" start="1711" end="1715" title="1360" label="1360"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020" start="1719" end="1730" title="November 25" label="November 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q310371" start="1733" end="1755" title="Antipope Benedict XIII" label="Antipope Benedict XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267" start="1789" end="1793" title="1423" label="1423"/>
<link wikidata="Q592380" start="1825" end="1863" title="Archibald Douglas, 3rd Earl of Douglas" label="Archibald Douglas, 3rd Earl of Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108" start="1960" end="1964" title="1400" label="1400"/>
<link wikidata="Q440447" start="1969" end="1988" title="Emperor Go-Murakami" label="Emperor Go-Murakami"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207" start="2002" end="2006" title="1368" label="1368"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312" start="2024" end="2034" title="February 1" label="February 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q174964" start="2042" end="2062" title="Charles IV of France" label="Charles IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559" start="2067" end="2071" title="1294" label="1294"/>
<link wikidata="Q2774" start="2075" end="2084" title="August 15" label="August 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q8560" start="2087" end="2098" title="Yesün Temür (Yuan dynasty)" label="Yesün Temür"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="2115" end="2127" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5557" start="2132" end="2136" title="1293" label="1293"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821" start="2140" end="2149" title="August 23" label="August 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091356" start="2152" end="2169" title="Nicolaas Zannekin" label="Nicolaas Zannekin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885" start="2222" end="2234" title="September 26" label="September 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q491558" start="2237" end="2250" title="Ibn Taymiyyah" label="Ibn Taymiyyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512" start="2298" end="2302" title="1263" label="1263"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920" start="2306" end="2316" title="October 12" label="October 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925" start="2321" end="2323" title="October 13" label="13"/>
<link wikidata="Q230081" start="2327" end="2347" title="Clementia of Hungary" label="Clementia of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5557" start="2389" end="2393" title="1293" label="1293"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029" start="2397" end="2408" title="November 16" label="November 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q715826" start="2411" end="2425" title="Prince Hisaaki" label="Prince Hisaaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="2436" end="2442" title="shōgun" label="shōgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530" start="2447" end="2451" title="1276" label="1276"/>
<link wikidata="Q76548" start="2483" end="2498" title="Meister Eckhart" label="Meister Eckhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508" start="2522" end="2526" title="1260" label="1260"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759500" start="2531" end="2561" title="Andronikos Angelos Palaiologos" label="Andronikos Angelos Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541" start="2603" end="2607" title="1282" label="1282"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39970" wikidata="Q5894" url="?curid=39970" title="1329">
<text>Year 1329 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXXIX]]) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==

=== January–December ===
* February 1 – King John of Bohemia (of the Teutonic Order) captures Medvėgalis, an important fortress of the pagan Grand Duchy of Lithuania, and baptizes 6,000 of its defenders.
* February 18 – Amda Seyon I, Emperor of Ethiopia, begins his campaigns in the southern Muslim provinces (possibly in 1332).
* March 27 – Pope John XXII condemns some teachings of Meister Eckhart as heretical.
* April – Antipope Nicholas V is excommunicated by Pope John XXII.
* June 6 – Edward III of England pays homage to Philip VI of France for Aquitaine.
* June 7 – David II becomes King of Scots at age 5; he will rule Scotland for nearly 42 years.
* June 10 – Braganstown massacre, County Louth, Ireland: Over 160 are killed.
* June 11 – Battle of Maltepe (Pelekanon): Ottoman Turks defeat the Byzantine Empire.
* August 4 – Wittelsbach possessions are divided by the Treaty of Pavia into those of the Bavarian line and those of Palatinate line. Both lines will be reunited in 1777.

=== Date unknown ===
* Aimone of Savoy becomes Count of Savoy.
* Construction begins on the Archcathedral Basilica of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary and Saint Andrew in Frombork, Poland.
* Michael of Cesena is deposed as General of the Franciscans.
* Stefan Uroš IV Dušan of Serbia defeats Stephen II, Ban of Bosnia.
* Wiesbaden is granted the right of coinage by Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor.

== Births ==
* September 26 – Anne of Bavaria, queen consort of Bohemia (d. 1353)
* November 22 – Elisabeth of Meissen, Burgravine consort of Nuremberg (d. 1375)
* November 29 – John I, Duke of Bavaria (d. 1340)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Fairuzabadi, Persian Arab lexicographer (d. 1414)
** Prince Lazar of Serbia (d. 1389)
** Philip II, Prince of Taranto (d. 1374)
** Hosokawa Yoriyuki, Japanese samurai (d. 1392)

== Deaths ==
* January 17 – Saint Roseline, Carthusian nun (b. 1263)
* April 21 – Frederick IV, Duke of Lorraine (b. 1282)
* May 9 – John Drokensford, Bishop of Bath and Wells
* May 31 – Albertino Mussato, Italian statesman and writer (b. 1261)
* June 7 – Robert the Bruce, King of Scotland (b. 1274)
* August 30 – Khutughtu Khan, Emperor Mingzong of Yuan, emperor of the Yuan dynasty and the Mongol Empire (b. 1300)
* October 27 – Mahaut, Countess of Artois (b. 1268)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Walter Herok, Bishop of Aberdeen
** Michael of Imereti
** Oshin of Korikos, regent of Armenia (assassinated)
** Edward, Count of Savoy (b. 1284)
** Maol Íosa IV, Earl of Strathearn

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5894" start="5" end="9" title="1329" label="1329"/>
<link wikidata="Q5894" start="11" end="38" title="1329" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXXIX]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235670" start="46" end="76" title="common year starting on Sunday" label="common year starting on Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="84" end="99" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312" start="143" end="153" title="February 1" label="February 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q155167" start="161" end="176" title="John of Bohemia" label="John of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="185" end="199" title="Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q12665039" start="201" end="209" title="Siege of Medvėgalis" label="captures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501117" start="210" end="220" title="Medvėgalis" label="Medvėgalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="257" end="281" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343" start="322" end="333" title="February 18" label="February 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q460342" start="336" end="348" title="Amda Seyon I" label="Amda Seyon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962705" start="350" end="369" title="Emperor of Ethiopia" label="Emperor of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="408" end="414" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6001" start="438" end="442" title="1332" label="1332"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457" start="447" end="455" title="March 27" label="March 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="458" end="472" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q76548" start="500" end="515" title="Meister Eckhart" label="Meister Eckhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q118" start="532" end="537" title="April" label="April"/>
<link wikidata="Q348611" start="540" end="559" title="Antipope Nicholas V" label="Antipope Nicholas V"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="563" end="577" title="Excommunication" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="581" end="595" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620" start="599" end="605" title="June 6" label="June 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="608" end="629" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q170586" start="645" end="664" title="Philip VI of France" label="Philip VI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179" start="669" end="678" title="Aquitaine" label="Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616" start="682" end="688" title="June 7" label="June 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q239486" start="691" end="699" title="David II of Scotland" label="David II"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="708" end="721" title="King of Scots" label="King of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615" start="777" end="784" title="June 10" label="June 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q97355286" start="787" end="807" title="Braganstown massacre" label="Braganstown massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q183539" start="809" end="821" title="County Louth" label="County Louth"/>
<link wikidata="Q844250" start="823" end="830" title="Lordship of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617" start="855" end="862" title="June 11" label="June 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q964226" start="865" end="894" title="Battle of Pelekanon" label="Battle of Maltepe (Pelekanon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="896" end="909" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottoman Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="921" end="937" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784" start="941" end="949" title="August 4" label="August 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q882631" start="995" end="1010" title="Treaty of Pavia (1329)" label="Treaty of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q547610" start="1134" end="1149" title="Aimone of Savoy" label="Aimone of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="1158" end="1172" title="Kings of Savoy" label="Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q478321" start="1203" end="1299" title="Archcathedral Basilica of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary and Saint Andrew in Frombork" label="Archcathedral Basilica of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary and Saint Andrew in Frombork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352704" start="1311" end="1328" title="Michael of Cesena" label="Michael of Cesena"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="1358" end="1368" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207303" start="1373" end="1403" title="Stefan Uroš IV Dušan of Serbia" label="Stefan Uroš IV Dušan of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q965795" start="1412" end="1437" title="Stephen II, Ban of Bosnia" label="Stephen II, Ban of Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721" start="1441" end="1450" title="Wiesbaden" label="Wiesbaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q57161" start="1486" end="1514" title="Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885" start="1532" end="1544" title="September 26" label="September 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q63373" start="1547" end="1562" title="Anne of Bavaria" label="Anne of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116" start="1593" end="1597" title="1353" label="1353"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025" start="1601" end="1612" title="November 22" label="November 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q465426" start="1615" end="1635" title="Elisabeth of Meissen" label="Elisabeth of Meissen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277" start="1673" end="1677" title="1375" label="1375"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016" start="1681" end="1692" title="November 29" label="November 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q523886" start="1695" end="1718" title="John I, Duke of Bavaria" label="John I, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056" start="1723" end="1727" title="1340" label="1340"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115262" start="1759" end="1770" title="Fairuzabadi" label="Fairuzabadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179" start="1803" end="1807" title="1414" label="1414"/>
<link wikidata="Q310197" start="1819" end="1834" title="Lazar of Serbia" label="Lazar of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371" start="1839" end="1843" title="1389" label="1389"/>
<link wikidata="Q658100" start="1848" end="1876" title="Philip II, Prince of Taranto" label="Philip II, Prince of Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269" start="1881" end="1885" title="1374" label="1374"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139739" start="1890" end="1907" title="Hosokawa Yoriyuki" label="Hosokawa Yoriyuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382" start="1930" end="1934" title="1392" label="1392"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264" start="1952" end="1962" title="January 17" label="January 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q143109" start="1965" end="1979" title="Saint Roseline" label="Saint Roseline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512" start="2000" end="2004" title="1263" label="1263"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525" start="2008" end="2016" title="April 21" label="April 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q562051" start="2019" end="2049" title="Frederick IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick IV, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541" start="2054" end="2058" title="1282" label="1282"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556" start="2062" end="2067" title="May 9" label="May 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230165" start="2070" end="2086" title="John Drokensford" label="John Drokensford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591" start="2115" end="2121" title="May 31" label="May 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q737321" start="2124" end="2141" title="Albertino Mussato" label="Albertino Mussato"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509" start="2176" end="2180" title="1261" label="1261"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616" start="2184" end="2190" title="June 7" label="June 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="2193" end="2209" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="2211" end="2227" title="King of Scotland" label="King of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527" start="2232" end="2236" title="1274" label="1274"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818" start="2240" end="2249" title="August 30" label="August 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q8659" start="2252" end="2292" title="Khutughtu Khan, Emperor Mingzong of Yuan" label="Khutughtu Khan, Emperor Mingzong of Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="2309" end="2321" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="2330" end="2343" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609" start="2348" end="2352" title="1300" label="1300"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956" start="2356" end="2366" title="October 27" label="October 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166728" start="2369" end="2395" title="Mahaut, Countess of Artois" label="Mahaut, Countess of Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520" start="2400" end="2404" title="1268" label="1268"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965133" start="2436" end="2448" title="Walter Herok" label="Walter Herok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102643" start="2472" end="2490" title="Michael of Imereti" label="Michael of Imereti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383522" start="2494" end="2510" title="Oshin of Korikos" label="Oshin of Korikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q739378" start="2548" end="2570" title="Edward, Count of Savoy" label="Edward, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544" start="2575" end="2579" title="1284" label="1284"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753645" start="2584" end="2616" title="Maol Íosa IV, Earl of Strathearn" label="Maol Íosa IV, Earl of Strathearn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39971" wikidata="Q5996" url="?curid=39971" title="1330">
<text>Year 1330 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXXX]]) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;

=== January–December ===
* July 28 – Battle of Velbazhd: The Bulgarians under Tsar Michael Shishman (who is mortally wounded) are beaten by the Serbs. Bulgaria does not lose any territory to Serbia, but is powerless to stop the Serbian advance towards the predominantly Bulgarian-populated Macedonia.
* October 19 – King Edward III of England starts his personal reign, arresting his regent Roger Mortimer, and having him executed.
* November 9–12 – Battle of Posada: The Wallachians, under Basarab I, defeat the Hungarians, though heavily outnumbered, thus making a firm statement towards the independence of Wallachia.
* December 6 – The British Isles are hit by a great storm, creating large areas of sand dunes on Anglesey.
* Undated – Vilnius, Lithuania receives its coat-of-arms, granted to the city in the seventh year of its existence.
* Undated – Ivan Alexander becomes the despot of Lovech. &lt;/onlyinclude&gt;

== Births ==
* June 15 – Edward, the Black Prince, son of Edward III of England (d. 1376)
* July 4 – Ashikaga Yoshiakira, Japanese shōgun (d. 1367)
* October 25 – Louis II of Flanders (d. 1384)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Frans Ackerman, Flemish statesman (d. 1387)
** Euphemia of Sicily, princess regent of Sicily (d. 1359)
** Altichiero, Italian painter (d. 1390)
** Nicolas Flamel, French scribe and manuscript-seller, reputed alchemist (d. 1417)
** John Gower, English poet (d. 1410)

== Deaths ==
* January 13 – Duke Frederick I of Austria (b. 1286)
* January 21 – Joan II, Countess of Burgundy, queen dowager of France (b. 1291)
* March 19 – Edmund of Woodstock, 1st Earl of Kent, son of Edward I and brother of Edward II (executed by Roger Mortimer) (b. 1301)
* May 3 – Alexios II Megas Komnenos, Emperor of Trebizond (b. 1282)
* c. July 31 – Tsar Michael Shishman of Bulgaria (b. 1280s?)
* August 25 – On or about this date, Sir James Douglas, Scottish guerilla leader during the Wars of Scottish Independence (b. circa 1286)
* September 28 – Elizabeth of Bohemia, queen consort of Bohemia (b. 1292)
* November 29 – Roger Mortimer, 1st Earl of March, de facto ruler of England (b. 1287)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Pietro Cavallini, Italian artist (b. 1259)
** Guillaume Durand, French clergyman
** Immanuel the Roman, Italian scholar and poet (b. 1270)
** Maximus Planudes, Byzantine grammarian and theologian
** Uthman ibn Abi al-Ula, Marinid prince and &quot;shaykh al-ghuzat&quot; of the Emirate of Granada

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5996" start="5" end="9" title="1330" label="1330"/>
<link wikidata="Q5996" start="11" end="37" title="1330" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXXX]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235687" start="45" end="75" title="common year starting on Monday" label="common year starting on Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="83" end="98" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718" start="162" end="169" title="July 28" label="July 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400440" start="172" end="190" title="Battle of Velbazhd" label="Battle of Velbazhd"/>
<link wikidata="Q420759" start="196" end="206" title="Second Bulgarian Empire" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q453491" start="218" end="234" title="Michael Shishman of Bulgaria" label="Michael Shishman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415003" start="279" end="284" title="Kingdom of Serbia (medieval)" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="326" end="332" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="425" end="434" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961" start="438" end="448" title="October 19" label="October 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="456" end="477" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q312990" start="526" end="540" title="Roger Mortimer, 1st Earl of March" label="Roger Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991" start="569" end="579" title="November 9" label="November 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986" start="580" end="582" title="November 12" label="12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076246" start="585" end="601" title="Battle of Posada" label="Battle of Posada"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="607" end="616" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q324748" start="626" end="635" title="Basarab I" label="Basarab I"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="648" end="658" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="745" end="754" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303" start="758" end="768" title="December 6" label="December 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="775" end="788" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q81054" start="808" end="813" title="storm" label="storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="839" end="849" title="sand dunes" label="sand dunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="853" end="861" title="Anglesey" label="Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="875" end="882" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="884" end="893" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="907" end="919" title="coat-of-arms" label="coat-of-arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q122610" start="991" end="1005" title="Ivan Alexander of Bulgaria" label="Ivan Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q113614156" start="1018" end="1034" title="Despotate of Lovech" label="despot of Lovech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613" start="1073" end="1080" title="June 15" label="June 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q184854" start="1083" end="1107" title="Edward, the Black Prince" label="Edward, the Black Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="1116" end="1137" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282" start="1142" end="1146" title="1376" label="1376"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698" start="1150" end="1156" title="July 4" label="July 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q466321" start="1159" end="1178" title="Ashikaga Yoshiakira" label="Ashikaga Yoshiakira"/>
<link wikidata="Q898214" start="1189" end="1195" title="List of shōguns" label="shōgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202" start="1200" end="1204" title="1367" label="1367"/>
<link wikidata="Q2954" start="1208" end="1218" title="October 25" label="October 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q469648" start="1221" end="1241" title="Louis II of Flanders" label="Louis II of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347" start="1246" end="1250" title="1384" label="1384"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594530" start="1282" end="1296" title="Frans Ackerman" label="Frans Ackerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6359" start="1320" end="1324" title="1387" label="1387"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947289" start="1329" end="1347" title="Euphemia of Sicily" label="Euphemia of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143" start="1379" end="1383" title="1359" label="1359"/>
<link wikidata="Q379567" start="1388" end="1398" title="Altichiero" label="Altichiero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375" start="1420" end="1424" title="1390" label="1390"/>
<link wikidata="Q213330" start="1429" end="1443" title="Nicolas Flamel" label="Nicolas Flamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6193" start="1504" end="1508" title="1417" label="1417"/>
<link wikidata="Q365133" start="1513" end="1523" title="John Gower" label="John Gower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6151" start="1542" end="1546" title="1410" label="1410"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255" start="1564" end="1574" title="January 13" label="January 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q124950" start="1582" end="1604" title="Frederick I of Austria (Habsburg)" label="Frederick I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548" start="1609" end="1613" title="1286" label="1286"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273" start="1617" end="1627" title="January 21" label="January 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q231760" start="1630" end="1659" title="Joan II, Countess of Burgundy" label="Joan II, Countess of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554" start="1689" end="1693" title="1291" label="1291"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424" start="1697" end="1705" title="March 19" label="March 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q956563" start="1708" end="1745" title="Edmund of Woodstock, 1st Earl of Kent" label="Edmund of Woodstock, 1st Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610" start="1821" end="1825" title="1301" label="1301"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547" start="1829" end="1834" title="May 3" label="May 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q365710" start="1837" end="1862" title="Alexios II of Trebizond" label="Alexios II Megas Komnenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q178913" start="1864" end="1884" title="Empire of Trebizond" label="Emperor of Trebizond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541" start="1889" end="1893" title="1282" label="1282"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715" start="1900" end="1907" title="July 31" label="July 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q453491" start="1915" end="1943" title="Michael Shishman of Bulgaria" label="Michael Shishman of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536" start="1948" end="1952" title="1280" label="1280"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819" start="1958" end="1967" title="August 25" label="August 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q648516" start="1993" end="2010" title="James Douglas, Lord of Douglas" label="Sir James Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548" start="2088" end="2092" title="1286" label="1286"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883" start="2096" end="2108" title="September 28" label="September 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q254322" start="2111" end="2131" title="Elizabeth of Bohemia (1292–1330)" label="Elizabeth of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555" start="2162" end="2166" title="1292" label="1292"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016" start="2170" end="2181" title="November 29" label="November 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q312990" start="2184" end="2217" title="Roger Mortimer, 1st Earl of March" label="Roger Mortimer, 1st Earl of March"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549" start="2249" end="2253" title="1287" label="1287"/>
<link wikidata="Q316009" start="2285" end="2301" title="Pietro Cavallini" label="Pietro Cavallini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507" start="2322" end="2326" title="1259" label="1259"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120208" start="2331" end="2347" title="Guillaume Durand (nephew)" label="Guillaume Durand"/>
<link wikidata="Q953988" start="2369" end="2387" title="Immanuel the Roman" label="Immanuel the Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522" start="2418" end="2422" title="1270" label="1270"/>
<link wikidata="Q218672" start="2427" end="2443" title="Maximus Planudes" label="Maximus Planudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q67440005" start="2484" end="2505" title="Uthman ibn Abi al-Ula" label="Uthman ibn Abi al-Ula"/>
<link wikidata="Q85813493" start="2532" end="2548" title="shaykh al-ghuzat" label="shaykh al-ghuzat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39972" wikidata="Q6001" url="?curid=39972" title="1332">
<text>Year 1332 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXXXII]]) was a leap year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==

* February 18 – Amda Seyon I, Emperor of Ethiopia, begins his campaigns in the southern Muslim provinces (possibly in 1329).
* August 10–11 – Battle of Dupplin Moor: Edward Balliol rebels, and the English defeat the loyalists of David II in Scotland.
* September – Edward Balliol crowns himself King of Scotland.
* November 7 – Lucerne joins the Swiss Confederation with Uri, Schwyz, and Unterwalden.
* December 16 – Battle of Annan: The loyalists of David II defeat Edward Balliol in Scotland.
* The city of Marosvásárhely (in Transylvania, today Târgu Mureș in Romania) is first documented in the papal registry, under the name &quot;Novum Forum Siculorum&quot;.

== Births ==
* May 27 – Ibn Khaldun, North African Arab historian (d. 1406)
* June 8 – Cangrande II della Scala, Lord of Verona (d. 1359)
* June 16 – Isabella de Coucy, English princess, daughter of King Edward III of England (d. 1379 or 1382)
* June 18 – John V Palaiologos, Byzantine Emperor (d. 1391)
* October 10 – King Charles II of Navarre (d. 1387)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Pero López de Ayala, Spanish soldier (d. 1407)
** Elizabeth de Burgh, 4th Countess of Ulster (d. 1363)
** Andrea Vanni, Italian painter (d. c. 1414)
** Hanna van Recklinghausen, Dutch banker
** Xu Da, Chinese military leader (d. 1385)
* &quot;Approximate&quot;
** William Langland, English poet (d. c.1400)
**Catherine of Vadstena, Swedish saint (d. 1381)

== Deaths ==
* January 8 – Andronikos III Megas Komnenos, Emperor of Trebizond
* February – Henry Hussey, 1st Baron Hussey (b. c. 1265)
* February 13 – Andronikos II Palaiologos, Byzantine Emperor (b. 1259)
* March 13 – Theodore Metochites, Byzantine Empire statesman, author, man of learning, and patron of the arts (b. 1270)
* June 16 – Adam de Brome, founder of Oriel College, Oxford
* July 20 – Thomas Randolph, 1st Earl of Moray, regent of Scotland
* August 2 – King Christopher II of Denmark (b. 1276)
* August 11 – at the Battle of Dupplin Moor 
**Domhnall II, Earl of Mar
** Robert II Keith, Marischal of Scotland
** Thomas Randolph, 2nd Earl of Moray
** Muireadhach III, Earl of Menteith
** Robert Bruce, Lord of Liddesdale
* September 4 – García de Ayerbe, Spanish bishop and crusade theorist
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Jayaatu Khan Tugh Temür, Emperor Wenzong of the Yuan dynasty (b. 1304)
** Rinchinbal Khan, Emperor Ningzong of the Yuan dynasty (b. 1326)
* &quot;approximate date&quot; – Mary of Woodstock, English princess (b. 1279)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6001" start="5" end="9" title="1332" label="1332"/>
<link wikidata="Q6001" start="11" end="39" title="1332" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXXXII]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q217015" start="47" end="78" title="leap year starting on Wednesday" label="leap year starting on Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="86" end="101" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343" start="120" end="131" title="February 18" label="February 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q460342" start="134" end="146" title="Amda Seyon I" label="Amda Seyon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962705" start="148" end="167" title="Emperor of Ethiopia" label="Emperor of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5894" start="236" end="240" title="1329" label="1329"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779" start="245" end="254" title="August 10" label="August 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778" start="255" end="257" title="August 11" label="11"/>
<link wikidata="Q281648" start="260" end="282" title="Battle of Dupplin Moor" label="Battle of Dupplin Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q471796" start="284" end="298" title="Edward Balliol" label="Edward Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="315" end="322" title="Kingdom of England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q239486" start="347" end="355" title="David II of Scotland" label="David II"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="359" end="367" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q123" start="371" end="380" title="September" label="September"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="413" end="429" title="King of Scotland" label="King of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989" start="433" end="443" title="November 7" label="November 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q4191" start="446" end="453" title="Lucerne" label="Lucerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q435583" start="464" end="483" title="Old Swiss Confederacy" label="Swiss Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404" start="489" end="492" title="Canton of Uri" label="Uri"/>
<link wikidata="Q68155" start="494" end="500" title="Schwyz" label="Schwyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q214069" start="506" end="517" title="Unterwalden" label="Unterwalden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410" start="521" end="532" title="December 16" label="December 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870310" start="535" end="550" title="Battle of Annan" label="Battle of Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q239486" start="569" end="577" title="David II of Scotland" label="David II"/>
<link wikidata="Q471796" start="585" end="599" title="Edward Balliol" label="Edward Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="603" end="611" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q186349" start="627" end="641" title="Marosvásárhely" label="Marosvásárhely"/>
<link wikidata="Q186349" start="666" end="677" title="Târgu Mureș" label="Târgu Mureș"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="681" end="688" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587" start="799" end="805" title="May 27" label="May 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="808" end="819" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129" start="854" end="858" title="1406" label="1406"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621" start="862" end="868" title="June 8" label="June 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q704799" start="871" end="895" title="Cangrande II della Scala" label="Cangrande II della Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143" start="916" end="920" title="1359" label="1359"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653" start="924" end="931" title="June 16" label="June 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278840" start="934" end="951" title="Isabella de Coucy" label="Isabella de Coucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="988" end="1009" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316" start="1014" end="1018" title="1379" label="1379"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335" start="1022" end="1026" title="1382" label="1382"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670" start="1030" end="1037" title="June 18" label="June 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q37070" start="1040" end="1058" title="John V Palaiologos" label="John V Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="1060" end="1077" title="Byzantine Emperor" label="Byzantine Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378" start="1082" end="1086" title="1391" label="1391"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921" start="1090" end="1100" title="October 10" label="October 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q43082" start="1108" end="1129" title="Charles II of Navarre" label="Charles II of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6359" start="1134" end="1138" title="1387" label="1387"/>
<link wikidata="Q81678" start="1170" end="1189" title="Pero López de Ayala" label="Pero López de Ayala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134" start="1211" end="1215" title="1407" label="1407"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519681" start="1220" end="1262" title="Elizabeth de Burgh, 4th Countess of Ulster" label="Elizabeth de Burgh, 4th Countess of Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176" start="1267" end="1271" title="1363" label="1363"/>
<link wikidata="Q495226" start="1276" end="1288" title="Andrea Vanni" label="Andrea Vanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179" start="1313" end="1317" title="1414" label="1414"/>
<link wikidata="Q385227" start="1322" end="1346" title="Hanna van Recklinghausen" label="Hanna van Recklinghausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355886" start="1364" end="1369" title="Xu Da" label="Xu Da"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350" start="1399" end="1403" title="1385" label="1385"/>
<link wikidata="Q467672" start="1434" end="1450" title="William Langland" label="William Langland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108" start="1471" end="1475" title="1400" label="1400"/>
<link wikidata="Q237871" start="1479" end="1500" title="Catherine of Vadstena" label="Catherine of Vadstena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331" start="1520" end="1524" title="1381" label="1381"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234" start="1542" end="1551" title="January 8" label="January 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q365659" start="1554" end="1583" title="Andronikos III of Trebizond" label="Andronikos III Megas Komnenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q178913" start="1585" end="1605" title="Empire of Trebizond" label="Emperor of Trebizond"/>
<link wikidata="Q109" start="1608" end="1616" title="February" label="February"/>
<link wikidata="Q11803284" start="1619" end="1649" title="Henry Hussey, 1st Baron Hussey" label="Henry Hussey, 1st Baron Hussey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516" start="1657" end="1661" title="1265" label="1265"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333" start="1665" end="1676" title="February 13" label="February 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q37067" start="1679" end="1704" title="Andronikos II Palaiologos" label="Andronikos II Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="1706" end="1723" title="Byzantine Emperor" label="Byzantine Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507" start="1728" end="1732" title="1259" label="1259"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400" start="1736" end="1744" title="March 13" label="March 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q221657" start="1747" end="1766" title="Theodore Metochites" label="Theodore Metochites"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1768" end="1784" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522" start="1848" end="1852" title="1270" label="1270"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653" start="1856" end="1863" title="June 16" label="June 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680035" start="1866" end="1879" title="Adam de Brome" label="Adam de Brome"/>
<link wikidata="Q81170" start="1892" end="1905" title="Oriel College, Oxford" label="Oriel College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="1907" end="1913" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728" start="1916" end="1923" title="July 20" label="July 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685918" start="1926" end="1960" title="Thomas Randolph, 1st Earl of Moray" label="Thomas Randolph, 1st Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1972" end="1980" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785" start="1983" end="1991" title="August 2" label="August 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q350186" start="1999" end="2024" title="Christopher II of Denmark" label="Christopher II of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530" start="2029" end="2033" title="1276" label="1276"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778" start="2037" end="2046" title="August 11" label="August 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q281648" start="2056" end="2078" title="Battle of Dupplin Moor" label="Battle of Dupplin Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237391" start="2082" end="2106" title="Domhnall II, Earl of Mar" label="Domhnall II, Earl of Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345780" start="2110" end="2148" title="Robert II Keith, Marischal of Scotland" label="Robert II Keith, Marischal of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426674" start="2152" end="2186" title="Thomas Randolph, 2nd Earl of Moray" label="Thomas Randolph, 2nd Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933197" start="2190" end="2223" title="Muireadhach III, Earl of Menteith" label="Muireadhach III, Earl of Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342440" start="2227" end="2259" title="Robert Bruce, Lord of Liddesdale" label="Robert Bruce, Lord of Liddesdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855" start="2262" end="2273" title="September 4" label="September 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q39600792" start="2276" end="2292" title="García de Ayerbe" label="García de Ayerbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8655" start="2360" end="2383" title="Jayaatu Khan Tugh Temür" label="Jayaatu Khan Tugh Temür"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="2408" end="2420" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619" start="2425" end="2429" title="1304" label="1304"/>
<link wikidata="Q8664" start="2434" end="2449" title="Rinchinbal Khan" label="Rinchinbal Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5782" start="2492" end="2496" title="1326" label="1326"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216185" start="2531" end="2548" title="Mary of Woodstock" label="Mary of Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534" start="2571" end="2575" title="1279" label="1279"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39973" wikidata="Q6011" url="?curid=39973" title="1335">
<text>Year 1335 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXXXV]]) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;

=== January–December ===
* May 2 – Otto the Merry, Duke of Austria, becomes Duke of Carinthia. 
* July 30 – Battle of Boroughmuir: John Randolph, 3rd Earl of Moray defeats Guy, Count of Namur in Scotland.
* November 30 – Battle of Culblean: David Bruce defeats Edward Balliol in Scotland.
* December 1 – Abu Sa&#x27;id Bahadur Khan dies, a victim of the plague that ravages the Ilkhanate. This is an early outbreak of the Black Death. His death without a clear heir causes the Ilkhanate to disintegrate.
*October 22 – Ex-emperor Hanazono (95th emperor of japan) becomes a Zen priest.

=== Date unknown ===
* Georgians under King George V (the Brilliant) finally defeat the Mongolians in a decisive battle. After that George V returns the Grave of Christ from the Muslims.
* Slavery is abolished in Sweden.
* Congress of Visegrád: The monarchs of Bohemia, Hungary, and Poland form an anti-Habsburg alliance.
* Carinthia and Carniola come under Habsburg rule. After the death of Duke Henry, the duchies are bestowed by Louis the Bavarian on the Dukes of Austria. From that time onwards, what is today Slovenia is ruled jointly with Austria until 1918.
* Pope Benedict XII begins to reform the Cistercians.
* The excommunication of Frederick III of Sicily and the interdict placed on Sicily end.
* Construction begins on the papal palace in Avignon.
* Aabenraa is chartered as a city.
* The School of Arts in Zaragoza, Spain is founded (later known as the University of Zaragoza in the 16th Century).
&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;

== Births ==
* May 24 – Margaret of Bohemia, Queen of Hungary (d. 1349)
* October 27 – Yi Seong-gye, Korean founder of the Joseon Dynasty
* Gülçiçek Hatun, first wife of Ottoman Sultan Murad I
* Marko Mrnjavčević, &quot;de jure&quot; Serbian king
* Milica, wife of Prince Lazar of Serbia (d. 1405)
*Tiphaine Raguenel, Breton astrologer (d. 1373)

== Deaths ==
* April 2 – Duke Henry of Carinthia
* August 12 – Prince Moriyoshi, Japanese shōgun (b. 1308)
* August 23 – Heilwige Bloemardinne, Dutch Christian mystic (b. c. 1265)
* October 31 – Marie of Évreux, French noblewoman (b. 1303)
* December 1 – Abu Sa&#x27;id Bahadur Khan, Mongol ruler of the Ilkhanate (b. 1305)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6011" start="5" end="9" title="1335" label="1335"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011" start="11" end="38" title="1335" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXXXV]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235670" start="46" end="76" title="common year starting on Sunday" label="common year starting on Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="84" end="99" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545" start="163" end="168" title="May 2" label="May 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q313429" start="171" end="185" title="Otto, Duke of Austria" label="Otto the Merry"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="220" end="229" title="Carinthia (duchy)" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716" start="234" end="241" title="July 30" label="July 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870526" start="244" end="265" title="Battle of Boroughmuir" label="Battle of Boroughmuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q164925" start="267" end="299" title="John Randolph, 3rd Earl of Moray" label="John Randolph, 3rd Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934858" start="308" end="327" title="Guy II, Marquis of Namur" label="Guy, Count of Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="331" end="339" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015" start="343" end="354" title="November 30" label="November 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237470" start="357" end="375" title="Battle of Culblean" label="Battle of Culblean"/>
<link wikidata="Q239486" start="377" end="388" title="David II of Scotland" label="David Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q471796" start="397" end="411" title="Edward Balliol" label="Edward Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297" start="427" end="437" title="December 1" label="December 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q335301" start="440" end="467" title="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Bahadur Khan" label="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Bahadur Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="514" end="523" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="558" end="569" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957" start="641" end="651" title="October 22" label="October 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q18973" start="744" end="753" title="Georgians" label="Georgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q714844" start="765" end="773" title="George V of Georgia" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="809" end="819" title="Mongols" label="Mongolians"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="899" end="906" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="910" end="917" title="Slavery" label="Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="934" end="940" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415418" start="944" end="964" title="Congress of Visegrád (1335)" label="Congress of Visegrád"/>
<link wikidata="Q42585" start="982" end="989" title="Kingdom of Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="991" end="998" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="1004" end="1010" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="1024" end="1032" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="1045" end="1054" title="Carinthia (duchy)" label="Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193474" start="1059" end="1067" title="Carniola" label="Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="1079" end="1087" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q275408" start="1118" end="1123" title="Henry of Carinthia" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q57161" start="1153" end="1171" title="Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Louis the Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q699964" start="1179" end="1195" title="Archduchy of Austria" label="Dukes of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="1235" end="1243" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="1266" end="1273" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="1280" end="1284" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q170389" start="1288" end="1305" title="Pope Benedict XII" label="Pope Benedict XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="1327" end="1338" title="Cistercians" label="Cistercians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="1346" end="1361" title="excommunication" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q367226" start="1365" end="1388" title="Frederick III of Sicily" label="Frederick III of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291244" start="1397" end="1406" title="Interdict (Catholic canon law)" label="interdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="1417" end="1423" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="1458" end="1463" title="papacy" label="papal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="1474" end="1481" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21152" start="1485" end="1493" title="Aabenraa municipality" label="Aabenraa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10305" start="1542" end="1550" title="Zaragoza" label="Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1552" end="1557" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q633561" start="1589" end="1611" title="University of Zaragoza" label="University of Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584" start="1671" end="1677" title="May 24" label="May 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q265460" start="1680" end="1717" title="Margaret of Bohemia, Queen of Hungary" label="Margaret of Bohemia, Queen of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090" start="1722" end="1726" title="1349" label="1349"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956" start="1730" end="1740" title="October 27" label="October 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q378483" start="1743" end="1755" title="Yi Seong-gye" label="Yi Seong-gye"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="1779" end="1793" title="Joseon Dynasty" label="Joseon Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4447304" start="1796" end="1810" title="Gülçiçek Hatun" label="Gülçiçek Hatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q96261" start="1841" end="1848" title="Murad I" label="Murad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q316462" start="1851" end="1868" title="Marko Mrnjavčević" label="Marko Mrnjavčević"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="1876" end="1883" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734105" start="1890" end="1897" title="Serbia in the Middle Ages" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q439595" start="1905" end="1911" title="Princess Milica of Serbia" label="Milica"/>
<link wikidata="Q310197" start="1928" end="1943" title="Lazar of Serbia" label="Lazar of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124" start="1948" end="1952" title="1405" label="1405"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529273" start="1955" end="1972" title="Tiphaine Raguenel" label="Tiphaine Raguenel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261" start="1996" end="2000" title="1373" label="1373"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511" start="2018" end="2025" title="April 2" label="April 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q275408" start="2033" end="2051" title="Henry of Carinthia" label="Henry of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777" start="2054" end="2063" title="August 12" label="August 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288858" start="2066" end="2082" title="Prince Moriyoshi" label="Prince Moriyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q898214" start="2093" end="2099" title="List of shōguns" label="shōgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5723" start="2104" end="2108" title="1308" label="1308"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821" start="2112" end="2121" title="August 23" label="August 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699512" start="2124" end="2145" title="Heilwige Bloemardinne" label="Heilwige Bloemardinne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516" start="2177" end="2181" title="1265" label="1265"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949" start="2185" end="2195" title="October 31" label="October 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016555" start="2198" end="2213" title="Marie of Évreux" label="Marie of Évreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614" start="2237" end="2241" title="1303" label="1303"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297" start="2245" end="2255" title="December 1" label="December 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q335301" start="2258" end="2285" title="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Bahadur Khan" label="Abu Sa&amp;#x27;id Bahadur Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="2307" end="2316" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5624" start="2321" end="2325" title="1305" label="1305"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39974" wikidata="Q6039" url="?curid=39974" title="1337">
<text>Year 1337 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXXXVII]]) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.

==Events==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;

===January–December===
* March 16 – Edward, the Black Prince establishes the Duchy of Cornwall, becoming the first English Duke.
* May 24 – Philip VI of France confiscates Gascony from English control.
* August – Second War of Scottish Independence: English forces relieve Stirling Castle, ending Edward III of England&#x27;s last campaign in Scotland.
* October – Hundred Years&#x27; War: Edward III of England formally rejects Philip VI&#x27;s claim to the French throne, initiating hostilities between France and England.
* November – Battle of Cadzand: English troops raid the Flemish island of Cadzand.

=== Date unknown ===
* Bisham Priory is founded in England.
* The Scaligeri Family loses control of Padua; Alberto della Scala, patron of the music of the Trecento, moves to Verona.
* Petrarch, &quot;father&quot; of Renaissance humanism, first visits Rome to wander its mysterious ruins, with an eye for aesthetics as well as for history, exciting a renewed interest in Classical civilisation.
* The Sofia Psalter is produced in Bulgaria.
* The Despotate of Epirus is conquered by the Byzantine Empire.
* The famine in China, which had lasted since 1332 and killed 6,000,000, comes to an end.&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;
* Siege of Nicomedia: After its foundation by Osman I in about 1299, the Ottoman Empire expanded across Bithynia in north-west Anatolia by capturing territory from the Byzantine Empire.

==Births==
* February 25 – Wenceslaus I, Duke of Luxembourg, Czech Duke of Luxembourg (d. 1383)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Louis II, Duke of Bourbon (d. 1410)
** Jean Froissart, historian and courtier from Hainaut (d. 1405)
** Bianca of Savoy, lady consort of Milan (d. 1387)
** Chŏng Mong-ju, Goryeo diplomat and poet (d. 1392)
** Robert III of Scotland, second monarch from the House of Stewart to rule Scotland (d. 1406)

==Deaths==
* January 8 – Giotto di Bondone, Italian painter (b. 1267)
* June 7 – William I, Count of Hainaut (b. 1286)
* June 15 – Angelo da Clareno, Italian Franciscan and leader of a group of Fraticelli (b. 1247)
* June 25 – Frederick III of Sicily (b. 1272)
* June 30 – Eleanor de Clare, politically active English noble (b. 1290)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
** Changshi, khan of the Chagatai Khanate
** William Frangipani, Latin Archbishop of Patras
** Musa I of Mali, ruler of the Malian Empire (b. c.1280)
** Prince Narinaga, Japanese Shōgun (b. 1326, d. either 1337 or 1344, the sources are contradictory)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6039" start="5" end="9" title="1337" label="1337"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039" start="11" end="40" title="1337" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXXXVII]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235676" start="48" end="81" title="common year starting on Wednesday" label="common year starting on Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="89" end="104" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417" start="164" end="172" title="March 16" label="March 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q184854" start="175" end="199" title="Edward, the Black Prince" label="Edward, the Black Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q876107" start="216" end="233" title="Duchy of Cornwall" label="Duchy of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="254" end="261" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="262" end="266" title="Duke" label="Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584" start="270" end="276" title="May 24" label="May 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q170586" start="279" end="298" title="Philip VI of France" label="Philip VI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="311" end="318" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q122" start="343" end="349" title="August" label="August"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310304" start="352" end="387" title="Second War of Scottish Independence" label="Second War of Scottish Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="412" end="427" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="436" end="457" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q124" start="494" end="501" title="October" label="October"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="504" end="527" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="529" end="550" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q125" start="666" end="674" title="November" label="November"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237447" start="677" end="694" title="Battle of Cadzand" label="Battle of Cadzand"/>
<link wikidata="Q157070" start="720" end="727" title="County of Flanders" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025352" start="738" end="745" title="Cadzand" label="Cadzand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985822" start="771" end="784" title="Bisham Priory" label="Bisham Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="799" end="806" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247250" start="814" end="823" title="Scaligeri" label="Scaligeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="848" end="853" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q212653" start="855" end="874" title="Alberto II della Scala" label="Alberto della Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916253" start="890" end="911" title="music of the Trecento" label="music of the Trecento"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="922" end="928" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401" start="932" end="940" title="Petrarch" label="Petrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="964" end="984" title="Renaissance humanism" label="Renaissance humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="1118" end="1127" title="Classical antiquity" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657740" start="1148" end="1161" title="Sofia Psalter" label="Sofia Psalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="1177" end="1185" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q187684" start="1193" end="1212" title="Despotate of Epirus" label="Despotate of Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1233" end="1249" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q96374919" start="1257" end="1272" title="Chinese famine of 1333–1337" label="famine in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6001" start="1297" end="1301" title="1332" label="1332"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422572" start="1363" end="1381" title="Siege of Nicomedia" label="Siege of Nicomedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83100" start="1407" end="1414" title="Osman I" label="Osman I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1434" end="1448" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q373189" start="1465" end="1473" title="Bithynia" label="Bithynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1488" end="1496" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1529" end="1545" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356" start="1561" end="1572" title="February 25" label="February 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q658785" start="1575" end="1607" title="Wenceslaus I, Duke of Luxembourg" label="Wenceslaus I, Duke of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341" start="1638" end="1642" title="1383" label="1383"/>
<link wikidata="Q444658" start="1674" end="1699" title="Louis II, Duke of Bourbon" label="Louis II, Duke of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6151" start="1704" end="1708" title="1410" label="1410"/>
<link wikidata="Q315000" start="1713" end="1727" title="Jean Froissart" label="Jean Froissart"/>
<link wikidata="Q309460" start="1757" end="1764" title="County of Hainaut" label="Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124" start="1769" end="1773" title="1405" label="1405"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738923" start="1778" end="1793" title="Bianca of Savoy" label="Bianca of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6359" start="1821" end="1825" title="1387" label="1387"/>
<link wikidata="Q469423" start="1830" end="1843" title="Chŏng Mong-ju" label="Chŏng Mong-ju"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208" start="1845" end="1851" title="Goryeo" label="Goryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382" start="1874" end="1878" title="1392" label="1392"/>
<link wikidata="Q294671" start="1883" end="1905" title="Robert III of Scotland" label="Robert III of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129" start="1969" end="1973" title="1406" label="1406"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234" start="1989" end="1998" title="January 8" label="January 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814" start="2001" end="2018" title="Giotto di Bondone" label="Giotto di Bondone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519" start="2040" end="2044" title="1267" label="1267"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616" start="2048" end="2054" title="June 7" label="June 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q617496" start="2057" end="2084" title="William I, Count of Hainaut" label="William I, Count of Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548" start="2089" end="2093" title="1286" label="1286"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613" start="2097" end="2104" title="June 15" label="June 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q537595" start="2107" end="2124" title="Angelo da Clareno" label="Angelo da Clareno"/>
<link wikidata="Q420576" start="2170" end="2180" title="Fraticelli" label="Fraticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482" start="2185" end="2189" title="1247" label="1247"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662" start="2193" end="2200" title="June 25" label="June 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q367226" start="2203" end="2226" title="Frederick III of Sicily" label="Frederick III of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524" start="2231" end="2235" title="1272" label="1272"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657" start="2239" end="2246" title="June 30" label="June 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160835" start="2249" end="2265" title="Eleanor de Clare" label="Eleanor de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552" start="2304" end="2308" title="1290" label="1290"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038166" start="2340" end="2348" title="Changshi" label="Changshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q487829" start="2362" end="2378" title="Chagatai Khanate" label="Chagatai Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12875469" start="2382" end="2400" title="William Frangipani" label="William Frangipani"/>
<link wikidata="Q309333" start="2432" end="2446" title="Musa I of Mali" label="Musa I of Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722113" start="2490" end="2505" title="Prince Narinaga" label="Prince Narinaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q898214" start="2516" end="2522" title="List of shōguns" label="Shōgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5782" start="2527" end="2531" title="1326" label="1326"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073" start="2551" end="2555" title="1344" label="1344"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39975" wikidata="Q6051" url="?curid=39975" title="1339">
<text>Year 1339 ([[Roman numerals|MCCCXXXIX]]) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;

=== January–December ===
* June – Battle of Laupen: The Canton of Bern defeats the forces of Fribourg.
* September 18 – Emperor Go-Murakami accedes to the throne of Japan.
* September 24 (or 28) – Simone Boccanegra is elected, as the first Doge of Genoa.

=== Date unknown ===
* Shams-ud-Din Shah Mir, having defeated Kota Rani, Hindu queen regnant of Kashmir, in battle at Jayapur (modern Sumbal), asks her to marry him, but she commits suicide rather than do so; thus he takes over sole rule of Kashmir, beginning the Muslim Shah Mir Dynasty.
* All streets in the city of Florence are paved, the first European city in post-Roman times where this has happened.
* The Moscow Kremlin is first referred to as a kremlin.&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;

== Births ==
* July 23 – Louis I, Duke of Anjou (d. 1384)
* November 1 – Rudolf IV, Duke of Austria (d. 1365)
* &quot;date unknown:&quot;
** Pope Alexander V, Antipope (d. 1410)
** Erik Magnusson, king of parts of Sweden 1356–1359 (d. 1359)
** Frederick, Duke of Bavaria-Landshut (d. 1393)
** Pope Innocent VII (d. 1406)
** John IV, Duke of Brittany (d. 1399)
** Juana Manuel of Castile, queen consort of Castile (d. 1381)
** Ali ibn Mohammed al-Jurjani, Persian Arab encyclopaedist (d. 1414)

== Deaths ==

* February 17 – Otto, Duke of Austria (b. 1301)
* May 26 – Aldona Ona, Queen of Poland (b. c. 1309)
* August 16 – Azzone Visconti, founder of the state of Milan (b. 1302)
* August 25 – Henry de Cobham, 1st Baron Cobham (b. 1260)
* September 1 – Henry XIV, Duke of Bavaria (b. 1305)
* September 19 – Emperor Go-Daigo of Japan (b. 1288)
* October 29 – Grand Prince Aleksandr Mikhailovich of Tver (b. 1301)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6051" start="5" end="9" title="1339" label="1339"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051" start="11" end="39" title="1339" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCCXXXIX]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235680" start="47" end="77" title="common year starting on Friday" label="common year starting on Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="85" end="100" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q120" start="164" end="168" title="June" label="June"/>
<link wikidata="Q667606" start="171" end="187" title="Battle of Laupen" label="Battle of Laupen"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="203" end="207" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q36378" start="230" end="238" title="Fribourg" label="Fribourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893" start="242" end="254" title="September 18" label="September 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q440447" start="257" end="276" title="Emperor Go-Murakami" label="Emperor Go-Murakami"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="302" end="307" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890" start="311" end="323" title="September 24" label="September 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974438" start="334" end="351" title="Simone Boccanegra" label="Simone Boccanegra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712541" start="377" end="390" title="Doge of Genoa" label="Doge of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461311" start="429" end="437" title="Shah Mir" label="Shah Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6433813" start="455" end="464" title="Kota Rani" label="Kota Rani"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="466" end="471" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="489" end="496" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="657" end="663" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q11057724" start="664" end="680" title="Shah Mir Dynasty" label="Shah Mir Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q79007" start="688" end="694" title="street" label="street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="711" end="719" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049667" start="724" end="729" title="Pavement (material)" label="paved"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="806" end="820" title="Moscow Kremlin" label="Moscow Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q263274" start="847" end="854" title="Kremlin (fortification)" label="kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722" start="892" end="899" title="July 23" label="July 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q348961" start="902" end="924" title="Louis I, Duke of Anjou" label="Louis I, Duke of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347" start="929" end="933" title="1384" label="1384"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997" start="937" end="947" title="November 1" label="November 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q156404" start="950" end="976" title="Rudolf IV, Duke of Austria" label="Rudolf IV, Duke of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190" start="981" end="985" title="1365" label="1365"/>
<link wikidata="Q262884" start="1018" end="1034" title="Pope Alexander V" label="Pope Alexander V"/>
<link wikidata="Q6151" start="1049" end="1053" title="1410" label="1410"/>
<link wikidata="Q350330" start="1058" end="1072" title="Eric XII of Sweden" label="Erik Magnusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130" start="1098" end="1102" title="1356" label="1356"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143" start="1103" end="1107" title="1359" label="1359"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143" start="1112" end="1116" title="1359" label="1359"/>
<link wikidata="Q694351" start="1121" end="1156" title="Frederick, Duke of Bavaria-Landshut" label="Frederick, Duke of Bavaria-Landshut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390" start="1161" end="1165" title="1393" label="1393"/>
<link wikidata="Q227713" start="1170" end="1187" title="Pope Innocent VII" label="Pope Innocent VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129" start="1192" end="1196" title="1406" label="1406"/>
<link wikidata="Q449008" start="1201" end="1226" title="John IV, Duke of Brittany" label="John IV, Duke of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422" start="1231" end="1235" title="1399" label="1399"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439746" start="1240" end="1263" title="Juana Manuel of Castile" label="Juana Manuel of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331" start="1294" end="1298" title="1381" label="1381"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063378" start="1303" end="1330" title="Ali ibn Mohammed al-Jurjani" label="Ali ibn Mohammed al-Jurjani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179" start="1364" end="1368" title="1414" label="1414"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341" start="1387" end="1398" title="February 17" label="February 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q313429" start="1401" end="1422" title="Otto, Duke of Austria" label="Otto, Duke of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610" start="1427" end="1431" title="1301" label="1301"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586" start="1435" end="1441" title="May 26" label="May 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q252763" start="1444" end="1454" title="Aldona Ona" label="Aldona Ona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726" start="1479" end="1483" title="1309" label="1309"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812" start="1487" end="1496" title="August 16" label="August 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q511928" start="1499" end="1514" title="Azzone Visconti" label="Azzone Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612" start="1550" end="1554" title="1302" label="1302"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819" start="1558" end="1567" title="August 25" label="August 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801923" start="1570" end="1603" title="Henry de Cobham, 1st Baron Cobham" label="Henry de Cobham, 1st Baron Cobham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508" start="1608" end="1612" title="1260" label="1260"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859" start="1616" end="1627" title="September 1" label="September 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q62649" start="1630" end="1656" title="Henry XIV, Duke of Bavaria" label="Henry XIV, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5624" start="1661" end="1665" title="1305" label="1305"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896" start="1669" end="1681" title="September 19" label="September 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q313942" start="1684" end="1700" title="Emperor Go-Daigo" label="Emperor Go-Daigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550" start="1714" end="1718" title="1288" label="1288"/>
<link wikidata="Q2951" start="1722" end="1732" title="October 29" label="October 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q679083" start="1748" end="1778" title="Aleksandr Mikhailovich of Tver" label="Aleksandr Mikhailovich of Tver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610" start="1783" end="1787" title="1301" label="1301"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39976" wikidata="Q5563" url="?curid=39976" title="1298">
<text>Year 1298 ([[Roman numerals|MCCXCVIII]]) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;

=== By place ===

==== Europe ====
* April 20 – Rindfleisch massacres: The Jews of Röttingen are burned en masse. The Colmar Dominican Rudolph (refers to him in Latin as a &quot;carnifex&quot;, i.e. butcher or executioner) goes from town to town and kills all the Jews that fall under his control. He destroys the Jewish communities at Rothenburg ob der Tauber, Würzburg, Bamberg, Dinkelsbühl, Nördlingen and Forchheim. In the Free Imperial City of Nuremberg, the Jews thought to seek refuge in the Nuremberg Castle, which are assisted by Christian citizens. But Rindfleisch overcomes the defenders and massacres the Jews, on August 1. Spreading from Franconia to Bavaria and Austria, Rindfleisch and his persecutors destroy 146 communities, and some 20,000 Jews are killed.
* June 1 – Battle of Turaida: Forces of the Livonian Order are decisively defeated near Turaida Castle by the residents of Riga, allied with the Grand Duchy of Lithuania under Vytenis. After their defeat, the Livonians receive reinforcements from the Teutonic Order and defeat the residents of Riga and Lithuanians near Neuermühlen, on June 28. The knights proceed with their campaign, and besiege and capture Riga. In response, King Eric VI (Menved) threatens to invade Livonia, but a truce is reached and the conflict is mediated by Pope Boniface VIII.
* July 2 – Battle of Göllheim: German forces of Duke Albert I defeat King Adolf of Nassau at Göllheim over the prince electors&#x27; decision, without electoral act – to dethrone Adolf and proclaim Albert the new ruler of Germany at Frankfurt, on July 27. During the battle, Adolf is killed and his army is destroyed with the loss of 3,000 horses.
* September 9 – Battle of Curzola: The Genoese fleet (some 80 galleys) led by Admiral Lamba Doria defeats the Venetian fleet at Curzola. The disaster is almost complete for Venice: 83 of the 95 galleys are destroyed and some 7,000 men are killed. During the battle, Marco Polo, commanding one of the Venetian ships, is captured.
* After a year&#x27;s siege, the revolting Italian commune of Palestrina near Rome surrenders to the Papal forces, razed to the ground and salted by order of Boniface VIII, in an act of &quot;debellatio&quot;.

==== Scotland ====
* Summer – King Edward I (Longshanks) marches from Newcastle with his household to Alnwick and then by way of Chillingham to Roxburgh, where he joins the army in July. He proceeds to Lauderdale and encamps at Kirkliston, to the west of Edinburgh, where he remains from July 15 to July 20. The army is accompanied by a long train of supply wagons. Meanwhile, English supply ships, delayed by bad weather, bring food to Leith. 
* July 22 – Battle of Falkirk: English forces (some 15,000 men) led by Edward I (Longshanks) defeat a Scottish army led by William Wallace at Falkirk. During the battle, the English knights drive off the Scottish horse and archers, but cannot break the pikemen in the center. The Scottish pikemen are formed in four great &quot;hedgehogs&quot; (known as schiltron) but are destroyed by English longbow archers.

==== Asia ====
* Mongol invasion of India: Mongol forces led by Qutlugh Khwaja invade the Sindh region of the Delhi Sultanate and occupy the castle of Sivistan (modern Pakistan). Sultan Alauddin Khalji sends an army under Zafar Khan, who defeats the Mongols, on February 6. Some 20,000 Mongols are killed in the ensuing battle. The survivors are put into chains and brought to Delhi, where they are trampled to death by elephants.
* August 30 – Emperor Fushimi abdicates the throne after an 11-year reign. He is succeeded by his 10-year-old son Go-Fushimi as the 93rd emperor of Japan (until 1301).

=== By topic ===

==== Cities and towns ====
* August 1 – The &quot;ideal city&quot; of Marciac in southern France is founded by King Philip IV (the Fair) and his Seneschal Guichard de Marzé (or Marciac).

==== Markets ====
* The foreign creditors of the Sienese Gran Tavola Bank start demanding their deposits back, thus accelerating the liquidity crisis faced by the firm.

==== Religion ====
* Ambrose, Augustine, Jerome and Pope Gregory I are named the first Doctors of the Church. They are known collectively as the Great Doctors of the Western Church.

==== Technology ====
* Wang Zhen, Chinese inventor and politician, invents a wooden movable type printing (Bi Sheng invented ceramic movable type in the 11th century).
&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;

== Births ==
* August 9 – Robert Ufford, English nobleman and admiral (d. 1369)
* August 25 – Gongwon, Korean queen consort of Goryeo (d. 1380)
* December 12 – Albert II (the Lame), German nobleman (d. 1358)
* Andrew Murray, Scottish nobleman, knight and politician (d. 1338)
* Angelo Acciaioli, Italian nobleman, cleric, friar and bishop (d. 1357)
* Bernat II de Cabrera, Aragonese nobleman and diplomat (d. 1364)
* Charles of Calabria, Italian nobleman and Vicar-General (d. 1328)
* Edmond de Burgh, Norman nobleman (House of Burgh) (d. 1338)
* Elizabeth of Carinthia, Sicilian queen consort and regent (d. 1352)
* Everhard II of Limburg, German nobleman and co-ruler (d. 1344)
* Kunigunde of Poland, Polish princess (House of Piast) (d. 1331)
* Peter I of Dreux, French nobleman (House of Dreux) (d. 1345)
* Qvarqvare I, Georgian nobleman and prince (&quot;mtavari&quot;) (d. 1361)
* Zhou Boqi, Chinese magistrate, calligrapher and poet (d. 1369)

== Deaths ==
* January 2 – Lodomer, Hungarian prelate and archbishop
* March 14 – Peter John Olivi, French theologian (b. 1248)
* March 25 – Siegfried I, German prince (House of Ascania)
* March 27 – William of Louth (or de Luda), English bishop
* April 8 – Andrew Moray, Scottish nobleman and justiciar
* April 17
** Albrecht II, German nobleman and governor (b. 1235)
** Árni Þorláksson, Icelandic cleric and bishop (b. 1237)
* May 4 – Frederick VI, German nobleman, knight and co-ruler
* May 22 – Robert de Tiptoft, Norman landowner and governor
* June 11 – Yolanda of Hungaria, Hungarian princess (b. 1235)
* July 2 – Adolf of Nassau, king of Germany (House of Nassau)
* July 13 or July 16 – Jacobus de Voragine, Italian archbishop
* July 22 
** John de Graham, Scottish nobleman (Clan Graham)
** John Stewart, Scottish nobleman (Clan Stewart)
** MacDuff of Fife, Scottish nobleman (Clan MacDuff)
* July 23 – Thoros III (or Toros), king of Cilician Armenia (b. 1271)
* August 1 – Mordechai ben Hillel, German Jewish rabbi (b. 1250)
* August 25 – Albert II of Saxony, German nobleman and co-ruler 
* August 28 – William Houghton, English diplomat and archbishop
* August 29 – Eleanor of England, daughter of Edward I (b. 1269)
* September 9 – Andrea Dandolo, Venetian nobleman and admiral
* September 29 – Guido I da Montefeltro, Italian military strategist
* December 31 – Humphrey de Bohun, English nobleman (b. 1249) 
* Aimery IV of Narbonne, Italian nobleman and knight (&quot;condottiero&quot;)
* Elisabeth of Wetzikon, Swiss noblewoman and abbess (b. 1235)
* Euphrosyne of Greater Poland, Polish princess (House of Piast)
* Ibn Wasil, Ayyubid scholar, judge, diplomat and writer (b. 1208)
* Jacopo del Cassero, Italian nobleman and magistrate (b. 1260)
* John of Genoa (or Balbus), Italian priest, grammarian and writer
* John of Procida, Italian scholar, physician and diplomat (b. 1210)
* Lourenço Soares de Valadares, Portuguese nobleman (b. 1230)
* Mugai Nyodai, Japanese nun, abbess and Zen Master (b. 1223)
* Otto V (the Tall), German nobleman, knight and regent (b. 1246)
* Smilets of Bulgaria, Bulgarian emperor (&quot;tsar&quot;) (House of Smilets)
* Thomas the Rhymer, Scottish nobleman (&quot;laird&quot;), knight and poet
* Thomas Weyland, English landowner, lawyer and administrator
* William de Beauchamp, English nobleman and knight (b. 1238)
* William the Hardy (the Bold), Scottish nobleman and warlord 
* Yang Hui (or Qianguang), Chinese mathematician and writer
* Yaqut al-Musta&#x27;simi, Abbasid eunuch, calligrapher and writer

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5563" start="5" end="9" title="1298" label="1298"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563" start="11" end="39" title="1298" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCXCVIII]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235676" start="47" end="80" title="common year starting on Wednesday" label="common year starting on Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="88" end="103" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524" start="177" end="185" title="April 20" label="April 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q466042" start="188" end="209" title="Rintfleisch massacres" label="Rindfleisch massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q506515" start="223" end="232" title="Röttingen" label="Röttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q468455" start="237" end="243" title="Burned at the stake" label="burned"/>
<link wikidata="Q130994" start="258" end="264" title="Colmar" label="Colmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q153494" start="476" end="500" title="Rothenburg ob der Tauber" label="Rothenburg ob der Tauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999" start="502" end="510" title="Würzburg" label="Würzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936" start="512" end="519" title="Bamberg" label="Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q491743" start="521" end="532" title="Dinkelsbühl" label="Dinkelsbühl"/>
<link wikidata="Q489902" start="534" end="544" title="Nördlingen" label="Nördlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16116" start="549" end="558" title="Forchheim" label="Forchheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q117020" start="567" end="598" title="Free Imperial City of Nuremberg" label="Free Imperial City of Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q707396" start="639" end="655" title="Nuremberg Castle" label="Nuremberg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788" start="766" end="774" title="August 1" label="August 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q150907" start="791" end="800" title="Franconia" label="Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="816" end="823" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625" start="917" end="923" title="June 1" label="June 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q62417" start="926" end="943" title="Battle of Turaida" label="Battle of Turaida"/>
<link wikidata="Q29140" start="959" end="973" title="Livonian Order" label="Livonian Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075107" start="1003" end="1017" title="Turaida Castle" label="Turaida Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="1038" end="1042" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="1060" end="1084" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q557859" start="1091" end="1098" title="Vytenis" label="Vytenis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="1166" end="1180" title="Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q336006" start="1235" end="1246" title="Ādaži" label="Neuermühlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660" start="1251" end="1258" title="June 28" label="June 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q359601" start="1349" end="1356" title="Eric VI of Denmark" label="Eric VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q183464" start="1386" end="1393" title="Livonia" label="Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="1455" end="1468" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697" start="1472" end="1478" title="July 2" label="July 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q534990" start="1481" end="1499" title="Battle of Göllheim" label="Battle of Göllheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q153956" start="1523" end="1531" title="Albert I of Germany" label="Albert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q160101" start="1544" end="1559" title="Adolf, King of the Romans" label="Adolf of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q566711" start="1563" end="1571" title="Göllheim" label="Göllheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q175211" start="1692" end="1699" title="Kingdom of Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="1703" end="1712" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719" start="1717" end="1724" title="July 27" label="July 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856" start="1820" end="1831" title="September 9" label="September 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139987" start="1834" end="1851" title="Battle of Curzola" label="Battle of Curzola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157148" start="1904" end="1915" title="Lamba Doria" label="Lamba Doria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13288" start="1946" end="1953" title="Korčula" label="Curzola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="1991" end="1997" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="2084" end="2094" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q243133" start="2209" end="2219" title="Palestrina" label="Palestrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="2225" end="2229" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406137" start="2286" end="2292" title="Salting the earth" label="salted"/>
<link wikidata="Q971076" start="2339" end="2349" title="debellatio" label="debellatio"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="2393" end="2401" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="2428" end="2437" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002826" start="2460" end="2467" title="Alnwick" label="Alnwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918969" start="2487" end="2498" title="Chillingham, Northumberland" label="Chillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714424" start="2502" end="2510" title="Roxburgh" label="Roxburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q239193" start="2586" end="2596" title="Kirkliston" label="Kirkliston"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="2613" end="2622" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686" start="2646" end="2653" title="July 15" label="July 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728" start="2657" end="2664" title="July 20" label="July 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018540" start="2795" end="2800" title="Leith" label="Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725" start="2805" end="2812" title="July 22" label="July 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q589318" start="2815" end="2832" title="Battle of Falkirk" label="Battle of Falkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="2926" end="2941" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q623687" start="2945" end="2952" title="Falkirk" label="Falkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754114" start="3157" end="3166" title="schiltron" label="schiltron"/>
<link wikidata="Q10729167" start="3197" end="3204" title="longbow" label="longbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q19562959" start="3232" end="3256" title="Mongol invasion of India (1297–1298)" label="Mongol invasion of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273018" start="3279" end="3293" title="Qutlugh Khwaja" label="Qutlugh Khwaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="3305" end="3310" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="3325" end="3340" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308397" start="3366" end="3374" title="Sehwan" label="Sivistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="3383" end="3391" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q335362" start="3401" end="3416" title="Alauddin Khalji" label="Alauddin Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064238" start="3437" end="3447" title="Zafar Khan (Indian general)" label="Zafar Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320" start="3477" end="3487" title="February 6" label="February 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="3592" end="3597" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q213490" start="3614" end="3631" title="Execution by elephant" label="trampled to death"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818" start="3648" end="3657" title="August 30" label="August 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q373949" start="3668" end="3675" title="Emperor Fushimi" label="Fushimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q440454" start="3760" end="3770" title="Emperor Go-Fushimi" label="Go-Fushimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="3783" end="3799" title="emperor of Japan" label="emperor of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610" start="3807" end="3811" title="1301" label="1301"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788" start="3862" end="3870" title="August 1" label="August 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q473925" start="3903" end="3910" title="Marciac" label="Marciac"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3923" end="3929" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="3949" end="3958" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774960" start="4078" end="4089" title="Gran Tavola" label="Gran Tavola"/>
<link wikidata="Q43689" start="4212" end="4219" title="Ambrose" label="Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="4221" end="4230" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="4232" end="4238" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q42827" start="4248" end="4257" title="Pope Gregory I" label="Gregory I"/>
<link wikidata="Q192499" start="4278" end="4299" title="Doctor of the Church" label="Doctors of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q716074" start="4397" end="4406" title="Wang Zhen (inventor)" label="Wang Zhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q426853" start="4458" end="4470" title="movable type" label="movable type"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034" start="4471" end="4479" title="printing" label="printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q200662" start="4481" end="4489" title="Bi Sheng" label="Bi Sheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782" start="4579" end="4587" title="August 9" label="August 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351378" start="4590" end="4603" title="Robert Ufford, 1st Earl of Suffolk" label="Robert Ufford"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="4613" end="4621" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211" start="4638" end="4642" title="1369" label="1369"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819" start="4646" end="4655" title="August 25" label="August 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q6799784" start="4658" end="4665" title="Queen Gongwon" label="Gongwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208" start="4691" end="4697" title="Goryeo" label="Goryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327" start="4702" end="4706" title="1380" label="1380"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369" start="4710" end="4721" title="December 12" label="December 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q158434" start="4724" end="4733" title="Albert II, Duke of Austria" label="Albert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140" start="4766" end="4770" title="1358" label="1358"/>
<link wikidata="Q506425" start="4774" end="4787" title="Andrew Murray (soldier)" label="Andrew Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044" start="4834" end="4838" title="1338" label="1338"/>
<link wikidata="Q352746" start="4842" end="4858" title="Angelo Acciaioli (bishop)" label="Angelo Acciaioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135" start="4907" end="4911" title="1357" label="1357"/>
<link wikidata="Q16182181" start="4915" end="4935" title="Bernat II de Cabrera" label="Bernat II de Cabrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185" start="4973" end="4977" title="1364" label="1364"/>
<link wikidata="Q201737" start="4981" end="5000" title="Charles, Duke of Calabria" label="Charles of Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5802" start="5041" end="5045" title="1328" label="1328"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048026" start="5049" end="5064" title="Edmond de Burgh" label="Edmond de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915567" start="5083" end="5097" title="House of Burgh" label="House of Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q732941" start="5111" end="5133" title="Elizabeth of Carinthia, Queen of Sicily" label="Elizabeth of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="5162" end="5168" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112" start="5173" end="5177" title="1352" label="1352"/>
<link wikidata="Q31192440" start="5181" end="5203" title="Everhard II van Limburg Hohenlimburg" label="Everhard II of Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073" start="5238" end="5242" title="1344" label="1344"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487816" start="5246" end="5265" title="Kunigunde of Poland" label="Kunigunde of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="5284" end="5298" title="Piast dynasty" label="House of Piast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000" start="5304" end="5308" title="1331" label="1331"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075883" start="5312" end="5328" title="Peter, Count of Dreux" label="Peter I of Dreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q489345" start="5347" end="5361" title="House of Dreux" label="House of Dreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077" start="5367" end="5371" title="1345" label="1345"/>
<link wikidata="Q12840673" start="5375" end="5386" title="Qvarqvare I Jaqeli" label="Qvarqvare I"/>
<link wikidata="Q186387" start="5424" end="5431" title="mtavari" label="mtavari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159" start="5443" end="5447" title="1361" label="1361"/>
<link wikidata="Q21003773" start="5451" end="5460" title="Zhou Boqi" label="Zhou Boqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151" start="5530" end="5539" title="January 2" label="January 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179005" start="5542" end="5549" title="Lodomer" label="Lodomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q725440" start="5561" end="5568" title="prelate" label="prelate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404" start="5586" end="5594" title="March 14" label="March 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q326307" start="5597" end="5613" title="Peter John Olivi" label="Peter John Olivi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483" start="5637" end="5641" title="1248" label="1248"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454" start="5645" end="5653" title="March 25" label="March 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q323102" start="5656" end="5667" title="Siegfried I, Prince of Anhalt-Zerbst" label="Siegfried I"/>
<link wikidata="Q168352" start="5684" end="5700" title="House of Ascania" label="House of Ascania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457" start="5704" end="5712" title="March 27" label="March 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020887" start="5715" end="5731" title="William of Louth" label="William of Louth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503" start="5763" end="5770" title="April 8" label="April 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758063" start="5773" end="5785" title="Andrew Moray (justiciar)" label="Andrew Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520" start="5821" end="5829" title="April 17" label="April 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639833" start="5833" end="5844" title="Albrecht II, Count of Hohenberg-Rotenburg" label="Albrecht II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425" start="5879" end="5883" title="1235" label="1235"/>
<link wikidata="Q252282" start="5888" end="5903" title="Árni Þorláksson" label="Árni Þorláksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430" start="5937" end="5941" title="1237" label="1237"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549" start="5945" end="5950" title="May 4" label="May 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q73981" start="5953" end="5965" title="Frederick VI, Count of Zollern" label="Frederick VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581" start="6006" end="6012" title="May 22" label="May 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q17325926" start="6015" end="6032" title="Robert de Tiptoft" label="Robert de Tiptoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617" start="6066" end="6073" title="June 11" label="June 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q833920" start="6076" end="6095" title="Yolanda of Poland" label="Yolanda of Hungaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697" start="6128" end="6134" title="July 2" label="July 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q160101" start="6137" end="6152" title="Adolf, King of the Romans" label="Adolf of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q175211" start="6162" end="6169" title="Kingdom of Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q646085" start="6171" end="6186" title="House of Nassau" label="House of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687" start="6190" end="6197" title="July 13" label="July 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731" start="6201" end="6208" title="July 16" label="July 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q313460" start="6211" end="6230" title="Jacobus de Voragine" label="Jacobus de Voragine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725" start="6253" end="6260" title="July 22" label="July 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265546" start="6265" end="6279" title="John de Graham" label="John de Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648872" start="6300" end="6311" title="Clan Graham" label="Clan Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701834" start="6316" end="6328" title="John Stewart (knight, died 1298)" label="John Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651263" start="6349" end="6361" title="Clan Stewart" label="Clan Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723011" start="6366" end="6381" title="Macduff of Fife" label="MacDuff of Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389483" start="6402" end="6414" title="Clan MacDuff" label="Clan MacDuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722" start="6418" end="6425" title="July 23" label="July 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q888141" start="6428" end="6438" title="Thoros III of Armenia" label="Thoros III"/>
<link wikidata="Q335088" start="6459" end="6475" title="Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia" label="Cilician Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523" start="6480" end="6484" title="1271" label="1271"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788" start="6488" end="6496" title="August 1" label="August 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q460673" start="6499" end="6519" title="Mordechai ben Hillel" label="Mordechai ben Hillel"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="6535" end="6540" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487" start="6545" end="6549" title="1250" label="1250"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819" start="6553" end="6562" title="August 25" label="August 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q661181" start="6565" end="6584" title="Albert II, Duke of Saxony" label="Albert II of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817" start="6618" end="6627" title="August 28" label="August 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012546" start="6630" end="6646" title="William Houghton (bishop)" label="William Houghton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816" start="6682" end="6691" title="August 29" label="August 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q292321" start="6694" end="6712" title="Eleanor of England, Countess of Bar" label="Eleanor of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="6726" end="6734" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521" start="6739" end="6743" title="1269" label="1269"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856" start="6747" end="6758" title="September 9" label="September 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615661" start="6761" end="6775" title="Andrea Dandolo (admiral)" label="Andrea Dandolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882" start="6809" end="6821" title="September 29" label="September 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755054" start="6824" end="6846" title="Guido I da Montefeltro" label="Guido I da Montefeltro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912" start="6878" end="6889" title="December 31" label="December 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q525813" start="6892" end="6909" title="Humphrey de Bohun, 3rd Earl of Hereford" label="Humphrey de Bohun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485" start="6932" end="6936" title="1249" label="1249"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614149" start="6941" end="6962" title="Aimery IV of Narbonne" label="Aimery IV of Narbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q273108" start="6999" end="7010" title="condottiero" label="condottiero"/>
<link wikidata="Q119288" start="7020" end="7041" title="Elisabeth of Wetzikon" label="Elisabeth of Wetzikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646408" start="7064" end="7070" title="abbess" label="abbess"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549529" start="7083" end="7111" title="Euphrosyne of Greater Poland" label="Euphrosyne of Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q174325" start="7148" end="7157" title="Ibn Wasil" label="Ibn Wasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238" start="7207" end="7211" title="1208" label="1208"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805974" start="7215" end="7233" title="Jacopo del Cassero" label="Jacopo del Cassero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508" start="7271" end="7275" title="1260" label="1260"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312678" start="7279" end="7292" title="John of Genoa" label="John of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227361" start="7346" end="7361" title="John of Procida" label="John of Procida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250" start="7407" end="7411" title="1210" label="1210"/>
<link wikidata="Q10319996" start="7415" end="7443" title="Lourenço Soares de Valadares" label="Lourenço Soares de Valadares"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412" start="7469" end="7473" title="1230" label="1230"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305714" start="7477" end="7489" title="Mugai Nyodai" label="Mugai Nyodai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998748" start="7516" end="7526" title="Zen Master" label="Zen Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399" start="7531" end="7535" title="1223" label="1223"/>
<link wikidata="Q64721" start="7539" end="7545" title="Otto V, Margrave of Brandenburg-Salzwedel" label="Otto V"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441" start="7597" end="7601" title="1246" label="1246"/>
<link wikidata="Q430736" start="7605" end="7624" title="Smilets of Bulgaria" label="Smilets of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="7651" end="7655" title="tsar" label="tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12294082" start="7664" end="7680" title="Smilets dynasty" label="House of Smilets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976986" start="7684" end="7701" title="Thomas the Rhymer" label="Thomas the Rhymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515878" start="7728" end="7733" title="laird" label="laird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795015" start="7760" end="7774" title="Thomas Weyland" label="Thomas Weyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020193" start="7822" end="7842" title="William de Beauchamp, 9th Earl of Warwick" label="William de Beauchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433" start="7876" end="7880" title="1238" label="1238"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123011" start="7884" end="7901" title="William the Hardy, Lord of Douglas" label="William the Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q574521" start="7947" end="7955" title="Yang Hui" label="Yang Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915617" start="8007" end="8031" title="Yaqut al-Musta&amp;#x27;simi" label="Yaqut al-Musta&amp;#x27;simi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179294" start="8041" end="8047" title="eunuch" label="eunuch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39977" wikidata="Q5561" url="?curid=39977" title="1296">
<text>Year 1296 ([[Roman numerals|MCCXCVI]]) was a leap year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==

=== January–December ===
* March 30 – Capture of Berwick: King Edward I of England storms and captures Berwick-upon-Tweed, sacking what is at this time a Scottish border town, with much bloodshed. He slaughters most of the residents, including those who flee to the churches.
* April 12 – King Mangrai the Great of Ngoenyang establishes a new capital by founding Chiangmai, and founds the Mangrai Dynasty, that will rule the Lanna Kingdom of Chiangmai from 1296 to 1578 (the 700th Anniversary Stadium will be built in remembrance of this foundation).
* April 27 – Battle of Dunbar: John Balliol&#x27;s Scottish army is defeated by an English army commanded by John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey.
* July 20 – Jalal ud din Firuz Khalji dies, and his nephew and son-in-law Ala-Ud-Din-Khalji comes to the throne of the Delhi Sultanate in Hindustan, becoming the most powerful ruler of his dynasty.
* October 21 – The formal coronation of Alauddin Khalji as Sultan of Delhi takes place, and he takes the regnal name Muhammad Shah I.

=== Date unknown ===
* Boniface of Verona expels the Byzantines from their last remaining strongholds on Euboea.
* Chinese diplomat Zhou Daguan spends a year at the court of Khmer King Indravarman III at Angkor, and pens a journal setting forth his observations.
* &quot;approximate date&quot; – Tarabya, self-proclaimed king of Pegu, is defeated in single combat on war elephants by Wareru.

== Births ==
* August 10 – &quot;Blind&quot; King John I of Bohemia (d. 1346)
* December – Marjorie Bruce, Scottish princess, only daughter of Robert I of Scotland (d. 1316)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
**Charles of Taranto (d. 1315)
** Gregory Palamas, Archbishop of Thessalonica (d. 1359)
** Roland of Sicily, Italian nobleman (d. 1361)
* &quot;probable&quot;
**Algirdas, ruler of Lithuania (d. 1377)
** Blanche of Burgundy, queen consort of France (d. 1326)
** Shi Naian, Chinese author (d. 1370)
** Tamagusuku, ruler of Chuzan

== Deaths ==
* February 8 – King Przemysł II of Poland (b. 1257)
* March 11 – John le Romeyn, Archbishop of York
* March 24 – Odon de Pins, French Grand Master of the Knights Hospitaller
* May – William de Valence, 1st Earl of Pembroke
* May 19 – Pope Celestine V (b. 1215)
* June 5 – Edmund Crouchback, 1st Earl of Lancaster, son of Henry III of England (b. 1245)
* June 27 – Floris V, Count of Holland (b. 1254)
* August 7 – Heinrich II von Rotteneck, prince-bishop of Regensburg
* August 9 – Hugh, Count of Brienne, French crusader
* October 9 – Louis III, Duke of Bavaria (b. 1269)
* November 1 – Guillaume Durand, French canonist and writer
* December
**Isabella of Mar, Scottish countess, spouse of Robert I of Scotland
** Adam de Darlington, Bishop of Caithness (approximate date)
* &quot;date unknown&quot;
**Philippe de Rémi, French lawyer and royal official (b. c. 1247)
** Campanus of Novara, Italian astronomer and mathematician (b. c. 1220)
** Dnyaneshwar, Hindu saint and poet (b. 1275)
** Jalal ud din Firuz Khalji, founder of the Khalji dynasty in India
** Tarabya of Pegu, self-proclaimed ruler
** Robert de Vere, 5th Earl of Oxford (b. c.1240)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5561" start="5" end="9" title="1296" label="1296"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561" start="11" end="37" title="1296" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCXCVI]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q217041" start="45" end="73" title="leap year starting on Sunday" label="leap year starting on Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="81" end="96" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460" start="140" end="148" title="March 30" label="March 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036985" start="151" end="169" title="Capture of Berwick (1296)" label="Capture of Berwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="176" end="195" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q504678" start="216" end="234" title="Berwick-upon-Tweed" label="Berwick-upon-Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="267" end="275" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499" start="391" end="399" title="April 12" label="April 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q887732" start="407" end="414" title="Mangrai" label="Mangrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q52028" start="476" end="485" title="Chiangmai" label="Chiangmai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059707" start="538" end="543" title="Lanna" label="Lanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347394" start="588" end="613" title="700th Anniversary Stadium" label="700th Anniversary Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533" start="666" end="674" title="April 27" label="April 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509663" start="677" end="693" title="Battle of Dunbar (1296)" label="Battle of Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q310065" start="695" end="707" title="John Balliol" label="John Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q976367" start="773" end="808" title="John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey" label="John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728" start="812" end="819" title="July 20" label="July 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691885" start="822" end="847" title="Jalal ud din Firuz Khalji" label="Jalal ud din Firuz Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q335362" start="884" end="901" title="Alauddin Khalji" label="Ala-Ud-Din-Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="929" end="944" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q853968" start="948" end="957" title="Hindustan" label="Hindustan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960" start="1010" end="1020" title="October 21" label="October 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q335362" start="1048" end="1063" title="Alauddin Khalji" label="Alauddin Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910121" start="1166" end="1184" title="Boniface of Verona" label="Boniface of Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1196" end="1206" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q173096" start="1248" end="1254" title="Euboea" label="Euboea"/>
<link wikidata="Q197958" start="1275" end="1286" title="Zhou Daguan" label="Zhou Daguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="1317" end="1322" title="Khmer people" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495118" start="1328" end="1343" title="Indravarman III" label="Indravarman III"/>
<link wikidata="Q163607" start="1347" end="1353" title="Angkor" label="Angkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q32670096" start="1439" end="1446" title="Tarabya of Pegu" label="Tarabya"/>
<link wikidata="Q48979590" start="1464" end="1476" title="List of rulers of Pegu" label="king of Pegu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108367" start="1527" end="1533" title="Wareru" label="Wareru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779" start="1551" end="1560" title="August 10" label="August 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q155167" start="1586" end="1603" title="John of Bohemia" label="John I of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6080" start="1608" end="1612" title="1346" label="1346"/>
<link wikidata="Q126" start="1616" end="1624" title="December" label="December"/>
<link wikidata="Q291049" start="1627" end="1641" title="Marjorie Bruce" label="Marjorie Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744" start="1704" end="1708" title="1316" label="1316"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659977" start="1739" end="1757" title="Charles of Taranto" label="Charles of Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742" start="1762" end="1766" title="1315" label="1315"/>
<link wikidata="Q243787" start="1771" end="1786" title="Gregory Palamas" label="Gregory Palamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143" start="1819" end="1823" title="1359" label="1359"/>
<link wikidata="Q19958467" start="1828" end="1844" title="Roland of Sicily" label="Roland of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159" start="1867" end="1871" title="1361" label="1361"/>
<link wikidata="Q336754" start="1898" end="1906" title="Algirdas" label="Algirdas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289" start="1931" end="1935" title="1377" label="1377"/>
<link wikidata="Q232267" start="1940" end="1959" title="Blanche of Burgundy" label="Blanche of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5782" start="1989" end="1993" title="1326" label="1326"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777502" start="1998" end="2007" title="Shi Naian" label="Shi Naian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217" start="2028" end="2032" title="1370" label="1370"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054329" start="2037" end="2047" title="Tamagusuku" label="Tamagusuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323" start="2081" end="2091" title="February 8" label="February 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q54017" start="2099" end="2120" title="Przemysł II" label="Przemysł II of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504" start="2125" end="2129" title="1257" label="1257"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398" start="2133" end="2141" title="March 11" label="March 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265692" start="2144" end="2158" title="John le Romeyn" label="John le Romeyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453" start="2181" end="2189" title="March 24" label="March 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q652995" start="2192" end="2204" title="Odon de Pins" label="Odon de Pins"/>
<link wikidata="Q952136" start="2213" end="2252" title="Grand Master of the Knights Hospitaller" label="Grand Master of the Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q119" start="2255" end="2258" title="May" label="May"/>
<link wikidata="Q940171" start="2261" end="2301" title="William de Valence, 1st Earl of Pembroke" label="William de Valence, 1st Earl of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578" start="2304" end="2310" title="May 19" label="May 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q118081" start="2313" end="2329" title="Pope Celestine V" label="Pope Celestine V"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366" start="2334" end="2338" title="1215" label="1215"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622" start="2342" end="2348" title="June 5" label="June 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q447802" start="2351" end="2368" title="Edmund Crouchback" label="Edmund Crouchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="2400" end="2420" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440" start="2425" end="2429" title="1245" label="1245"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664" start="2433" end="2440" title="June 27" label="June 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q77245" start="2443" end="2469" title="Floris V, Count of Holland" label="Floris V, Count of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500" start="2474" end="2478" title="1254" label="1254"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781" start="2482" end="2490" title="August 7" label="August 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597781" start="2493" end="2518" title="Heinrich II von Rotteneck" label="Heinrich II von Rotteneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782" start="2550" end="2558" title="August 9" label="August 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635924" start="2561" end="2583" title="Hugh, Count of Brienne" label="Hugh, Count of Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923" start="2603" end="2612" title="October 9" label="October 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q64326" start="2615" end="2641" title="Louis III, Duke of Bavaria" label="Louis III, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521" start="2646" end="2650" title="1269" label="1269"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997" start="2654" end="2664" title="November 1" label="November 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329414" start="2667" end="2683" title="Guillaume Durand" label="Guillaume Durand"/>
<link wikidata="Q126" start="2714" end="2722" title="December" label="December"/>
<link wikidata="Q444026" start="2725" end="2740" title="Isabella of Mar" label="Isabella of Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="2771" end="2791" title="Robert I of Scotland" label="Robert I of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680038" start="2795" end="2813" title="Adam de Darlington" label="Adam de Darlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q957503" start="2883" end="2899" title="Philippe de Rémi (died 1296)" label="Philippe de Rémi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482" start="2941" end="2945" title="1247" label="1247"/>
<link wikidata="Q560868" start="2950" end="2968" title="Campanus of Novara" label="Campanus of Novara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392" start="3014" end="3018" title="1220" label="1220"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033695" start="3023" end="3034" title="Dnyaneshwar" label="Dnyaneshwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529" start="3061" end="3065" title="1275" label="1275"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691885" start="3070" end="3095" title="Jalal ud din Firuz Khalji" label="Jalal ud din Firuz Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q919071" start="3112" end="3126" title="Khalji dynasty" label="Khalji dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q32670096" start="3139" end="3154" title="Tarabya of Pegu" label="Tarabya of Pegu"/>
<link wikidata="Q673774" start="3181" end="3215" title="Robert de Vere, 5th Earl of Oxford" label="Robert de Vere, 5th Earl of Oxford"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39978" wikidata="Q5560" url="?curid=39978" title="1295">
<text>Year 1295 ([[Roman numerals|MCCXCV]]) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;

=== By place ===

==== Europe ====
* April 25 – King Sancho IV of Castile (&quot;the Brave&quot;) dies of a fatal illness (possibly tuberculosis), after a 11-year reign at Toledo. He is succeeded by his 9-year-old son Ferdinand IV (&quot;the Summoned&quot;) as ruler of Castile and León. In the &quot;Cortes&quot; at Valladolid, Henry of Castile the Senator is appointed guardian of Ferdinand, while Queen María de Molina becomes his regent. During the summer, Ferdinand is betrothed to the 5-year-old Princess Constance of Portugal. Hostilities between Castile and King Denis of Portugal (&quot;the Poet King&quot;) are ended by a peace agreement.
* June 20 – Treaty of Anagni: Pope Boniface VIII arranges a peace treaty between King Philip IV of France (&quot;the Fair&quot;), Charles II of Naples (&quot;the Lame&quot;), and James II of Majorca. James returns Sicily to the Papal States, seeking to bring peace between the Capetian House of Anjou and the Kingdom of Sicily; the effort is in vain. Boniface is determined to put an end to the War of the Sicilian Vespers, because he wants to declare a new Crusade for the reconquest of the Holy Land.
* June 26 – Przemysł II is crowned king of Poland at Gniezno, the first coronation of a Polish ruler in 219 years. Przemysł travels to Pomerelia where he confirms the privileges of the monasteries in Oliwa and Żarnowiec. He also visits other major cities: Gdańsk, Tczew and Świecie. In August, Przemysł returns to Greater Poland but in October he travels again to Gdańsk. 
* July 22 – War of Curzola: Genoese raids on the Venetian quarter in Constantinople lead to a formal declaration of war with the Republic of Venice. A Venetian fleet (some 40 war galleys) attacks Galata, the quarter of the Genoese merchants. Emperor Andronikos II Palaiologos arrests surviving Venetians in the capital and joins the war with the Republic of Genoa.
* Marco Polo returns to Venice after 24 years of travel in China. When the Polos arrive, Venice is engaged in a naval war with the rival city of Genoa. Marco joins the war and arms a galley equipped with a trebuchet.
* October 23 – The first treaty forming the Auld Alliance (&quot;Old Alliance&quot;), between Scotland and France against England, is signed in Paris by Kings John Balliol and Philip IV.

==== Britain ====
* March 5 – Battle of Maes Moydog: English forces led by William de Beauchamp, 9th Earl of Warwick defeat the Welsh rebels (some 700 men), near the modern-day town of Llanfair Caereinion in Wales. In a night attack on the Welsh infantry, William uses cavalry to drive them into compact formations, which are then shot up by his archers. Madog ap Llywelyn, proclaimed &quot;Prince of Wales&quot;, and the remnants of his army are routed and retreat across the Banwy River, in which many drown. 
* November 13 – King Edward I of England (&quot;Longshanks&quot;) summons the Model Parliament to Westminster, the composition of which serves as a model for later parliaments. The parliament agrees that a tax can be raised to allow him to launch campaigns against France and the rebellious Scots for the forthcoming year.
* Construction begins on Beaumaris Castle in Anglesey under the direction of James of Saint George as part of the conquest of Wales by Edward I.

==== Asia ====
* October 4 – Mongol leader Baydu Khan is executed after a 7-month reign at Tabriz. He is succeeded by Ghazan, who becomes ruler of the Ilkhanate. He converts to Islam, ending a line of Vajrayana (Tantric Buddhist) leaders.
* King Jayavarman VIII is overthrown after a 52-year reign. He is succeeded by his son-in-law Indravarman III as ruler of the Khmer Empire (modern Cambodia).&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;

== Births ==
&quot;some dates approximate&quot;
* March 21 – Henry Suso, German priest, mystic and writer (d. 1366)
* September 16 – Elizabeth de Clare, English noblewoman (d. 1360)
* Catherine of Austria, German noblewoman and princess (d. 1323)
* Egill Eyjólfsson, Icelandic deacon, scholar and bishop (d. 1341)
* Giovanni Colonna, Italian cardinal (House of Colonna) (d. 1348)
* Hōjō Moritoki, Japanese nobleman and regent (&quot;shikken&quot;) (d. 1333)
* Joanna of Flanders, Flemish noblewoman and regent (d. 1374)
* John III, French nobleman and knight (House of Dreux) (d. 1331)
* John of Montfort, French nobleman (House of Montfort) (d. 1345)
* Juan Alfonso de la Cerda, French nobleman and knight (d. 1347)
* Margaret of Valois, French noblewoman and princess (d. 1342)
* Nicephorus Gregoras, Byzantine historian and writer (d. 1360)
* Nijō Tameakira, Japanese nobleman and &quot;waka&quot; poet (d. 1364)
* Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy (or Eudes), French nobleman and knight (d. 1349)
* Reginald II, Duke of Guelders (&quot;the Black&quot;), Dutch nobleman and regent (d. 1343)
* Reynold Cobham, English nobleman and diplomat (d. 1361)
* Robert de Eglesfield, English nobleman and chaplain (d. 1349)
* Takatsukasa Fuyunori, Japanese nobleman and regent (d. 1337)
* Vitalis of Assisi, Italian Benedictine monk and hermit (d. 1370)

== Deaths ==
* January 2 – Agnes of Baden, Duchess of Carinthia, German noblewoman (b. 1250)
* January 11 – Bayan of the Baarin, Mongol general (b. 1236)
* March 21 – Gaykhatu, Mongol ruler of the Ilkhanate (b. 1259)
* March 31 – Robert V de Brus, Scottish nobleman (b. 1215)
* April 10 – Baldwin of Avesnes, French nobleman (b. 1219)
* April 25 – Sancho IV (&quot;the Brave&quot;), king of Castile (b. 1258)
* May 28 – Barnim II, Polish nobleman and co-ruler (b. 1277)
* August 1 – Pietro Peregrosso, Italian scholar and cardinal
* August 8 – Ottone Visconti, Italian canon and archbishop 
* August 12 – Charles Martel, titular king of Hungary (b. 1271)
* September 15 – Ruggieri degli Ubaldini, Italian archbishop
* October 4 – Baydu, Mongol ruler of the Ilkhanate (b. 1255)
* November 10 – Nicholas Segrave, 1st Baron Segrave, English nobleman (b. 1238)
* December 7 – Gilbert de Clare, 7th Earl of Gloucester, English nobleman (b. 1243)
* December 16 – Roger de Meyland, English sheriff and bishop 
* December 20 – Margaret of Provence, queen consort of France (b. 1221)
* Anna of Greater Poland, Polish princess and abbess (b. 1253)
* Beatrice of Navarre, French noblewoman and regent (b. 1242)
* Fenenna of Kuyavia (or Kujawska), queen consort of Hungary (b. 1276)
* Nicholas of Gorran, French preacher and theologian (b. 1232)
* Padishah Khatun, Mongol female ruler and writer (b. 1256)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5560" start="5" end="9" title="1295" label="1295"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560" start="11" end="36" title="1295" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCXCV]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235673" start="44" end="76" title="common year starting on Saturday" label="common year starting on Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="84" end="99" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531" start="173" end="181" title="April 25" label="April 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q312110" start="189" end="209" title="Sancho IV of Castile" label="Sancho IV of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="268" end="280" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="308" end="314" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="354" end="366" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="Ferdinand IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="406" end="413" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q175276" start="418" end="422" title="Kingdom of León" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q8356" start="453" end="463" title="Valladolid" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357700" start="465" end="493" title="Henry of Castile the Senator" label="Henry of Castile the Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q266025" start="542" end="557" title="María de Molina" label="María de Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="570" end="576" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081231" start="647" end="668" title="Constance of Portugal" label="Constance of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q212890" start="707" end="724" title="Denis of Portugal" label="Denis of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666" start="787" end="794" title="June 20" label="June 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456414" start="797" end="813" title="Treaty of Anagni" label="Treaty of Anagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="815" end="833" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="871" end="890" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q314331" start="915" end="935" title="Charles II of Naples" label="Charles II of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q528401" start="964" end="983" title="James II of Majorca" label="James II of Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="999" end="1005" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="1013" end="1025" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q939200" start="1062" end="1085" title="Capetian House of Anjou" label="Capetian House of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="1094" end="1111" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599340" start="1180" end="1207" title="War of the Sicilian Vespers" label="War of the Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="1277" end="1286" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661" start="1290" end="1297" title="June 26" label="June 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q54017" start="1300" end="1311" title="Przemysł II" label="Przemysł II"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="1331" end="1337" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q51432" start="1341" end="1348" title="Gniezno" label="Gniezno"/>
<link wikidata="Q326188" start="1423" end="1432" title="Pomerelia" label="Pomerelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447540" start="1488" end="1493" title="Oliwa" label="Oliwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q130001" start="1498" end="1507" title="Żarnowiec" label="Żarnowiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="1544" end="1550" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q474697" start="1552" end="1557" title="Tczew" label="Tczew"/>
<link wikidata="Q387502" start="1562" end="1569" title="Świecie" label="Świecie"/>
<link wikidata="Q211371" start="1602" end="1616" title="Greater Poland" label="Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725" start="1663" end="1670" title="July 22" label="July 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377830" start="1673" end="1687" title="War of Curzola" label="War of Curzola"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="1730" end="1744" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="1790" end="1808" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q501817" start="1857" end="1863" title="Galata" label="Galata"/>
<link wikidata="Q37067" start="1911" end="1936" title="Andronikos II Palaiologos" label="Andronikos II Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="2007" end="2024" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="2028" end="2038" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="2050" end="2056" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2085" end="2090" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="2171" end="2176" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19776" start="2232" end="2241" title="trebuchet" label="trebuchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958" start="2245" end="2255" title="October 23" label="October 23"/>
<link wikidata="Q771662" start="2287" end="2300" title="Auld Alliance" label="Auld Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="2337" end="2345" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q237131" start="2350" end="2356" title="France during the Middle Ages" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="2365" end="2372" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2387" end="2392" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q310065" start="2402" end="2414" title="John Balliol" label="John Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392" start="2451" end="2458" title="March 5" label="March 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406664" start="2461" end="2482" title="Battle of Maes Moydog" label="Battle of Maes Moydog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020193" start="2506" end="2547" title="William de Beauchamp, 9th Earl of Warwick" label="William de Beauchamp, 9th Earl of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666382" start="2616" end="2635" title="Llanfair Caereinion" label="Llanfair Caereinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="2639" end="2644" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063375" start="2786" end="2803" title="Madog ap Llywelyn" label="Madog ap Llywelyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="2822" end="2837" title="Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q13125355" start="2908" end="2919" title="River Banwy" label="Banwy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984" start="2945" end="2956" title="November 13" label="November 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="2964" end="2983" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026910" start="3021" end="3037" title="Model Parliament" label="Model Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="3041" end="3052" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q756815" start="3291" end="3307" title="Beaumaris Castle" label="Beaumaris Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="3311" end="3319" title="Anglesey" label="Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681343" start="3343" end="3364" title="James of Saint George" label="James of Saint George"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162450" start="3380" end="3409" title="conquest of Wales by Edward I" label="conquest of Wales by Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929" start="3429" end="3438" title="October 4" label="October 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q448033" start="3455" end="3460" title="Baydu" label="Baydu"/>
<link wikidata="Q80053" start="3503" end="3509" title="Tabriz" label="Tabriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q334496" start="3530" end="3536" title="Ghazan" label="Ghazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="3563" end="3572" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="3589" end="3594" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="3613" end="3622" title="Vajrayana" label="Vajrayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q879224" start="3658" end="3673" title="Jayavarman VIII" label="Jayavarman VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495118" start="3745" end="3760" title="Indravarman III" label="Indravarman III"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="3777" end="3789" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="3798" end="3806" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433" start="3880" end="3888" title="March 21" label="March 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q303435" start="3891" end="3901" title="Henry Suso" label="Henry Suso"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194" start="3940" end="3944" title="1366" label="1366"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897" start="3948" end="3960" title="September 16" label="September 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002250" start="3963" end="3981" title="Elizabeth de Clare" label="Elizabeth de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150" start="4006" end="4010" title="1360" label="1360"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025247" start="4014" end="4034" title="Catherine of Austria, Duchess of Calabria" label="Catherine of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5771" start="4071" end="4075" title="1323" label="1323"/>
<link wikidata="Q13634266" start="4079" end="4095" title="Egill Eyjólfsson" label="Egill Eyjólfsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6062" start="4138" end="4142" title="1341" label="1341"/>
<link wikidata="Q630971" start="4146" end="4162" title="Giovanni Colonna (cardinal, 1295–1348)" label="Giovanni Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q327202" start="4182" end="4198" title="Colonna family" label="House of Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6085" start="4204" end="4208" title="1348" label="1348"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083395" start="4212" end="4225" title="Hōjō Moritoki" label="Hōjō Moritoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="4236" end="4244" title="Nobility" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="4249" end="4255" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045904" start="4263" end="4270" title="shikken" label="shikken"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004" start="4282" end="4286" title="1333" label="1333"/>
<link wikidata="Q288219" start="4290" end="4308" title="Joan of Flanders, Countess of Montfort" label="Joanna of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269" start="4344" end="4348" title="1374" label="1374"/>
<link wikidata="Q919266" start="4352" end="4360" title="John III, Count of Dreux" label="John III"/>
<link wikidata="Q489345" start="4390" end="4404" title="House of Dreux" label="House of Dreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000" start="4410" end="4414" title="1331" label="1331"/>
<link wikidata="Q544055" start="4418" end="4434" title="John of Montfort" label="John of Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946241" start="4453" end="4470" title="House of Montfort" label="House of Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077" start="4476" end="4480" title="1345" label="1345"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659604" start="4484" end="4508" title="Juan Alfonso de la Cerda" label="Juan Alfonso de la Cerda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082" start="4541" end="4545" title="1347" label="1347"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034017" start="4549" end="4567" title="Margaret of Valois, Countess of Blois" label="Margaret of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069" start="4604" end="4608" title="1342" label="1342"/>
<link wikidata="Q372109" start="4612" end="4631" title="Nicephorus Gregoras" label="Nicephorus Gregoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887244" start="4676" end="4690" title="Nijō Tameakira" label="Nijō Tameakira"/>
<link wikidata="Q737148" start="4714" end="4730" title="Waka (poetry)" label="&amp;quot;waka&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185" start="4740" end="4744" title="1364" label="1364"/>
<link wikidata="Q707899" start="4748" end="4772" title="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090" start="4816" end="4820" title="1349" label="1349"/>
<link wikidata="Q314383" start="4824" end="4853" title="Reginald II, Duke of Guelders" label="Reginald II, Duke of Guelders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072" start="4909" end="4913" title="1343" label="1343"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308923" start="4917" end="4931" title="Reynold Cobham, 1st Baron Cobham of Sterborough" label="Reynold Cobham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159" start="4967" end="4971" title="1361" label="1361"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351397" start="4975" end="4995" title="Robert de Eglesfield" label="Robert de Eglesfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q208762" start="5018" end="5026" title="chaplain" label="chaplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389291" start="5039" end="5059" title="Takatsukasa Fuyunori" label="Takatsukasa Fuyunori"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039" start="5094" end="5098" title="1337" label="1337"/>
<link wikidata="Q4014944" start="5102" end="5119" title="Vitalis of Assisi" label="Vitalis of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="5129" end="5140" title="Benedictines" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="5150" end="5156" title="hermit" label="hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217" start="5161" end="5165" title="1370" label="1370"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151" start="5183" end="5192" title="January 2" label="January 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q394697" start="5195" end="5231" title="Agnes of Baden, Duchess of Carinthia" label="Agnes of Baden, Duchess of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487" start="5255" end="5259" title="1250" label="1250"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247" start="5263" end="5273" title="January 11" label="January 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q846112" start="5276" end="5295" title="Bayan of the Baarin" label="Bayan of the Baarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427" start="5316" end="5320" title="1236" label="1236"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433" start="5324" end="5332" title="March 21" label="March 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q470322" start="5335" end="5343" title="Gaykhatu" label="Gaykhatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="5365" end="5374" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507" start="5379" end="5383" title="1259" label="1259"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461" start="5387" end="5395" title="March 31" label="March 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526281" start="5398" end="5414" title="Robert de Brus, 5th Lord of Annandale" label="Robert V de Brus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366" start="5438" end="5442" title="1215" label="1215"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502" start="5446" end="5454" title="April 10" label="April 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q466184" start="5457" end="5475" title="Baldwin of Avesnes" label="Baldwin of Avesnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388" start="5497" end="5501" title="1219" label="1219"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531" start="5505" end="5513" title="April 25" label="April 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q312110" start="5516" end="5525" title="Sancho IV of Castile" label="Sancho IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="5559" end="5566" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506" start="5571" end="5575" title="1258" label="1258"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588" start="5579" end="5585" title="May 28" label="May 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q167200" start="5588" end="5597" title="Barnim II, Duke of Pomerania" label="Barnim II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531" start="5632" end="5636" title="1277" label="1277"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788" start="5640" end="5648" title="August 1" label="August 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q359048" start="5651" end="5668" title="Pietro Peregrosso" label="Pietro Peregrosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780" start="5701" end="5709" title="August 8" label="August 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q511984" start="5712" end="5727" title="Ottone Visconti" label="Ottone Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777" start="5761" end="5770" title="August 12" label="August 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q359237" start="5773" end="5787" title="Charles Martel of Anjou" label="Charles Martel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470101" start="5805" end="5812" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1000–1301)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523" start="5817" end="5821" title="1271" label="1271"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846" start="5825" end="5837" title="September 15" label="September 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093574" start="5840" end="5863" title="Ruggieri degli Ubaldini" label="Ruggieri degli Ubaldini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929" start="5886" end="5895" title="October 4" label="October 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q448033" start="5898" end="5903" title="Baydu" label="Baydu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501" start="5939" end="5943" title="1255" label="1255"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988" start="5947" end="5958" title="November 10" label="November 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026476" start="5961" end="5996" title="Nicholas Segrave, 1st Baron Segrave" label="Nicholas Segrave, 1st Baron Segrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433" start="6019" end="6023" title="1238" label="1238"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299" start="6027" end="6037" title="December 7" label="December 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360375" start="6040" end="6080" title="Gilbert de Clare, 7th Earl of Gloucester" label="Gilbert de Clare, 7th Earl of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438" start="6103" end="6107" title="1243" label="1243"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410" start="6111" end="6122" title="December 16" label="December 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359200" start="6125" end="6141" title="Roger de Meyland" label="Roger de Meyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455" start="6173" end="6184" title="December 20" label="December 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q230889" start="6187" end="6207" title="Margaret of Provence" label="Margaret of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q237131" start="6226" end="6232" title="France during the Middle Ages" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393" start="6237" end="6241" title="1221" label="1221"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767653" start="6245" end="6267" title="Anna of Greater Poland" label="Anna of Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646408" start="6289" end="6295" title="abbess" label="abbess"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498" start="6300" end="6304" title="1253" label="1253"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703683" start="6308" end="6327" title="Beatrice of Navarre, Duchess of Burgundy" label="Beatrice of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437" start="6362" end="6366" title="1242" label="1242"/>
<link wikidata="Q265835" start="6370" end="6388" title="Fenenna of Kuyavia" label="Fenenna of Kuyavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530" start="6433" end="6437" title="1276" label="1276"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340931" start="6441" end="6459" title="Nicholas of Gorran" label="Nicholas of Gorran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418" start="6496" end="6500" title="1232" label="1232"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123797" start="6504" end="6519" title="Padishah Khatun" label="Padishah Khatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502" start="6556" end="6560" title="1256" label="1256"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39979" wikidata="Q5559" url="?curid=39979" title="1294">
<text>Year 1294 ([[Roman numerals|MCCXCIV]]) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==

===Asia===

* February 18 – Kublai Khan dies; by this time the separation of the four khanates of the Mongol Empire (the Chagatai Khanate in Central Asia, the Golden Horde in Russia, the Ilkhanate in Persia, and the Yuan Dynasty in China) has deepened.

===Europe===

* March 30 – A Novgorodian army led by Prince Roman Glebovich attempts a storm of Vyborg, but the attack fails.
* Spring – Following the arrival of a fleet from Sweden, an offensive takes place in which Sweden captures Kexholm after an assault.
* July 5 – Following the Papal election, 1292–94, Pope Celestine V succeeds Nicholas IV, becoming the 192nd pope.
* Autumn – In response to the actions of new royal administrators in north and west Wales, Madog ap Llywelyn leads a revolt against his English overlords.
* December 24 – Pope Boniface VIII succeeds Pope Celestine V, becoming the 193rd pope, after Celestine V abdicates the papacy on December 13, only five months after reluctantly accepting his surprise election on July 5, wishing to return to his life as an ascetic hermit.
* John Balliol, King of Scotland, decides to refuse King Edward I of England&#x27;s demands for support in a planned invasion of France, the result being the negotiation of the Auld Alliance with France and Norway in the following year. These actions play a part in precipitating the Scottish Wars of Independence, which begin in 1296.
* Strata Florida Abbey is rebuilt; it had been destroyed some years earlier, during King Edward I of England&#x27;s conquest of Wales.
* Architect Arnolfo di Cambio designs Florence Cathedral (&quot;Cattedrale di Santa Maria del Fiore&quot;, better known simply as &quot;Il Duomo&quot;); he also begins work on the Basilica of Santa Croce, Florence.
* England and Portugal enter into the first iteration of the Anglo-Portuguese Alliance, the oldest alliance in the world still in force.
* Edward I of England and Philip the Fair of France declare war on each other. To finance this war, both kings lay taxes on the clergy. Pope Boniface VIII insists that kings gain papal consent for taxation of the clergy, and forbids churchmen to pay taxes.

== Births ==
* June 18 or June 19 – Charles IV of France (d. 1328)
* John, Duke of Durazzo (d. 1336)
*&quot;date unknown&quot; – Kusunoki Masashige, Japanese samurai (d. 1336)
**Joan of Valois, Countess of Hainaut (d. 1342)

== Deaths ==

* February 18 – Kublai Khan of the Mongol Empire (b. 1215)
* May 3 – John I, Duke of Brabant
* June 12 – John I of Brienne, Count of Eu
* December 25 – Mestwin II, Duke of Pomerania
*&quot;date unknown&quot; 
**Emperor Yagbe&#x27;u Seyon of Ethiopia
**Brunetto Latini, Florentine philosopher (b. c. 1220)
**Dmitri of Pereslavl, Grand Duke of Vladimir-Suzdal

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5559" start="5" end="9" title="1294" label="1294"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559" start="11" end="37" title="1294" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCXCIV]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235680" start="45" end="75" title="common year starting on Friday" label="common year starting on Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="83" end="98" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343" start="129" end="140" title="February 18" label="February 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="143" end="154" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="217" end="230" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q487829" start="236" end="252" title="Chagatai Khanate" label="Chagatai Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="274" end="286" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="302" end="311" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="331" end="343" title="Yuan Dynasty" label="Yuan Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460" start="385" end="393" title="March 30" label="March 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272243" start="465" end="471" title="Vyborg Castle" label="Vyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141145" start="602" end="609" title="Korela Fortress" label="Kexholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696" start="630" end="636" title="July 5" label="July 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145024" start="653" end="676" title="Papal election, 1292–94" label="Papal election, 1292–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q118081" start="678" end="694" title="Pope Celestine V" label="Pope Celestine V"/>
<link wikidata="Q103625" start="704" end="715" title="Pope Nicholas IV" label="Nicholas IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063375" start="833" end="850" title="Madog ap Llywelyn" label="Madog ap Llywelyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q113630369" start="857" end="895" title="Welsh revolt of 1294–95" label="a revolt against his English overlords"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705" start="899" end="910" title="December 24" label="December 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="913" end="931" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q118081" start="941" end="957" title="Pope Celestine V" label="Pope Celestine V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379" start="1026" end="1037" title="December 13" label="December 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q310065" start="1171" end="1183" title="John Balliol" label="John Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="1226" end="1245" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q771662" start="1346" end="1359" title="Auld Alliance" label="Auld Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="1376" end="1382" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368240" start="1453" end="1482" title="Scottish Wars of Independence" label="Scottish Wars of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561" start="1499" end="1503" title="1296" label="1296"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814107" start="1507" end="1527" title="Strata Florida Abbey" label="Strata Florida Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="1594" end="1613" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q315249" start="1652" end="1669" title="Arnolfo di Cambio" label="Arnolfo di Cambio"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="1678" end="1696" title="Florence Cathedral" label="Florence Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q51177" start="1832" end="1853" title="Santa Croce, Florence" label="Santa Croce, Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="1857" end="1864" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="1869" end="1877" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838032" start="1916" end="1941" title="Anglo-Portuguese Alliance" label="Anglo-Portuguese Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="1994" end="2013" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="2018" end="2033" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip the Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="2128" end="2146" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670" start="2265" end="2272" title="June 18" label="June 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669" start="2276" end="2283" title="June 19" label="June 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q174964" start="2286" end="2306" title="Charles IV of France" label="Charles IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5802" start="2311" end="2315" title="1328" label="1328"/>
<link wikidata="Q576665" start="2319" end="2340" title="John, Duke of Durazzo" label="John, Duke of Durazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028" start="2345" end="2349" title="1336" label="1336"/>
<link wikidata="Q382234" start="2379" end="2397" title="Kusunoki Masashige" label="Kusunoki Masashige"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028" start="2420" end="2424" title="1336" label="1336"/>
<link wikidata="Q916305" start="2428" end="2463" title="Joan of Valois, Countess of Hainaut" label="Joan of Valois, Countess of Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069" start="2468" end="2472" title="1342" label="1342"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343" start="2491" end="2502" title="February 18" label="February 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="2505" end="2516" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366" start="2542" end="2546" title="1215" label="1215"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547" start="2550" end="2555" title="May 3" label="May 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q545424" start="2558" end="2581" title="John I, Duke of Brabant" label="John I, Duke of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619" start="2584" end="2591" title="June 12" label="June 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q94862" start="2594" end="2624" title="John I of Brienne, Count of Eu" label="John I of Brienne, Count of Eu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745" start="2627" end="2638" title="December 25" label="December 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q572038" start="2641" end="2670" title="Mestwin II, Duke of Pomerania" label="Mestwin II, Duke of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q887998" start="2708" end="2738" title="Yagbe&amp;#x27;u Seyon of Ethiopia" label="Yagbe&amp;#x27;u Seyon of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q366328" start="2741" end="2756" title="Brunetto Latini" label="Brunetto Latini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392" start="2788" end="2792" title="1220" label="1220"/>
<link wikidata="Q249270" start="2796" end="2815" title="Dmitri of Pereslavl" label="Dmitri of Pereslavl"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="39980" wikidata="Q5557" url="?curid=39980" title="1293">
<text>Year 1293 ([[Roman numerals|MCCXCIII]]) was a common year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar.

== Events ==
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;

===By area===
====Africa====
* December – Mamluk sultan of Egypt Khalil is assassinated by his regent Baydara, who briefly claims the sultanate, before being assassinated himself by a rival political faction.

====Asia====
* May 26 – An earthquake in Kamakura, Japan kills an estimated 23,000.
* May 31 – The forces of Raden Wijaya win a major victory in the Mongol invasion of Java, which is considered to be the founding date of the city of Surabaya.
* The Japanese era Shōō ends, and the Einin era begins.
* Kublai Khan sends a fleet to the islands of Southeast Asia, including Java.
* The Hindu Majapahit Empire is founded by Kertarajasa in Java. It benefits from internal conflict and Mongol intervention, to defeat the Singhasari Kingdom and establish the empire.

====Europe====
* Torkel Knutsson leads Sweden in beginning the Third Swedish Crusade, against unchristianized Finnish Karelia. In the same year, the construction of Vyborg Castle begins, by orders of Knutsson.
* The Ordinances of Justice are enacted, in the Commune of Florence.
* The Isle of Wight is sold to King Edward I of England by Isabella de Forz, Countess of Devon, for 6,000 marks.

===By topic===
====Arts and culture====
* Dante Alighieri completes the book of verse &quot;La Vita Nuova&quot;.

====Education====
* May 20 – King Sancho IV of Castile creates the &quot;Studium General&quot;, forerunner to the modern Complutense University of Madrid.

====Religion====
* January – Ignatius bar Wahib becomes Syriac Orthodox Patriarch of Mardin.
&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;

== Births ==
* John of Ruysbroeck, Brabantian mystic (approximate date; d. 1381)
* Margaret de Clare, English noblewoman (d. 1342)
* Fedlim Ó Conchobair, King of Connacht (d. 1316)
* Philip V of France (d. 1322)
* Philip VI of France (d. 1350)
* Walter Stewart, 6th High Steward of Scotland (d. 1326)

== Deaths ==
* May 2 – Meir of Rothenburg, German rabbi (b. c.1215)
* June 29 – Henry of Ghent, philosopher (b. c.1217)
* November 10 – Isabella de Forz, Countess of Devon (b. 1237)
* December 14 – Al-Ashraf Khalil, Mamluk sultan of Egypt (assassinated)
*&quot;date unknown&quot;
**David VI Narin, King of Georgia (b. 1225)
**William of Rubruck, Flemish Franciscan missionary (approximate date; b. c.1220)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5557" start="5" end="9" title="1293" label="1293"/>
<link wikidata="Q5557" start="11" end="38" title="1293" label="[[Roman numerals|MCCXCIII]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q235690" start="46" end="78" title="common year starting on Thursday" label="common year starting on Thursday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="86" end="101" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q126" start="169" end="177" title="December" label="December"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="180" end="186" title="Mamluk Sultanate (Cairo)" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="197" end="202" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q392815" start="203" end="209" title="Al-Ashraf Khalil" label="Khalil"/>
<link wikidata="Q11908849" start="240" end="247" title="Baydara" label="Baydara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586" start="363" end="369" title="May 26" label="May 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548624" start="375" end="385" title="1293 Kamakura earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q200267" start="389" end="397" title="Kamakura" label="Kamakura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591" start="434" end="440" title="May 31" label="May 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q49334" start="457" end="469" title="Raden Wijaya" label="Raden Wijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672432" start="497" end="520" title="Mongol invasion of Java" label="Mongol invasion of Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q11462" start="581" end="589" title="Surabaya" label="Surabaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q24706" start="597" end="609" title="Japanese era name" label="Japanese era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327371" start="610" end="614" title="Shōō (Kamakura period)" label="Shōō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327307" start="629" end="634" title="Einin" label="Einin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="649" end="660" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672432" start="719" end="723" title="Mongol invasion of Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q49326" start="737" end="753" title="Majapahit Empire" label="Majapahit Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q49334" start="768" end="779" title="Kertarajasa" label="Kertarajasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="783" end="787" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="828" end="834" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060657" start="863" end="873" title="Singhasari" label="Singhasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q373737" start="926" end="941" title="Torkel Knutsson" label="Torkel Knutsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632466" start="972" end="993" title="Third Swedish Crusade" label="Third Swedish Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069921" start="1019" end="1034" title="Finnish Karelia" label="Finnish Karelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272243" start="1074" end="1087" title="Vyborg Castle" label="Vyborg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885115" start="1125" end="1146" title="Ordinances of Justice" label="Ordinances of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="1194" end="1207" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="1224" end="1243" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q516610" start="1247" end="1282" title="Isabella de Forz, Countess of Devon" label="Isabella de Forz, Countess of Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="1344" end="1359" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q18084" start="1394" end="1407" title="La Vita Nuova" label="La Vita Nuova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579" start="1436" end="1442" title="May 20" label="May 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q312110" start="1450" end="1470" title="Sancho IV of Castile" label="Sancho IV of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q219694" start="1537" end="1569" title="Complutense University of Madrid" label="Complutense University of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q108" start="1591" end="1598" title="January" label="January"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206580" start="1601" end="1619" title="Ignatius bar Wahib" label="Ignatius bar Wahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q210540" start="1628" end="1643" title="Syriac Orthodox Church" label="Syriac Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q920312" start="1702" end="1720" title="John of Ruysbroeck" label="John of Ruysbroeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331" start="1762" end="1766" title="1381" label="1381"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609611" start="1770" end="1787" title="Margaret de Clare" label="Margaret de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069" start="1812" end="1816" title="1342" label="1342"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441103" start="1820" end="1839" title="Felim McHugh O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Fedlim Ó Conchobair"/>
<link wikidata="Q164421" start="1849" end="1857" title="Connacht" label="Connacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744" start="1862" end="1866" title="1316" label="1316"/>
<link wikidata="Q8433" start="1870" end="1888" title="Philip V of France" label="Philip V of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5770" start="1893" end="1897" title="1322" label="1322"/>
<link wikidata="Q170586" start="1901" end="1920" title="Philip VI of France" label="Philip VI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094" start="1925" end="1929" title="1350" label="1350"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100898" start="1933" end="1977" title="Walter Stewart, 6th High Steward of Scotland" label="Walter Stewart, 6th High Steward of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5782" start="1982" end="1986" title="1326" label="1326"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545" start="2004" end="2009" title="May 2" label="May 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q72163" start="2012" end="2030" title="Meir of Rothenburg" label="Meir of Rothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366" start="2051" end="2055" title="1215" label="1215"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659" start="2059" end="2066" title="June 29" label="June 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q707637" start="2069" end="2083" title="Henry of Ghent" label="Henry of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379" start="2103" end="2107" title="1217" label="1217"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988" start="2111" end="2122" title="November 10" label="November 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q516610" start="2125" end="2160" title="Isabel de Forz, suo jure 8th Countess of Devon" label="Isabella de Forz, Countess of Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430" start="2165" end="2169" title="1237" label="1237"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382" start="2173" end="2184" title="December 14" label="December 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q392815" start="2187" end="2203" title="Al-Ashraf Khalil" label="Al-Ashraf Khalil"/>
<link wikidata="Q770827" start="2271" end="2285" title="David VI Narin" label="David VI Narin"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="2295" end="2302" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403" start="2307" end="2311" title="1225" label="1225"/>
<link wikidata="Q316083" start="2315" end="2333" title="William of Rubruck" label="William of Rubruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="2343" end="2353" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392" start="2389" end="2393" title="1220" label="1220"/>
</links>
</doc>
