<doc id="44183" wikidata="Q183140" url="?curid=44183" title="Ozone depletion">
<text>Ozone depletion consists of two related events observed since the late 1970s: a steady lowering of about four percent in the total amount of ozone in Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, and a much larger springtime decrease in stratospheric ozone (the ozone layer) around Earth&#x27;s polar regions. The latter phenomenon is referred to as the ozone hole. There are also springtime polar tropospheric ozone depletion events in addition to these stratospheric events.

The main causes of ozone depletion and the ozone hole are manufactured chemicals, especially manufactured halocarbon refrigerants, solvents, propellants, and foam-blowing agents (chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), HCFCs, halons), referred to as &quot;ozone-depleting substances&quot; (ODS). These compounds are transported into the stratosphere by turbulent mixing after being emitted from the surface, mixing much faster than the molecules can settle. Once in the stratosphere, they release atoms from the halogen group through photodissociation, which catalyze the breakdown of ozone (O3) into oxygen (O2). Both types of ozone depletion were observed to increase as emissions of halocarbons increased.

Ozone depletion and the ozone hole have generated worldwide concern over increased cancer risks and other negative effects. The ozone layer prevents harmful wavelengths of ultraviolet (UVB) light from passing through the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere. These wavelengths cause skin cancer, sunburn, permanent blindness, and cataracts, which were projected to increase dramatically as a result of thinning ozone, as well as harming plants and animals. These concerns led to the adoption of the Montreal Protocol in 1987, which bans the production of CFCs, halons, and other ozone-depleting chemicals. Over time, scientists have developed new refrigerants with lower global warming potential (GWP) to replace older ones. For example, in new automobiles, R-1234yf systems are now common, being chosen over refrigerants with much higher GWP such as R-134a and R-12.

The ban came into effect in 1989. Ozone levels stabilized by the mid-1990s and began to recover in the 2000s, as the shifting of the jet stream in the southern hemisphere towards the south pole has stopped and might even be reversing. Recovery was projected to continue over the next century, with the ozone hole expected to reach pre-1980 levels by around 2075. In 2019, NASA reported that the ozone hole was the smallest ever since it was first discovered in 1982. The UN now projects that under the current regulations the ozone layer will completely regenerate by 2045. The Montreal Protocol is considered the most successful international environmental agreement to date.

== Ozone cycle overview ==

Three forms (or allotropes) of oxygen are involved in the ozone-oxygen cycle: oxygen atoms (O or atomic oxygen), oxygen gas ( or diatomic oxygen), and ozone gas ( or triatomic oxygen). Ozone is formed in the stratosphere when oxygen gas molecules photodissociate after absorbing UVC photons. This converts a single into two atomic oxygen radicals. The atomic oxygen radicals then combine with separate molecules to create two molecules. These ozone molecules absorb UVB light, following which ozone splits into a molecule of and an oxygen atom. The oxygen atom then joins up with an oxygen molecule to regenerate ozone. This is a continuing process that terminates when an oxygen atom recombines with an ozone molecule to make two molecules. It is worth noting that ozone is the only atmospheric gas that absorbs UVB light.

:O + → 2 

The total amount of ozone in the stratosphere is determined by a balance between photochemical production and recombination.

Ozone can be destroyed by a number of free radical catalysts; the most important are the hydroxyl radical (OH·), nitric oxide radical (NO·), chlorine radical (Cl·) and bromine radical (Br·). The dot is a notation to indicate that each species has an unpaired electron and is thus extremely reactive. The effectiveness of different halogens and pseudohalogens as catalysts for ozone destruction varies, in part due to differing routes to regenerate the original radical after reacting with ozone or dioxygen.

While all of the relevant radicals have both natural and man-made sources, human activity has impacted some more than others. As of 2020, most of the OH· and NO· in the stratosphere is naturally occurring, but human activity has drastically increased the levels of chlorine and bromine. These elements are found in stable organic compounds, especially chlorofluorocarbons, which can travel to the stratosphere without being destroyed in the troposphere due to their low reactivity. Once in the stratosphere, the Cl and Br atoms are released from the parent compounds by the action of ultraviolet light, e.g.

: + electromagnetic radiation → Cl· + ·
Ozone is a highly reactive molecule that easily reduces to the more stable oxygen form with the assistance of a catalyst. Cl and Br atoms destroy ozone molecules through a variety of catalytic cycles. In the simplest example of such a cycle, a chlorine atom reacts with an ozone molecule (), taking an oxygen atom to form chlorine monoxide (ClO) and leaving an oxygen molecule (). The ClO can react with a second molecule of ozone, releasing the chlorine atom and yielding two molecules of oxygen. The chemical shorthand for these gas-phase reactions is:
* Cl· + → ClO + A chlorine atom removes an oxygen atom from an ozone molecule to make a ClO molecule
* ClO + → Cl· + 2 This ClO can also remove an oxygen atom from another ozone molecule; the chlorine is free to repeat this two-step cycle

The overall effect is a decrease in the amount of ozone, though the rate of these processes can be decreased by the effects of null cycles. More complicated mechanisms have also been discovered that lead to ozone destruction in the lower stratosphere.

A single chlorine atom would continuously destroy ozone (thus a catalyst) for up to two years (the time scale for transport back down to the troposphere) except for reactions that remove it from this cycle by forming reservoir species such as hydrogen chloride (HCl) and chlorine nitrate (). Bromine is even more efficient than chlorine at destroying ozone on a per-atom basis, but there is much less bromine in the atmosphere at present. Both chlorine and bromine contribute significantly to overall ozone depletion. Laboratory studies have also shown that fluorine and iodine atoms participate in analogous catalytic cycles. However, fluorine atoms react rapidly with water vapour, methane and hydrogen to form strongly bound hydrogen fluoride (HF) in the Earth&#x27;s stratosphere, while organic molecules containing iodine react so rapidly in the lower atmosphere that they do not reach the stratosphere in significant quantities.

A single chlorine atom is able to react with an average of 100,000 ozone molecules before it is removed from the catalytic cycle. This fact plus the amount of chlorine released into the atmosphere yearly by chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) demonstrates the danger of CFCs and HCFCs to the environment.

== Observations on ozone layer depletion ==

The ozone hole is usually measured by reduction in the total &quot;column ozone&quot; above a point on the Earth&#x27;s surface. This is normally expressed in Dobson units; abbreviated as &quot;DU&quot;. The most prominent decrease in ozone has been in the lower stratosphere. Marked decreases in column ozone in the Antarctic spring and early summer compared to the early 1970s and before have been observed using instruments such as the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS).

Reductions of up to 70 percent in the ozone column observed in the austral (southern hemispheric) spring over Antarctica and first reported in 1985 (Farman et al.) are continuing. Antarctic total column ozone in September and October have continued to be 40–50 percent lower than pre-ozone-hole values since the 1990s. A gradual trend toward &quot;healing&quot; was reported in 2016. In 2017, NASA announced that the ozone hole was the weakest since 1988 because of warm stratospheric conditions. It is expected to recover around 2070.

The amount lost is more variable year-to-year in the Arctic than in the Antarctic. The greatest Arctic declines are in the winter and spring, reaching up to 30 percent when the stratosphere is coldest.

Reactions that take place on polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs) play an important role in enhancing ozone depletion. PSCs form more readily in the extreme cold of the Arctic and Antarctic stratosphere. This is why ozone holes first formed, and are deeper, over Antarctica. Early models failed to take PSCs into account and predicted a gradual global depletion, which is why the sudden Antarctic ozone hole was such a surprise to many scientists.

It is more accurate to speak of ozone depletion in middle latitudes rather than holes. Total column ozone declined below pre-1980 values between 1980 and 1996 for mid-latitudes. In the northern mid-latitudes, it then increased from the minimum value by about two percent from 1996 to 2009 as regulations took effect and the amount of chlorine in the stratosphere decreased. In the Southern Hemisphere&#x27;s mid-latitudes, total ozone remained constant over that time period. There are no significant trends in the tropics, largely because halogen-containing compounds have not had time to break down and release chlorine and bromine atoms at tropical latitudes.

Large volcanic eruptions have been shown to have substantial albeit uneven ozone-depleting effects, as observed with the 1991 eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in the Philippines.

Ozone depletion also explains much of the observed reduction in stratospheric and upper tropospheric temperatures. The source of the warmth of the stratosphere is the absorption of UV radiation by ozone, hence reduced ozone leads to cooling. Some stratospheric cooling is also predicted from increases in greenhouse gases such as and CFCs themselves; however, the ozone-induced cooling appears to be dominant.

Predictions of ozone levels remain difficult, but the precision of models&#x27; predictions of observed values and the agreement among different modeling techniques have increased steadily. The World Meteorological Organization Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project—Report No. 44 is strongly in favor of the Montreal Protocol, but notes that a UNEP 1994 Assessment overestimated ozone loss for the 1994–1997 period.

=== Compounds in the atmosphere ===

==== CFCs and related compounds ====
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and other halogenated ozone-depleting substances (ODS) are mainly responsible for man-made chemical ozone depletion. The total amount of effective halogens (chlorine and bromine) in the stratosphere can be calculated and are known as the equivalent effective stratospheric chlorine (EESC).

CFCs as refrigerants were invented by Thomas Midgley Jr. in the 1930s. They were used in air conditioning and cooling units, as aerosol spray propellants prior to the 1970s, and in the cleaning processes of delicate electronic equipment. They also occur as by-products of some chemical processes. No significant natural sources have ever been identified for these compounds—their presence in the atmosphere is due almost entirely to human manufacture. As mentioned above, when such ozone-depleting chemicals reach the stratosphere, they are dissociated by ultraviolet light to release chlorine atoms. The chlorine atoms act as a catalyst, and each can break down tens of thousands of ozone molecules before being removed from the stratosphere. Given the longevity of CFC molecules, recovery times are measured in decades. It is calculated that a CFC molecule takes an average of about five to seven years to go from the ground level up to the upper atmosphere, and it can stay there for about a century, destroying up to one hundred thousand ozone molecules during that time.

1,1,1-Trichloro-2,2,2-trifluoroethane, also known as CFC-113a, is one of four man-made chemicals newly discovered in the atmosphere by a team at the University of East Anglia. CFC-113a is the only known CFC whose abundance in the atmosphere is still growing. Its source remains a mystery, but illegal manufacturing is suspected by some. CFC-113a seems to have been accumulating unabated since 1960. Between 2012 and 2017, concentrations of the gas jumped by 40 percent.

A study by an international team of researchers published in &quot;Nature&quot; found that since 2013 emissions that are predominately from north-eastern China have released large quantities of the banned chemical Chlorofluorocarbon-11 (CFC-11) into the atmosphere. Scientists estimate that without action, these CFC-11 emissions will delay the recovery of the planet&#x27;s ozone hole by a decade.

====Aluminum oxide====
Satellites burning up upon re-entry into Earth&#x27;s atmosphere produce aluminum oxide (Al2O3) nanoparticles that endure in the atmosphere for decades. Estimates for 2022 alone were ~17 metric tons (~30kg of nanoparticles per ~250kg satellite). Increasing populations of satellite constellations can eventually lead to significant ozone depletion.

==== Very short-lived substances (VSLS) ====
&quot;Very short-lived substances&quot; are a class of ozone-depleting chemicals, allowed by the Montreal Protocol, that degrade in under 6 months. 90% are naturally produced, for example bromine-based chemicals generated by seaweed and phytoplankton, but 10% are manmade, for example dichloromethane.

=== Computer modeling ===
Scientists have attributed ozone depletion to the increase of man-made () halogen compounds from CFCs by combining observational data with computer models. These complex chemistry transport models (e.g. SLIMCAT, CLaMS—Chemical Lagrangian Model of the Stratosphere) work by combining measurements of chemicals and meteorological fields with chemical reaction rate constants. They identify key chemical reactions and transport processes that bring CFC photolysis products into contact with ozone.

== Ozone hole and its causes ==
The Antarctic ozone hole is an area of the Antarctic stratosphere in which the recent ozone levels have dropped to as low as 33 percent of their pre-1975 values. The ozone hole occurs during the Antarctic spring, from September to early December, as strong westerly winds start to circulate around the continent and create an atmospheric container. Within this polar vortex, over 50 percent of the lower stratospheric ozone is destroyed during the Antarctic spring.

As explained above, the primary cause of ozone depletion is the presence of chlorine-containing source gases (primarily CFCs and related halocarbons). In the presence of UV light, these gases dissociate, releasing chlorine atoms, which then go on to catalyze ozone destruction. The Cl-catalyzed ozone depletion can take place in the gas phase, but it is substantially enhanced in the presence of polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs).

These polar stratospheric clouds form during winter, in the extreme cold. Polar winters are dark, consisting of three months without solar radiation (sunlight). The lack of sunlight contributes to a decrease in temperature and the polar vortex traps and chills the air. Temperatures are around or below −80 °C. These low temperatures form cloud particles. There are three types of PSC clouds—nitric acid trihydrate clouds, slowly cooling water-ice clouds, and rapid cooling water-ice (nacreous) clouds—provide surfaces for chemical reactions whose products will, in the spring lead to ozone destruction.

The photochemical processes involved are complex but well understood. The key observation is that, ordinarily, most of the chlorine in the stratosphere resides in &quot;reservoir&quot; compounds, primarily chlorine nitrate () as well as stable end products such as HCl. The formation of end products essentially removes Cl from the ozone depletion process. Reservoir compounds sequester Cl, which can later be made available via absorption of light at wavelengths shorter than 400 nm. During the Antarctic winter and spring, reactions on the surface of the polar stratospheric cloud particles convert these &quot;reservoir&quot; compounds into reactive free radicals (Cl and ClO). Denitrification is the process by which the clouds remove from the stratosphere by converting it to nitric acid in PSC particles, which then are lost by sedimentation. This prevents newly formed ClO from being converted back into .

The role of sunlight in ozone depletion is the reason why the Antarctic ozone depletion is greatest during spring. During winter, even though PSCs are at their most abundant, there is no light over the pole to drive chemical reactions. During the spring, however, sunlight returns and provides energy to drive photochemical reactions and melt the polar stratospheric clouds, releasing considerable ClO, which drives the hole mechanism. Further warming temperatures near the end of spring break up the vortex around mid-December. As warm, ozone and -rich air flows in from lower latitudes, the PSCs are destroyed, the enhanced ozone depletion process shuts down, and the ozone hole closes.

Most of the ozone that is destroyed is in the lower stratosphere, in contrast to the much smaller ozone depletion through homogeneous gas-phase reactions, which occurs primarily in the upper stratosphere.

== Effects ==
Since the ozone layer absorbs UVB ultraviolet light from the sun, ozone layer depletion increases surface UVB levels (all else equal), which could lead to damage, including an increase in skin cancer. This was the reason for the Montreal Protocol. Although decreases in stratospheric ozone are well-tied to CFCs and increases in surface UVB, there is no direct observational evidence linking ozone depletion to higher incidence of skin cancer and eye damage in human beings. This is partly because UVA, which has also been implicated in some forms of skin cancer, is not absorbed by ozone, and because it is nearly impossible to control statistics for lifestyle changes over time. Ozone depletion may also influence wind patterns.

=== Increased UV ===
Ozone, while a minority constituent in Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, is responsible for most of the absorption of UVB radiation. The amount of UVB radiation that penetrates through the ozone layer decreases exponentially with the slant-path thickness and density of the layer. When stratospheric ozone levels decrease, higher levels of UVB reach the Earth&#x27;s surface. UV-driven phenolic formation in tree rings has dated the start of ozone depletion in northern latitudes to the late 1700s.

In October 2008, the Ecuadorian Space Agency published a report called HIPERION. The study used ground instruments in Ecuador and the last 28 years&#x27; data from 12 satellites of several countries, and found that the UV radiation reaching equatorial latitudes was far greater than expected, with the UV Index climbing as high as 24 in Quito; the WHO considers 11 as an extreme index and a great risk to health. The report concluded that depleted ozone levels around the mid-latitudes of the planet are already endangering large populations in these areas. Later, the CONIDA, the Peruvian Space Agency, published its own study, which yielded almost the same findings as the Ecuadorian study.

=== Biological effects ===
The main public concern regarding the ozone hole has been the effects of increased surface UV radiation on human health. So far, ozone depletion in most locations has been typically a few percent and, as noted above, no direct evidence of health damage is available in most latitudes. If the high levels of depletion seen in the ozone hole were to be common across the globe, the effects could be substantially more dramatic. As the ozone hole over Antarctica has in some instances grown so large as to affect parts of Australia, New Zealand, Chile, Argentina, and South Africa, environmentalists have been concerned that the increase in surface UV could be significant. Excessive ultraviolet radiation (UVR) has reducing effects on the rates of photosynthesis and growth of benthic diatom communities (microalgae species that increase water quality and are pollution resistant) that are present in shallow freshwater. Ozone depletion not only affects human health but also has a profound impact on biodiversity. It damages plants and trees at the cellular level, affecting their growth, vitality, photosynthesis, water balance, and defense mechanisms against pests and diseases. This sets off a cascade of ecological impacts, harming soil microbes, insects, wildlife, and entire ecosystems.

Ozone depletion would magnify all of the effects of UV on human health, both positive (including production of vitamin D) and negative (including sunburn, skin cancer, and cataracts). In addition, increased surface UV leads to increased tropospheric ozone, which is a health risk to humans.

==== Basal and squamous cell carcinomas ====
The most common forms of skin cancer in humans, basal and squamous cell carcinomas, have been strongly linked to UV-B exposure. The mechanism by which UVB induces these cancers is well understood—absorption of UV-B radiation causes the pyrimidine bases in the DNA molecule to form dimers, resulting in transcription errors when the DNA replicates. These cancers are relatively mild and rarely fatal, although the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma sometimes requires extensive reconstructive surgery. By combining epidemiological data with results of animal studies, scientists have estimated that every one percent decrease in long-term stratospheric ozone would increase the incidence of these cancers by 2%.

==== Melanoma ====
Another form of skin cancer, Melanoma, is much less common but far more dangerous, being lethal in about 15–20 percent of the cases diagnosed. The relationship between melanoma and ultraviolet exposure is not yet fully understood, but it appears that both UV-B and UV-A are involved. Because of this uncertainty, it is difficult to estimate the effect of ozone depletion on melanoma incidence. One study showed that a 10 percent increase in UV-B radiation was associated with a 19 percent increase in melanomas for men and 16 percent for women. A study of people in Punta Arenas, at the southern tip of Chile, showed a 56 percent increase in melanoma and a 46 percent increase in non-melanoma skin cancer over a period of seven years, along with decreased ozone and increased UVB levels.

==== Cortical cataracts ====
Epidemiological studies suggest an association between ocular cortical cataracts and UV-B exposure, using crude approximations of exposure and various cataract assessment techniques. A detailed assessment of ocular exposure to UV-B was carried out in a study on Chesapeake Bay Watermen, where increases in average annual ocular exposure were associated with increasing risk of cortical opacity. In this highly exposed group of predominantly white males, the evidence linking cortical opacities to sunlight exposure was the strongest to date. Based on these results, ozone depletion is predicted to cause hundreds of thousands of additional cataracts by 2050.

==== Increased tropospheric ozone ====
Increased surface UV leads to increased tropospheric ozone. Ground-level ozone is generally recognized to be a health risk, as ozone is toxic due to its strong oxidant properties. The risks are particularly high for young children, the elderly, and those with asthma or other respiratory difficulties. At this time, ozone at ground level is produced mainly by the action of UV radiation on combustion gases from vehicle exhausts.

==== Increased production of vitamin D ====
Vitamin D is produced in the skin by ultraviolet light. Thus, higher UVB exposure raises human vitamin D in those deficient in it. Recent research (primarily since the Montreal Protocol) shows that many humans have less than optimal vitamin D levels. In particular, in the U.S. population, the lowest quarter of vitamin D (&lt;17.8 ng/ml) were found using information from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey to be associated with an increase in all-cause mortality in the general population. While blood level of vitamin D in excess of 100 ng/ml appear to raise blood calcium excessively and to be associated with higher mortality, the body has mechanisms that prevent sunlight from producing vitamin D in excess of the body&#x27;s requirements.

==== Effects on animals ====
A November 2011 report by scientists at the Institute of Zoology in London, England found that whales off the coast of California have shown a sharp rise in sun damage, and these scientists &quot;fear that the thinning ozone layer is to blame&quot;. The study photographed and took skin biopsies from over 150 whales in the Gulf of California and found &quot;widespread evidence of epidermal damage commonly associated with acute and severe sunburn&quot;, having cells that form when the DNA is damaged by UV radiation. The findings suggest &quot;rising UV levels as a result of ozone depletion are to blame for the observed skin damage, in the same way that human skin cancer rates have been on the increase in recent decades.&quot; Apart from whales many other animals such as dogs, cats, sheep and terrestrial ecosystems also suffer the negative effects of increased UV-B radiations.

==== Effects on crops ====
An increase of UV radiation would be expected to affect crops. A number of economically important species of plants, such as rice, depend on cyanobacteria residing on their roots for the retention of nitrogen. Cyanobacteria are sensitive to UV radiation and would be affected by its increase. &quot;Despite mechanisms to reduce or repair the effects of increased ultraviolet radiation, plants have a limited ability to adapt to increased levels of UVB, therefore plant growth can be directly affected by UVB radiation.&quot;

==== Effects on plant life ====

Over the years, the Arctic ozone layer has depleted severely. As a consequence species that live above the snow cover or in areas where snow has melted abundantly, due to hot temperatures, are negatively impacted due to UV radiation that reaches the ground. Depletion of the ozone layer and allowing excess UVB radiation would initially be assumed to increase damage to plant DNA. Reports have found that when plants are exposed to UVB radiation similar to stratospheric ozone depletion, there was no significant change in plant height or leaf mass, but showed a response in shoot biomass and leaf area with a small decrease. However, UVB radiation has been shown to decrease quantum yield of photosystem II. UVB damage only occurs under extreme exposure, and most plants also have UVB absorbing flavonoids which allow them to acclimatize to the radiation present. Plants experience different levels of UV radiation throughout the day. It is known that they are able to shift the levels and types of UV sunscreens (i.e. flavonoids), that they contain, throughout the day. This allows them to increase their protection against UV radiation. Plants that have been affected by radiation throughout development are more affected by the inability to intercept light with a larger leaf area than having photosynthetic systems compromised. Damage from UVB radiation is more likely to be significant on species interactions than on plants themselves.

Another significant impact of ozone depletion on plant life is the stress experienced by plants when exposed to UV radiation. This can cause a decrease in plant growth and an increase in oxidative stress, due to the production of nitric oxide and hydrogen peroxide. In areas where substantial ozone depletion has occurred, increased UV-B radiation reduces terrestrial plant productivity (and likewise carbon sequestration) by about 6%.

Moreover, if plants are exposed to high levels of UV radiation, it can elicit the production of harmful volatile organic compounds, like isoprenes. The emission of isoprenes into the air, by plants, can severely impact the environment by adding to air pollution and increasing the amount of carbon in the atmosphere, ultimately contributing to climate change.

== Public policy ==
The full extent of the damage that CFCs have caused to the ozone layer is not known and will not be known for decades; however, marked decreases in column ozone have already been observed. The Montreal and Vienna conventions were installed long before a scientific consensus was established or important uncertainties in the science field were being resolved. The ozone case was understood comparably well by lay persons as e.g. &quot;Ozone shield&quot; or &quot;ozone hole&quot; were useful &quot;easy-to-understand bridging metaphors&quot;. Americans voluntarily switched away from aerosol sprays, resulting in a 50 percent sales loss even before legislation was enforced.

After a 1976 report by the United States National Academy of Sciences concluded that credible scientific evidence supported the ozone depletion hypothesis a few countries, including the United States, Canada, Sweden, Denmark, and Norway, moved to eliminate the use of CFCs in aerosol spray cans. At the time this was widely regarded as a first step towards a more comprehensive regulation policy, but progress in this direction slowed in subsequent years, due to a combination of political factors (continued resistance from the halocarbon industry and a general change in attitude towards environmental regulation during the first two years of the Reagan administration) and scientific developments (subsequent National Academy assessments that indicated that the first estimates of the magnitude of ozone depletion had been overly large).

A critical DuPont manufacturing patent for Freon was set to expire in 1979. The United States banned the use of CFCs in aerosol cans in 1978. The European Community rejected proposals to ban CFCs in aerosol sprays, and in the U.S., CFCs continued to be used as refrigerants and for cleaning circuit boards. Worldwide CFC production fell sharply after the U.S. aerosol ban, but by 1986 had returned nearly to its 1976 level. In 1993, DuPont Canada closed its CFC facility.

The U.S. government&#x27;s attitude began to change again in 1983, when William Ruckelshaus replaced Anne M. Burford as Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Under Ruckelshaus and his successor, Lee Thomas, the EPA pushed for an international approach to halocarbon regulations. In 1985 twenty nations, including most of the major CFC producers, signed the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer, which established a framework for negotiating international regulations on ozone-depleting substances. That same year, the discovery of the Antarctic ozone hole was announced, causing a revival in public attention to the issue.

In 1987, representatives from 43 nations signed the Montreal Protocol. Meanwhile, the halocarbon industry shifted its position and started supporting a protocol to limit CFC production. However, this shift was uneven with DuPont acting more quickly than its European counterparts. DuPont may have feared court action related to increased skin cancer, especially as the EPA had published a study in 1986 claiming that an additional 40 million cases and 800,000 cancer deaths were to be expected in the U.S. in the next 88 years. The EU shifted its position as well after Germany gave up its defence of the CFC industry and started supporting moves towards regulation. Government and industry in France and the UK tried to defend their CFC producing industries even after the Montreal Protocol had been signed.

At Montreal, the participants agreed to freeze production of CFCs at 1986 levels and to reduce production by 50 percent by 1999. After a series of scientific expeditions to the Antarctic produced convincing evidence that the ozone hole was indeed caused by chlorine and bromine from manmade organohalogens, the Montreal Protocol was strengthened at a 1990 meeting in London. The participants agreed to phase out CFCs and halons entirely (aside from a very small amount marked for certain &quot;essential&quot; uses, such as asthma inhalers) by 2000 in non-Article 5 countries and by 2010 in Article 5 (less developed) signatories. At a 1992 meeting in Copenhagen, Denmark, the phase-out date was moved up to 1996. At the same meeting, methyl bromide (MeBr), a fumigant used primarily in agricultural production, was added to the list of controlled substances. For all substances controlled under the protocol, phaseout schedules were delayed for less developed (&#x27;Article 5(1)&#x27;) countries, and phaseout in these countries was supported by transfers of expertise, technology, and money from non-Article 5(1) Parties to the Protocol. Additionally, exemptions from the agreed schedules could be applied for under the Essential Use Exemption (EUE) process for substances other than methyl bromide and under the Critical Use Exemption (CUE) process for methyl bromide.

Civil society, including especially non-governmental organizations (NGOs), played critical roles at all stages of policy development leading to the Vienna Conference, the Montreal Protocol, and in assessing compliance afterwards. The major companies claimed that no alternatives to HFC existed. An ozone-safe hydrocarbon refrigerant was developed at a technological institute in Hamburg, Germany, consisting of a mixture of the hydrocarbon gases propane and butane, and in 1992 came to the attention of the NGO Greenpeace. Greenpeace called it &quot;Greenfreeze&quot;. The NGO then worked successfully first with a small and struggling company to market an appliance beginning in Europe, then Asia and later Latin America, receiving a 1997 UNEP award. By 1995, Germany had made CFC refrigerators illegal. Since 2004, corporations like Coca-Cola, Carlsberg, and IKEA formed a coalition to promote the ozone-safe Greenfreeze units. Production spread to companies like Electrolux, Bosch, and LG, with sales reaching some 300 million refrigerators by 2008. In Latin America, a domestic Argentinian company began Greenfreeze production in 2003, while the giant Bosch in Brazil began a year later. By 2013 it was being used by some 700 million refrigerators, making up about 40 percent of the market.

In the U.S., however, change has been much slower. To some extent, CFCs were being replaced by the less damaging hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), although concerns remain regarding HCFCs also. In some applications, hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) were being used to replace CFCs. HFCs, which contain no chlorine or bromine, do not contribute to ozone depletion although they are potent greenhouse gases. The best known of these compounds is probably HFC-134a (R-134a), which in the United States has largely replaced CFC-12 (R-12) in automobile air conditioners. In laboratory analytics (a former &quot;essential&quot; use) the ozone depleting substances can be replaced with other solvents. Chemical companies like Du Pont, whose representatives disparaged Greenfreeze as &quot;that German technology,&quot; maneuvered the EPA to block the technology in the U.S. until 2011. Ben &amp; Jerry&#x27;s of Unilever and General Electric, spurred by Greenpeace, had expressed formal interest in 2008 which figured in the EPA&#x27;s final approval.

The EU recast its Ozone Regulation in 2009. The law bans ozone-depleting substances with the goal of protecting the ozone layer. The list of ODS that are subject to the regulation is the same as those under the Montreal Protocol, with some additions.

More recently, policy experts have advocated for efforts to link ozone protection efforts to climate protection efforts. Many ODS are also greenhouse gases, some thousands of times more powerful agents of radiative forcing than carbon dioxide over the short and medium term. Thus policies protecting the ozone layer have had benefits in mitigating climate change. The reduction of the radiative forcing due to ODS probably masked the true level of climate change effects of other greenhouse gases, and was responsible for the &quot;slow down&quot; of global warming from the mid-90s. Policy decisions in one arena affect the costs and effectiveness of environmental improvements in the other.

=== ODS requirements in the marine industry ===
The IMO has amended MARPOL Annex VI Regulation 12 regarding ozone depleting substances. As from July 1, 2010, all vessels where MARPOL Annex VI is applicable should have a list of equipment using ozone depleting substances. The list should include the name of ODS, type and location of equipment, quantity in kg and date. All changes since that date should be recorded in an ODS Record book on board recording all intended or unintended releases to the atmosphere. Furthermore, new ODS supply or landing to shore facilities should be recorded as well.

== Prospects of ozone depletion ==

Since the adoption and strengthening of the Montreal Protocol has led to reductions in the emissions of CFCs, atmospheric concentrations of the most-significant compounds have been declining. These substances are being gradually removed from the atmosphere; since peaking in 1994, the Effective Equivalent Chlorine (EECl) level in the atmosphere had dropped about 10 percent by 2008. The decrease in ozone-depleting chemicals has also been significantly affected by a decrease in bromine-containing chemicals. The data suggest that substantial natural sources exist for atmospheric methyl bromide (). The phase-out of CFCs means that nitrous oxide (), which is not covered by the Montreal Protocol, has become the most highly emitted ozone-depleting substance and is expected to remain so throughout the 21st century.

According to the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report, global stratospheric ozone levels experienced rapid decline in the 1970s and 1980s and have since been increasing, but have not reached preindustrial levels. Although considerable variability is expected from year to year, including in polar regions where depletion is largest, the ozone layer is expected to continue recovering in coming decades due to declining ozone-depleting substance concentrations, assuming full compliance with the Montreal Protocol.

The Antarctic ozone hole is expected to continue for decades. Ozone concentrations in the lower stratosphere over Antarctica increased by 5–10 percent by 2020 and will return to pre-1980 levels by about 2060–2075. This is 10–25 years later than predicted in earlier assessments, because of revised estimates of atmospheric concentrations of ozone-depleting substances, including a larger predicted future usage in developing countries. Another factor that may prolong ozone depletion is the drawdown of nitrogen oxides from above the stratosphere due to changing wind patterns. A gradual trend toward &quot;healing&quot; was reported in 2016. In 2019, the ozone hole was at its smallest in the previous thirty years, due to the warmer polar stratosphere weakening the polar vortex. In September 2023, the Antarctic ozone hole was one of the largest on record, at 26 million square kilometers. The anomalously large ozone loss may have been a result of the 2022 Tonga volcanic eruption.

== Research history ==
The basic physical and chemical processes that lead to the formation of an ozone layer in the Earth&#x27;s stratosphere were discovered by Sydney Chapman in 1930. Short-wavelength UV radiation splits an oxygen () molecule into two oxygen (O) atoms, which then combine with other oxygen molecules to form ozone. Ozone is removed when an oxygen atom and an ozone molecule &quot;recombine&quot; to form two oxygen molecules, i.e. O + → 2. In the 1950s, David Bates and Marcel Nicolet presented evidence that various free radicals, in particular hydroxyl (OH) and nitric oxide (NO), could catalyze this recombination reaction, reducing the overall amount of ozone. These free radicals were known to be present in the stratosphere, and so were regarded as part of the natural balance—it was estimated that in their absence, the ozone layer would be about twice as thick as it currently is.

In 1970 Paul Crutzen pointed out that emissions of nitrous oxide (), a stable, long-lived gas produced by soil bacteria, from the Earth&#x27;s surface could affect the amount of nitric oxide (NO) in the stratosphere. Crutzen showed that nitrous oxide lives long enough to reach the stratosphere, where it is converted into NO. Crutzen then noted that increasing use of fertilizers might have led to an increase in nitrous oxide emissions over the natural background, which would in turn result in an increase in the amount of NO in the stratosphere. Thus human activity could affect the stratospheric ozone layer. In the following year, Crutzen and (independently) Harold Johnston suggested that NO emissions from supersonic passenger aircraft, which would fly in the lower stratosphere, could also deplete the ozone layer. However, more recent analysis in 1995 by David W. Fahey, an atmospheric scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, found that the drop in ozone would be from 1–2 percent if a fleet of 500 supersonic passenger aircraft were operated. This, Fahey expressed, would not be a showstopper for advanced supersonic passenger aircraft development.

=== Rowland–Molina hypothesis ===
In 1974 Frank Sherwood Rowland, Chemistry Professor at the University of California at Irvine, and his postdoctoral associate Mario J. Molina suggested that long-lived organic halogen compounds, such as CFCs, might behave in a similar fashion as Crutzen had proposed for nitrous oxide. James Lovelock had recently discovered, during a cruise in the South Atlantic in 1971, that almost all of the CFC compounds manufactured since their invention in 1930 were still present in the atmosphere. Molina and Rowland concluded that, like , the CFCs would reach the stratosphere where they would be dissociated by UV light, releasing chlorine atoms. A year earlier, Richard Stolarski and Ralph Cicerone at the University of Michigan had shown that Cl is even more efficient than NO at catalyzing the destruction of ozone. Similar conclusions were reached by Michael McElroy and Steven Wofsy at Harvard University. Neither group, however, had realized that CFCs were a potentially large source of stratospheric chlorine—instead, they had been investigating the possible effects of HCl emissions from the Space Shuttle, which are very much smaller.

The Rowland–Molina hypothesis was strongly disputed by representatives of the aerosol and halocarbon industries. The Chair of the Board of DuPont was quoted as saying that ozone depletion theory is &quot;a science fiction tale ... a load of rubbish ... utter nonsense&quot;. Robert Abplanalp, the President of Precision Valve Corporation (and inventor of the first practical aerosol spray can valve), wrote to the Chancellor of UC Irvine to complain about Rowland&#x27;s public statements. Nevertheless, within three years most of the basic assumptions made by Rowland and Molina were confirmed by laboratory measurements and by direct observation in the stratosphere. The concentrations of the source gases (CFCs and related compounds) and the chlorine reservoir species (HCl and ) were measured throughout the stratosphere, and demonstrated that CFCs were indeed the major source of stratospheric chlorine, and that nearly all of the CFCs emitted would eventually reach the stratosphere. Even more convincing was the measurement, by James G. Anderson and collaborators, of chlorine monoxide (ClO) in the stratosphere. ClO is produced by the reaction of Cl with ozone—its observation thus demonstrated that Cl radicals not only were present in the stratosphere but also were actually involved in destroying ozone. McElroy and Wofsy extended the work of Rowland and Molina by showing that bromine atoms were even more effective catalysts for ozone loss than chlorine atoms and argued that the brominated organic compounds known as halons, widely used in fire extinguishers, were a potentially large source of stratospheric bromine. In 1976 the United States National Academy of Sciences released a report concluding that the ozone depletion hypothesis was strongly supported by the scientific evidence. In response the United States, Canada and Norway banned the use of CFCs in aerosol spray cans in 1978. Early estimates were that, if CFC production continued at 1977 levels, the total atmospheric ozone would after a century or so reach a steady state, 15 to 18 percent below normal levels. By 1984, when better evidence on the speed of critical reactions was available, this estimate was changed to 5 to 9 percent steady-state depletion.

Crutzen, Molina, and Rowland were awarded the 1995 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for their work on stratospheric ozone.

=== Antarctic ozone hole ===
The discovery of the Antarctic &quot;ozone hole&quot; by British Antarctic Survey scientists Farman, Gardiner and Shanklin (first reported in a paper in &quot;Nature&quot; in May 1985) came as a shock to the scientific community, because the observed decline in polar ozone was far larger than had been anticipated. Satellite measurements (TOMS onboard Nimbus 7) showing massive depletion of ozone around the south pole were becoming available at the same time. However, these were initially rejected as unreasonable by data quality control algorithms (they were filtered out as errors since the values were unexpectedly low); the ozone hole was detected only in satellite data when the raw data was reprocessed following evidence of ozone depletion in &quot;in situ&quot; observations. When the software was rerun without the flags, the ozone hole was seen as far back as 1976.

Susan Solomon, an atmospheric chemist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), proposed that chemical reactions on polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs) in the cold Antarctic stratosphere caused a massive, though localized and seasonal, increase in the amount of chlorine present in active, ozone-destroying forms. The polar stratospheric clouds in Antarctica are only formed at very low temperatures, as low as −80 °C, and early spring conditions. In such conditions the ice crystals of the cloud provide a suitable surface for conversion of unreactive chlorine compounds into reactive chlorine compounds, which can easily deplete ozone.

Moreover, the polar vortex formed over Antarctica is very tight and the reaction occurring on the surface of the cloud crystals is far different from when it occurs in atmosphere. These conditions have led to ozone hole formation in Antarctica. This hypothesis was decisively confirmed, first by laboratory measurements and subsequently by direct measurements, from the ground and from high-altitude airplanes, of very high concentrations of chlorine monoxide (ClO) in the Antarctic stratosphere.

Alternative hypotheses, which had attributed the ozone hole to variations in solar UV radiation or to changes in atmospheric circulation patterns, were also tested and shown to be untenable.

Meanwhile, analysis of ozone measurements from the worldwide network of ground-based Dobson spectrophotometers led an international panel to conclude that the ozone layer was in fact being depleted, at all latitudes outside of the tropics. These trends were confirmed by satellite measurements. As a consequence, the major halocarbon-producing nations agreed to phase out production of CFCs, halons, and related compounds, a process that was completed in 1996.

Since 1981 the United Nations Environment Programme, under the auspices of the World Meteorological Organization, has sponsored a series of technical reports on the Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion, based on satellite measurements. The 2007 report showed that the hole in the ozone layer was recovering and the smallest it had been for about a decade.

A 2010 report found, &quot;Over the past decade, global ozone and ozone in the Arctic and Antarctic regions is no longer decreasing but is not yet increasing. The ozone layer outside the Polar regions is projected to recover to its pre-1980 levels some time before the middle of this century. In contrast, the springtime ozone hole over the Antarctic is expected to recover much later.&quot;

In 2012, NOAA and NASA reported &quot;Warmer air temperatures high above the Antarctic led to the second smallest season ozone hole in 20 years averaging 17.9 million square kilometres. The hole reached its maximum size for the season on Sept 22, stretching to 21.2 million square kilometres.&quot; A gradual trend toward &quot;healing&quot; was reported in 2016 and then in 2017. It is reported that the recovery signal is evident even in the ozone loss saturation altitudes.

The hole in the Earth&#x27;s ozone layer over the South Pole has affected atmospheric circulation in the Southern Hemisphere all the way to the equator. The ozone hole has influenced atmospheric circulation all the way to the tropics and increased rainfall at low, subtropical latitudes in the Southern Hemisphere.

=== Arctic ozone &quot;mini-hole&quot; ===
On March 3, 2005, the journal &quot;Nature&quot; published an article linking 2004&#x27;s unusually large Arctic ozone hole to solar wind activity.

On March 15, 2011, a record ozone layer loss was observed, with about half of the ozone present over the Arctic having been destroyed. The change was attributed to increasingly cold winters in the Arctic stratosphere at an altitude of approximately , a change associated with global warming in a relationship that is still under investigation. By March 25, the ozone loss had become the largest compared to that observed in all previous winters with the possibility that it would become an ozone hole. This would require that the quantities of ozone to fall below 200 Dobson units, from the 250 recorded over central Siberia. It is predicted that the thinning layer would affect parts of Scandinavia and Eastern Europe on March 30–31.

On October 2, 2011, a study was published in the journal &quot;Nature&quot;, which said that between December 2010 and March 2011 up to 80 percent of the ozone in the atmosphere at about above the surface was destroyed. The level of ozone depletion was severe enough that scientists said it could be compared to the ozone hole that forms over Antarctica every winter. According to the study, &quot;for the first time, sufficient loss occurred to reasonably be described as an Arctic ozone hole.&quot; The study analyzed data from the Aura and CALIPSO satellites, and determined that the larger-than-normal ozone loss was due to an unusually long period of cold weather in the Arctic, some 30 days more than typical, which allowed for more ozone-destroying chlorine compounds to be created. According to Lamont Poole, a co-author of the study, cloud and aerosol particles on which the chlorine compounds are found &quot;were abundant in the Arctic until mid March 2011—much later than usual—with average amounts at some altitudes similar to those observed in the Antarctic, and dramatically larger than the near-zero values seen in March in most Arctic winters&quot;.

In 2013, researchers analyzed the data and found the 2010–2011 Arctic event did not reach the ozone depletion levels to classify as a true hole. A hole in the ozone is generally classified as 220 Dobson units or lower; the Arctic hole did not approach that low level. It has since been classified as a &quot;mini-hole.&quot;

Following the ozone depletion in 1997 and 2011, a 90% drop in ozone was measured by weather balloons over the Arctic in March 2020, as they normally recorded 3.5 parts per million of ozone, compared to only around 0.3 parts per million lastly, due to the coldest temperatures ever recorded since 1979, and a strong polar vortex which allowed chemicals, including chlorine and bromine, to reduce ozone.

A rare hole, the result of unusually low temperatures in the atmosphere above the North Pole, was studied in 2020.

=== Tibet ozone hole ===
As winters that are colder are more affected, at times there is an ozone hole over Tibet. In 2006, a 2.5 million square kilometer ozone hole was detected over Tibet. Again in 2011, an ozone hole appeared over mountainous regions of Tibet, Xinjiang, Qinghai and the Hindu Kush, along with an unprecedented hole over the Arctic, though the Tibet one was far less intense than the ones over the Arctic or Antarctic.

=== Potential depletion by storm clouds ===
Research in 2012 showed that the same process that produces the ozone hole over Antarctica, occurs over summer storm clouds in the United States, and thus may be destroying ozone there as well.

=== Ozone hole over tropics ===
Physicist Qing-Bin Lu, of the University of Waterloo, claimed to have discovered a large, all-season ozone hole in the lower stratosphere over the tropics in July 2022. However, other researchers in the field refuted this claim, stating that the research was riddled with &quot;serious errors and unsubstantiated assertions.&quot; According to Dr Paul Young, a lead author of the 2022 WMO/UNEP Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion, &quot;The author&#x27;s identification of a &#x27;tropical ozone hole&#x27; is down to him looking at percentage changes in ozone, rather than absolute changes, with the latter being much more relevant for damaging UV reaching the surface.&quot; Specifically, Lu&#x27;s work defines &quot;ozone hole&quot; as &quot;an area with O3 loss in percent larger than 25%, with respect to the undisturbed O3 value when there were no significant CFCs in the stratosphere (~ in the 1960s)&quot; instead of the general definition of 220 Dobson units or lower. Dr Marta Abalos Alvarez has added &quot;Ozone depletion in the tropics is nothing new and is mainly due to the acceleration of the Brewer-Dobson circulation.&quot;

=== Depletion caused by wildfire smoke ===

Analyzing the atmospheric impacts of the 2019–2020 Australian bushfire season, scientists led by MIT researcher Susan Solomon found the smoke destroyed 3–5% of ozone in affected areas of the Southern Hemisphere. Smoke particles absorb hydrogen chloride and act as a catalyst to create chlorine radicals that destroy ozone.

== Ozone depletion and global warming ==

Among others, Robert Watson had a role in the science assessment and in the regulation efforts of ozone depletion and global warming. Prior to the 1980s, the EU, NASA, NAS, UNEP, WMO and the British government had dissenting scientific reports and Watson played a role in the process of unified assessments. Based on the experience with the ozone case, the IPCC started to work on a unified reporting and science assessment to reach a consensus to provide the IPCC Summary for Policymakers.

There are various areas of linkage between ozone depletion and global warming science:
* The same radiative forcing that produces global warming is expected to cool the stratosphere. This cooling, in turn, is expected to produce a relative &quot;increase&quot; in ozone () depletion in polar areas and the frequency of ozone holes.
* Conversely, ozone depletion represents a radiative forcing of the climate system. There are two opposing effects: Reduced ozone causes the stratosphere to absorb less solar radiation, thus cooling the stratosphere while warming the troposphere; the resulting colder stratosphere emits less long-wave radiation downward, thus cooling the troposphere. Overall, the cooling dominates; the IPCC concludes &quot;observed stratospheric  losses over the past two decades have caused a negative forcing of the surface-troposphere system&quot; of about −0.15 ± 0.10 watts per square meter (W/m2).
* One of the strongest predictions of the greenhouse effect is that the stratosphere will cool. Although this cooling has been observed, it is not trivial to separate the effects of changes in the concentration of greenhouse gases and ozone depletion since both will lead to cooling. However, this can be done by numerical stratospheric modeling. Results from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration&#x27;s Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory show that above , the greenhouse gases dominate the cooling.
* Ozone depleting chemicals are also often greenhouse gases. The increases in concentrations of these chemicals have produced 0.34 ± 0.03 W/m2 of radiative forcing, corresponding to about 14 percent of the total radiative forcing from increases in the concentrations of well-mixed greenhouse gases.
* The long term modeling of the process, its measurement, study, design of theories and testing take decades to document, gain wide acceptance, and ultimately become the dominant paradigm. Several theories about the destruction of ozone were hypothesized in the 1980s, published in the late 1990s, and are now being investigated. Dr Drew Schindell, and Dr Paul Newman, NASA Goddard, proposed a theory in the late 1990s, using computational modeling methods to model ozone destruction, that accounted for 78 percent of the ozone destroyed. Further refinement of that model accounted for 89 percent of the ozone destroyed, but pushed back the estimated recovery of the ozone hole from 75 years to 150 years. (An important part of that model is the lack of stratospheric flight due to depletion of fossil fuels.)

In 2019, NASA reported that there was no significant relation between size of the ozone hole and climate change.

== Misconceptions ==

=== CFC weight ===
Since CFC molecules are heavier than air (nitrogen or oxygen), it is commonly believed that the CFC molecules cannot reach the stratosphere in significant amounts. However, atmospheric gases are not sorted by weight at these altitudes; the forces of wind can fully mix the gases in the atmosphere. Some of the heavier CFCs are not evenly distributed.

=== Percentage of man-made chlorine ===
Another misconception is that &quot;it is generally accepted that natural sources of tropospheric chlorine are four to five times larger than man-made ones.&quot; While this statement is strictly true, &quot;tropospheric&quot; chlorine is irrelevant; it is &quot;stratospheric&quot; chlorine that affects ozone depletion. Chlorine from ocean spray is soluble and thus is washed by rainfall before it reaches the stratosphere. CFCs, in contrast, are insoluble and long-lived, allowing them to reach the stratosphere. In the lower atmosphere, there is much more chlorine from CFCs and related haloalkanes than there is in HCl from salt spray, and in the stratosphere halocarbons are dominant. Only methyl chloride, which is one of these halocarbons, has a mainly natural source, and it is responsible for about 20 percent of the chlorine in the stratosphere; the remaining 80 percent comes from manmade sources.

Very violent volcanic eruptions can inject HCl into the stratosphere, but researchers have shown that the contribution is not significant compared to that from CFCs. A similar erroneous assertion is that soluble halogen compounds from the volcanic plume of Mount Erebus on Ross Island, Antarctica are a major contributor to the Antarctic ozone hole.

Nevertheless, a 2015 study showed that the role of Mount Erebus volcano in the Antarctic ozone depletion was probably underestimated. Based on the NCEP/NCAR reanalysis data over the last 35 years and by using the NOAA HYSPLIT trajectory model, researchers showed that Erebus volcano gas emissions (including hydrogen chloride (HCl)) can reach the Antarctic stratosphere via high-latitude cyclones and then the polar vortex. Depending on Erebus volcano activity, the additional annual HCl mass entering the stratosphere from Erebus varies from 1.0 to 14.3 kt.

=== First observation ===
G.M.B. Dobson mentioned that when springtime ozone levels in the Antarctic over Halley Bay were first measured in 1956, he was surprised to find that they were ~320 DU, or about 150 DU below spring Arctic levels of ~450 DU. These were at that time the only known Antarctic ozone values available. What Dobson describes is essentially the &quot;baseline&quot; from which the ozone hole is measured: actual ozone hole values are in the 150–100 DU range.

The discrepancy between the Arctic and Antarctic noted by Dobson was primarily a matter of timing: during the Arctic spring, ozone levels rose smoothly, peaking in April, whereas in the Antarctic they stayed approximately constant during early spring, rising abruptly in November when the polar vortex broke down.

The behavior seen in the Antarctic ozone hole is different. Instead of staying constant, early springtime ozone levels drop from their already low winter values, by as much as 50 percent, and normal values are not reached again until December.

=== Location of hole ===
Some people thought that the ozone hole should be above the sources of CFCs. However, CFCs are well mixed globally in the troposphere and stratosphere. The reason for occurrence of the ozone hole above Antarctica is not because there are more CFCs concentrated but because the low temperatures help form polar stratospheric clouds. In fact, there are findings of significant and localized &quot;ozone holes&quot; above other parts of the Earth, such as above Central Asia.

=== Awareness campaigns ===
Public misconceptions and misunderstandings of complex issues like ozone depletion are common. The limited scientific knowledge of the public led to confusion about global warming or the perception of global warming as a subset of the &quot;ozone hole&quot;. In the beginning, classical green NGOs refrained from using CFC depletion for campaigning, as they assumed the topic was too complicated. They became active much later, e.g. in Greenpeace&#x27;s support for a CFC-free refrigerator produced by the former East German company VEB dkk Scharfenstein.

The metaphors used in the CFC discussion (ozone shield, ozone hole) are not &quot;exact&quot; in the scientific sense. The &quot;ozone hole&quot; is more of a &quot;depression&quot;, less &quot;a hole in the windshield&quot;. The ozone does not disappear through the layer, nor is there a uniform &quot;thinning&quot; of the ozone layer. However, they resonated better with non-scientists and their concerns. The ozone hole was seen as a &quot;hot issue&quot; and imminent risk as laypeople feared severe personal consequences such as skin cancer, cataracts, damage to plants, and reduction of plankton populations in the ocean&#x27;s photic zone. Not only on the policy level, ozone regulation compared to climate change fared much better in public opinion. Americans voluntarily switched away from aerosol sprays before legislation was enforced, while climate change failed to achieve comparable concern and public action. The sudden identification in 1985 that there was a substantial &quot;hole&quot; was widely reported in the press. The especially rapid ozone depletion in Antarctica had previously been dismissed as a measurement error. Scientific consensus was established after regulation.

While the Antarctic ozone hole has a relatively small effect on global ozone, the hole has generated a great deal of public interest because:
* Many have worried that ozone holes might start appearing over other areas of the globe, though to date the only other large-scale depletion is a smaller ozone &quot;dimple&quot; observed during the Arctic spring around the North Pole. Ozone at middle latitudes has declined, but by a much smaller extent (a decrease of about 4–5 percent).
* If stratospheric conditions become more severe (cooler temperatures, more clouds, more active chlorine), global ozone may decrease at a greater pace. Standard global warming theory predicts that the stratosphere will cool.
* When the Antarctic ozone hole breaks up each year, the ozone-depleted air drifts into nearby regions. Decreases in the ozone level of up to 10 percent have been reported in New Zealand in the month following the breakup of the Antarctic ozone hole, with ultraviolet-B radiation intensities increasing by more than 15 percent since the 1970s.

== World Ozone Day ==
In 1994, the United Nations General Assembly voted to designate September 16 as the International Day for the Preservation of the Ozone Layer, or &quot;World Ozone Day&quot;. The designation commemorates the signing of the Montreal Protocol on that date in 1987.

== See also ==

* Climate change in the Arctic
* Section 608
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Andersen, S. O. and K. M. Sarma. (2002). &quot;Protecting the Ozone Layer: The United Nations History&quot;, Earthscan Press. London, England.
* (Ambassador Benedick was the Chief U.S. Negotiator at the meetings that resulted in the Montreal Protocol.)
* Chasek, Pamela S., David L. Downie, and Janet Welsh Brown (2013). &quot;Global Environmental Politics&quot;, 6th ed., Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.
* 
* Haas, P. (1992). Banning chlorofluorocarbons: Epistemic community efforts to protect stratospheric ozone. International Organization, 46(1), 187–224.
* Parson, Edward (2004). &quot;Protecting the Ozone Layer: Science and Strategy&quot;. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.

==External links==

* NOAA/ESRL Ozone Depletion
* NOAA/ESRL Ozone Depleting Gas Index
* MACC stratospheric ozone service delivers maps, datasets and validation reports about the past and current state of the ozone layer.
* Green Cooling Initiative on alternative natural refrigerants cooling technologies
* &quot;Ozone Hole: How We Saved the Planet&quot; premiered April 10, 2019 PBS
* &quot;Whatever happened to the Ozone Hole?&quot;, &quot;Distillations&quot; Podcast Episode 230, April 17, 2018, Science History Institute</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183140" start="0" end="15" title="Ozone depletion" label="Ozone depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="141" end="146" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="150" end="162" title="Earth" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q108376" start="216" end="229" title="stratospheric" label="stratospheric"/>
<link wikidata="Q79995" start="241" end="252" title="ozone layer" label="ozone layer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="333" end="343" title="#Ozone hole and its causes" label="ozone hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846269" start="377" end="412" title="tropospheric ozone depletion events" label="tropospheric ozone depletion events"/>
<link wikidata="Q387914" start="563" end="573" title="halocarbon" label="halocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q266790" start="574" end="585" title="refrigerant" label="refrigerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q146505" start="588" end="595" title="solvent" label="solvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="598" end="608" title="propellant" label="propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343294" start="620" end="633" title="blowing agent" label="blowing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="636" end="654" title="chlorofluorocarbon" label="chlorofluorocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q271026" start="671" end="677" title="Haloalkanes" label="halons"/>
<link wikidata="Q108376" start="782" end="794" title="stratosphere" label="stratosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q190132" start="798" end="814" title="Turbulence" label="turbulent mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="942" end="947" title="atoms" label="atoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="957" end="964" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16814" start="979" end="996" title="photodissociation" label="photodissociation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="1004" end="1012" title="catalyze" label="catalyze"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="1327" end="1338" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="1376" end="1399" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q192102" start="1425" end="1436" title="skin cancer" label="skin cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q649717" start="1438" end="1445" title="sunburn" label="sunburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q127724" start="1472" end="1481" title="cataracts" label="cataracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="1641" end="1658" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q901028" start="1813" end="1837" title="global warming potential" label="global warming potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q179088" start="1900" end="1908" title="R-1234yf" label="R-1234yf"/>
<link wikidata="Q423029" start="1993" end="1999" title="R-134a" label="R-134a"/>
<link wikidata="Q423021" start="2004" end="2008" title="Dichlorodifluoromethane" label="R-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q202325" start="2144" end="2154" title="jet stream" label="jet stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="2383" end="2387" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q81915" start="2733" end="2743" title="allotropy" label="allotropes"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="2748" end="2754" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q673756" start="2775" end="2793" title="ozone-oxygen cycle" label="ozone-oxygen cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="3055" end="3063" title="Radical (chemistry)" label="radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="3717" end="3729" title="free radical" label="free radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q427071" start="3768" end="3784" title="hydroxyl radical" label="hydroxyl radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="3792" end="3804" title="nitric oxide" label="nitric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="3820" end="3828" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q879" start="3847" end="3854" title="bromine" label="bromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="4010" end="4017" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q419067" start="4023" end="4036" title="pseudohalogen" label="pseudohalogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="4540" end="4558" title="chlorofluorocarbon" label="chlorofluorocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="4801" end="4826" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="5020" end="5029" title="catalysis" label="catalytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q288003" start="5759" end="5769" title="null cycle" label="null cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211086" start="6128" end="6145" title="hydrogen chloride" label="hydrogen chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563692" start="6156" end="6172" title="chlorine nitrate" label="chlorine nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468" start="6613" end="6630" title="hydrogen fluoride" label="hydrogen fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q740585" start="7359" end="7370" title="Dobson unit" label="Dobson unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555938" start="7517" end="7526" title="Antarctic" label="Antarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828044" start="7639" end="7671" title="Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer" label="Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="8271" end="8277" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="10008" end="10022" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="10429" end="10446" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q182016" start="10465" end="10469" title="UNEP" label="UNEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="10612" end="10630" title="Chlorofluorocarbon" label="Chlorofluorocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384721" start="10877" end="10920" title="equivalent effective stratospheric chlorine" label="equivalent effective stratospheric chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q324992" start="10968" end="10986" title="Thomas Midgley Jr." label="Thomas Midgley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="11019" end="11035" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11058" end="11083" title="aerosol spray#Aerosol propellants" label="aerosol spray propellants"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="11559" end="11567" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q15927952" start="12007" end="12044" title="1,1,1-Trichloro-2,2,2-trifluoroethane" label="1,1,1-Trichloro-2,2,2-trifluoroethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="12210" end="12213" title="Chlorofluorocarbon" label="CFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="12901" end="12910" title="Satellite" label="Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="12974" end="12988" title="aluminum oxide" label="aluminum oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q61231" start="12997" end="13009" title="nanoparticle" label="nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q967145" start="13173" end="13196" title="satellite constellation" label="satellite constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715960" start="13302" end="13329" title="Very short-lived substances" label="Very short-lived substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="13393" end="13410" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q879" start="13484" end="13491" title="bromine" label="bromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="13533" end="13546" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q421748" start="13581" end="13596" title="dichloromethane" label="dichloromethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670982" start="13828" end="13835" title="SLIMCAT" label="SLIMCAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012818" start="13837" end="13842" title="CLaMS" label="CLaMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16814" start="14075" end="14085" title="photodissociation" label="photolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197111" start="14514" end="14526" title="polar vortex" label="polar vortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="14740" end="14744" title="CFCs" label="CFCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q216417" start="15016" end="15041" title="polar stratospheric cloud" label="polar stratospheric cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q188651" start="15661" end="15674" title="photochemistry" label="photochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="17511" end="17514" title="Ultraviolet B" label="UVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q192102" start="17669" end="17680" title="skin cancer" label="skin cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="17979" end="17982" title="Ultraviolet" label="UVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q574576" start="18426" end="18449" title="exponential decay" label="decreases exponentially"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608365" start="18746" end="18769" title="Ecuadorian Space Agency" label="Ecuadorian Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330108" start="19027" end="19035" title="UV Index" label="UV Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900" start="19062" end="19067" title="Quito" label="Quito"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="19073" end="19076" title="WHO" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="19965" end="19974" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="19976" end="19987" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="19989" end="19994" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="19996" end="20005" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="20011" end="20023" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="20229" end="20235" title="diatom" label="diatom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690942" start="20780" end="20809" title="Health effects of sun exposure" label="effects of UV on human health"/>
<link wikidata="Q809758" start="21124" end="21129" title="Basal cell carcinoma" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q681817" start="21134" end="21142" title="Squamous cell carcinoma" label="squamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q762043" start="21357" end="21363" title="Dimer (chemistry)" label="dimers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="21838" end="21846" title="Melanoma" label="Melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q51599" start="22375" end="22387" title="Punta Arenas" label="Punta Arenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="22412" end="22417" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q40631" start="23366" end="23378" title="tropospheric" label="tropospheric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298060" start="23386" end="23404" title="Ground-level ozone" label="Ground-level ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="23486" end="23493" title="redox" label="oxidant"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="23716" end="23726" title="combustion" label="combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q175621" start="23801" end="23810" title="Vitamin D" label="Vitamin D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="24690" end="24695" title="whale" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="25635" end="25639" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="25651" end="25664" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="25710" end="25718" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="25720" end="25733" title="Cyanobacteria" label="Cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="28054" end="28079" title="volatile organic compound" label="volatile organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="29034" end="29076" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="United States National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858303" start="29892" end="29897" title="Freon" label="Freon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29902" end="29923" title="Chlorofluorocarbon#Regulation and DuPont" label="set to expire in 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="30282" end="30288" title="DuPont (1802–2017)" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q464554" start="30394" end="30413" title="William Ruckelshaus" label="William Ruckelshaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q565342" start="30423" end="30438" title="Anne M. Burford" label="Anne M. Burford"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="30463" end="30508" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q686455" start="30715" end="30770" title="Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer" label="Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="31053" end="31070" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q16897784" start="32335" end="32349" title="asthma inhaler" label="asthma inhaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q421758" start="32546" end="32560" title="methyl bromide" label="methyl bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q131189" start="33631" end="33638" title="propane" label="propane"/>
<link wikidata="Q134192" start="33643" end="33649" title="butane" label="butane"/>
<link wikidata="Q960800" start="34620" end="34624" title="HCFC" label="HCFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031943" start="34717" end="34721" title="Hydrofluorocarbon" label="HFCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q423029" start="34936" end="34942" title="R-134a" label="R-134a"/>
<link wikidata="Q423021" start="35001" end="35005" title="Dichlorodifluoromethane" label="R-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="36119" end="36133" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="36517" end="36520" title="International Maritime Organization" label="IMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q651219" start="36533" end="36539" title="MARPOL" label="MARPOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="37146" end="37163" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q879" start="37582" end="37589" title="bromine" label="bromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q421758" start="37684" end="37698" title="methyl bromide" label="methyl bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="37736" end="37749" title="nitrous oxide" label="nitrous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q110567218" start="39384" end="39412" title="2022 Hunga Tonga–Hunga Haʻapai eruption and tsunami" label="2022 Tonga volcanic eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q711256" start="39577" end="39591" title="Sydney Chapman (mathematician)" label="Sydney Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q135139" start="40332" end="40344" title="Paul Crutzen" label="Paul Crutzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="40375" end="40388" title="nitrous oxide" label="nitrous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="40502" end="40514" title="nitric oxide" label="nitric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="40693" end="40704" title="fertilizers" label="fertilizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239346" start="41038" end="41067" title="supersonic transport" label="supersonic passenger aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="41237" end="41284" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q111190" start="41553" end="41575" title="Frank Sherwood Rowland" label="Frank Sherwood Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19045" start="41671" end="41686" title="Mario J. Molina" label="Mario J. Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q210898" start="41831" end="41845" title="James Lovelock" label="James Lovelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150491" start="42203" end="42220" title="Richard Stolarski" label="Richard Stolarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q504210" start="42225" end="42239" title="Ralph Cicerone" label="Ralph Cicerone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832669" start="42395" end="42410" title="Michael McElroy (scientist)" label="Michael McElroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30069603" start="42415" end="42427" title="Steven Wofsy" label="Steven Wofsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="42431" end="42449" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="42640" end="42653" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="42824" end="42830" title="DuPont (1802–2017)" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q354463" start="42960" end="42976" title="Robert Abplanalp" label="Robert Abplanalp"/>
<link wikidata="Q868421" start="43113" end="43122" title="UC Irvine" label="UC Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="44178" end="44206" title="Organic compounds" label="brominated organic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q271026" start="44216" end="44222" title="Haloalkane" label="halons"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="44329" end="44371" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="United States National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q659495" start="44563" end="44581" title="Aerosol spray" label="aerosol spray cans"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="44978" end="45002" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q918757" start="45129" end="45153" title="British Antarctic Survey" label="British Antarctic Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209774" start="45165" end="45171" title="Joe Farman" label="Farman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963798" start="45173" end="45181" title="Brian G. Gardiner (meteorologist)" label="Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271551" start="45186" end="45194" title="Jon Shanklin" label="Shanklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="45231" end="45237" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q854845" start="45388" end="45410" title="Earth observation satellite" label="Satellite measurements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828044" start="45412" end="45416" title="TOMS (sensor)" label="TOMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16320449" start="45425" end="45433" title="Nimbus 7" label="Nimbus 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="45481" end="45491" title="south pole" label="south pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="45868" end="45876" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q445519" start="45952" end="45965" title="Susan Solomon" label="Susan Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="45997" end="46044" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="46067" end="46084" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q216417" start="46089" end="46114" title="polar stratospheric cloud" label="polar stratospheric cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555938" start="46135" end="46144" title="Antarctic" label="Antarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q108376" start="46145" end="46157" title="stratosphere" label="stratosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="46233" end="46241" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325808" start="46442" end="46454" title="ice crystals" label="ice crystals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197111" start="46624" end="46636" title="polar vortex" label="polar vortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="46649" end="46659" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="46860" end="46870" title="hypothesis" label="hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q483242" start="46906" end="46916" title="laboratory" label="laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="47010" end="47018" title="airplane" label="airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535800" start="47052" end="47069" title="chlorine monoxide" label="chlorine monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="47191" end="47203" title="Ultraviolet" label="UV radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182016" start="47777" end="47813" title="United Nations Environment Programme" label="United Nations Environment Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433745" start="47927" end="47967" title="Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion" label="Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="48525" end="48529" title="NOAA" label="NOAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="48534" end="48538" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="50301" end="50307" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q23649" start="50772" end="50776" title="Aura (satellite)" label="Aura"/>
<link wikidata="Q35494" start="50781" end="50788" title="CALIPSO" label="CALIPSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128180" start="51816" end="51832" title="weather balloons" label="weather balloons"/>
<link wikidata="Q732722" start="52053" end="52059" title="vortex" label="vortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q712226" start="52389" end="52405" title="square kilometer" label="square kilometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="52508" end="52513" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="52515" end="52523" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q45833" start="52525" end="52532" title="Qinghai" label="Qinghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="52541" end="52551" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q77924746" start="54195" end="54231" title="2019–20 Australian bushfire season" label="2019–2020 Australian bushfire season"/>
<link wikidata="Q211086" start="54389" end="54406" title="hydrogen chloride" label="hydrogen chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356270" start="54534" end="54547" title="Robert Watson (scientist)" label="Robert Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204984" start="54618" end="54652" title="Ozone depletion and climate change" label="ozone depletion and global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972982" start="54980" end="55009" title="IPCC Summary for Policymakers" label="IPCC Summary for Policymakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="55776" end="55776" title="Ozone" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="55903" end="55907" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="56298" end="56345" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306220" start="56353" end="56390" title="Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory" label="Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="57546" end="57558" title="fossil fuels" label="fossil fuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046888" start="58445" end="58456" title="salt spray" label="ocean spray"/>
<link wikidata="Q271026" start="58700" end="58710" title="haloalkane" label="haloalkane"/>
<link wikidata="Q188982" start="59277" end="59289" title="Mount Erebus" label="Mount Erebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188982" start="59422" end="59434" title="Mount Erebus" label="Mount Erebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953113" start="59518" end="59538" title="NCEP/NCAR reanalysis" label="NCEP/NCAR reanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23581023" start="59589" end="59596" title="HYSPLIT" label="HYSPLIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q211086" start="59679" end="59696" title="hydrogen chloride" label="hydrogen chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197111" start="59781" end="59793" title="polar vortex" label="polar vortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q709194" start="59957" end="59970" title="G.M.B. Dobson" label="G.M.B. Dobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571679" start="60037" end="60047" title="Halley Research Station" label="Halley Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q40631" start="61117" end="61128" title="troposphere" label="troposphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q108376" start="61133" end="61145" title="stratosphere" label="stratosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531989" start="62030" end="62033" title="Volkseigener Betrieb" label="VEB"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204984" start="62732" end="62775" title="Ozone depletion and climate change" label="ozone regulation compared to climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="63898" end="63912" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="64342" end="64373" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351475" start="64413" end="64470" title="International Day for the Preservation of the Ozone Layer" label="International Day for the Preservation of the Ozone Layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="64552" end="64569" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q526925" start="64611" end="64639" title="Climate change in the Arctic" label="Climate change in the Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q112160986" start="64642" end="64653" title="Section 608" label="Section 608"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236193" start="64969" end="64984" title="David L. Downie" label="David L. Downie"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="65768" end="65771" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090408" start="65887" end="65912" title="Science History Institute" label="Science History Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44187" wikidata="Q768807" url="?curid=44187" title="Sound effect">
<text>A sound effect (or audio effect) is an artificially created or enhanced sound, or sound process used to emphasize artistic or other content of films, television shows, live performance, animation, video games, music, or other media.

In motion picture and television production, a sound effect is a sound recorded and presented to make a specific storytelling or creative point &quot;without&quot; the use of dialogue or music. Traditionally, in the twentieth century, they were created with Foley. The term often refers to a process applied to a recording, without necessarily referring to the recording itself. In professional motion picture and television production, dialogue, music, and sound effects recordings are treated as separate elements. Dialogue and music recordings are never referred to as sound effects, even though the processes applied to such as reverberation or flanging effects, often are called &quot;sound effects&quot;.

This area and sound design have been slowly merged since the late-twentieth century.

== History ==

The term &quot;sound effect&quot; dates back to the early days of radio. In its &quot;Year Book 1931&quot; the BBC published a major article about &quot;The Use of Sound Effects&quot;. It considers sound effects deeply linked with broadcasting and states: &quot;It would be a great mistake to think of them as analogous to punctuation marks and accents in print. They should never be &quot;inserted&quot; into a program already existing. The author of a broadcast play or broadcast construction ought to have used Sound Effects as bricks with which to build, treating them as of equal value with speech and music.&quot; It lists six &quot;totally different primary genres of Sound Effect&quot;:

:* &quot;Realistic, confirmatory effect&quot;
:* &quot;Realistic, evocative effect&quot;
:* &quot;Symbolic, evocative effect&quot;
:* &quot;Conventionalised effect&quot;
:* &quot;Impressionistic effect&quot;
:* &quot;Music as an effect&quot;

According to the author, &quot;It is axiomatic that every Sound Effect, to whatever category it belongs, &quot;must&quot; register in the listener&#x27;s mind instantaneously. If it fails to do so its presence could not be justified.&quot;

== Film ==

In the context of motion pictures and television, &quot;sound effects&quot; refers to an entire hierarchy of sound elements, whose production encompasses many different disciplines, including:
* &quot;Hard sound effects&quot; are common sounds that appear on screen, such as door alarms, weapons firing, and cars driving by.
* &quot;Background&quot; (or &quot;BG&quot;) &quot;sound effects&quot; are sounds that do not explicitly synchronize with the picture, but indicate setting to the audience, such as forest sounds, the buzzing of fluorescent lights, and car interiors. The sound of people talking in the background is also considered a &quot;BG&quot;, but only if the speaker is unintelligible and the language is unrecognizable (this is known as walla). These background noises are also called &quot;ambience&quot; or &quot;atmos&quot; (&quot;atmosphere&quot;).
* &quot;Foley sound effects&quot; are sounds that synchronize on screen, and require the expertise of a Foley artist to record properly. Footsteps, the movement of hand props (e.g., a tea cup and saucer), and the rustling of cloth are common Foley units.
* &quot;Design sound effects&quot; are sounds that do not normally occur in nature, or are impossible to record in nature. These sounds are used to suggest futuristic technology in a science fiction film, or are used in a musical fashion to create an emotional mood.

Each of these sound effect categories is specialized, with sound editors known as specialists in an area of sound effects (e.g. a &quot;Car cutter&quot; or &quot;Guns cutter&quot;).

Foley is another method of adding sound effects. Foley is more of a technique for creating sound effects than a type of sound effect, but it is often used for creating the incidental real-world sounds that are very specific to what is going on onscreen, such as footsteps. With this technique, the action onscreen is essentially recreated to try to match it as closely as possible. If done correctly it is very hard for audiences to tell what sounds were added and what sounds were originally recorded (location sound).

In the early days of film and radio, Foley artists would add sounds in real time or pre-recorded sound effects would be played back from analog discs in real time (while watching the picture). Today, with effects held in digital format, it is easy to create any required sequence to be played in any desired timeline.

In the days of silent film, sound effects were added by the operator of a theater organ or photoplayer, both of which also supplied the soundtrack of the film. Theater organ sound effects are usually electric or electro-pneumatic, and activated by a button pressed with the hand or foot.

Photoplayer operators activate sound effects either by flipping switches on the machine or pulling &quot;cow-tail&quot; pull-strings, which hang above. Sounds like bells and drums are made mechanically, sirens and horns electronically. Due to its smaller size, a photoplayer usually has fewer special effects than a theater organ or less complex ones.

== Notable early uses of sound effects in film ==

* 1897: A Canadian filmmaker premiered a silent film in which a blacksmith was placed outside of the audience view and made sounds to coincide with the visuals of a blacksmith in the film.
* &quot;Kelly Gang&quot; (1906): An Australian premiere of this film was accompanied by a symphony to add sound effects to the film as viewers watched it.
* 1914: Britain began producing sound effect devices that people could buy to play different sound effects for films at home.
* &quot;Blackmail&quot; (1929): Uses a woman&#x27;s voice separate from the main actress on screen for screaming scenes.
* &quot;M&quot; (1931): Uses several street sounds such as car horns and the sounds of a ball to increase tension within the film.
* &quot;Spellbound&quot; (1945) Uses a Theremin to create one of the first instances of electronically produced sound effects.

== Video games ==

The principles involved with modern video game sound effects (since the introduction of sample playback) are essentially the same as those of motion pictures. Typically a game project requires two jobs to be completed: sounds must be recorded or selected from a library and a sound engine must be programmed so that those sounds can be incorporated into the game&#x27;s interactive environment.

In earlier computers and video game systems, sound effects were typically produced using sound synthesis. In modern systems, the increases in storage capacity and playback quality has allowed sampled sound to be used. The modern systems also frequently utilize positional audio, often with hardware acceleration, and real-time audio post-processing, which can also be tied to the 3D graphics development. Based on the internal state of the game, multiple different calculations can be made. This will allow for, for example, realistic sound dampening, echoes and Doppler effect.

Historically the simplicity of game environments reduced the required number of sounds needed, and thus only one or two people were directly responsible for the sound recording and design. As the video game business has grown and computer sound reproduction quality has increased, however, the team of sound designers dedicated to game projects has likewise grown and the demands placed on them may now approach those of mid-budget motion pictures.

Some pieces of music use sound effects that are made by a musical instrument or by other means. An early example is the 18th century Toy Symphony. Richard Wagner in the opera &quot;Das Rheingold&quot; (1869) lets a choir of anvils introduce the scene of the dwarfs who have to work in the mines, similar to the introduction of the dwarfs in the 1937 Disney movie &quot;Snow White&quot;. Klaus Doldingers soundtrack for the 1981 movie &quot;Das Boot&quot; includes a title score with a sonar sound to reflect the U-boat setting. John Barry integrated into the title song of &quot;Moonraker&quot; (1979) a sound representing the beep of a Sputnik like satellite.

== Sound effects in theater ==
Gao, Jianliang, Zhao, Yuezhe, and Pan, Lili explained how sound absorption in the stage area influences the acoustics within an opera house auditorium. Their research, using computer models and scale experiments, revealed that sound absorption significantly affects sound clarity and the time it takes for sound to fade, but not the volume. More absorption led to clearer sounds but quicker fades, showing the intricate dance between stage and auditorium acoustics.

In his book &quot;Sound: A Reader in Theatre Practice,&quot; Brown effectively connects the dots between theory and practice in the world of theater sound. He presents an engaging look into how sound design in theater has evolved, blending historical insights with current philosophical thoughts. Brown argues that the immersive nature of theater sound goes beyond traditional analysis, providing fresh perspectives on how sound interacts with societal contexts.

Brown offers a fresh look at Ovadija&#x27;s exploration of sound in theater, questioning the traditional focus on visuals over audio. He points out the significant, yet often overlooked, role of sound in shaping theater&#x27;s impact and experience. Brown pushes for a broader appreciation of sound&#x27;s essence in theater, beyond just supporting visuals, to acknowledge its deep influence on storytelling and audience immersion.

Rost explores the criteria for &#x27;good sound&#x27; in theater through handbooks and prioritization as guiding principles. These criteria not only dictate the creation and selection of sounds to complement the narrative and mood but also aim to maintain audience focus. Rost&#x27;s analysis reveals underlying hierarchies in sound selection and emphasizes the need for further research into the historical and practical aspects of theater sound.

== Recording ==
The most realistic sound effects may originate from original sources; the closest sound to machine-gun fire could be an original recording of actual machine guns.

Despite this, real life and actual practice do not always coincide with theory. When recordings of real life do not sound realistic on playback, Foley and effects are used to create more convincing sounds. For example, the realistic sound of bacon frying can be the crumpling of cellophane, while rain may be recorded as salt falling on a piece of tin foil.

Less realistic sound effects are digitally synthesized or sampled and sequenced (the same recording played repeatedly using a sequencer). When the producer or content creator demands high-fidelity sound effects, the sound editor usually must augment his available library with new sound effects recorded in the field.

When the required sound effect is of a small subject, such as scissors cutting, cloth ripping, or footsteps, the sound effect is best recorded in a studio, under controlled conditions in a process known as Foley. Many sound effects cannot be recorded in a studio, such as explosions, gunfire, and automobile or aircraft maneuvers. These effects must be recorded by a professional audio engineer.

When such &quot;big&quot; sounds are required, the recordist will begin contacting professionals or technicians in the same way a producer may arrange a crew; if the recordist needs an explosion, they may contact a demolition company to see if any buildings are scheduled to be destroyed with explosives in the near future. If the recordist requires a volley of cannon fire, they may contact historical re-enactors or gun enthusiasts.

Depending on the effect, recordists may use several DAT, hard disk, or Nagra recorders and a large number of microphones. During a cannon- and musket-fire recording session for the 2003 film &quot;The Alamo&quot;, conducted by Jon Johnson and Charles Maynes, two to three DAT machines were used. One machine was stationed near the cannon itself, so it could record the actual firing. Another was stationed several hundred yards away, below the trajectory of the ball, to record the sound of the cannonball passing by. When the crew recorded musket fire, a set of microphones were arrayed close to the target (in this case a swine carcass) to record the musket-ball impacts.

A counter-example is the common technique for recording an automobile. For recording &quot;onboard&quot; car sounds (which include the car interiors), a three-microphone technique is common. Two microphones record the engine directly: one is taped to the underside of the hood, near the engine block. The second microphone is covered in a wind screen and tightly attached to the rear bumper, within an inch or so of the tailpipe. The third microphone, which is often a stereo microphone, is stationed inside the car to get the car interior.

Having all of these tracks at once gives a sound designer or audio engineer a great deal of control over how they want the car to sound. In order to make the car more ominous or low, they can mix in more of the tailpipe recording; if they want the car to sound like it is running full throttle, they can mix in more of the engine recording and reduce the interior perspective. In cartoons, a pencil being dragged down a washboard may be used to simulate the sound of a sputtering engine.

What is considered today to be the first recorded sound effect was of Big Ben striking 10:30, 10:45, and 11:00. It was recorded on a brown wax cylinder by technicians at Edison House in London on July 16, 1890. This recording is currently in the public domain.

== Processing effects ==

As the car example demonstrates, the ability to make multiple simultaneous recordings of the same subject—through the use of several DAT or multitrack recorders—has made sound recording into a sophisticated craft. The sound effect can be shaped by the sound editor or sound designer, not just for realism, but for emotional effect.

Once the sound effects are recorded or captured, they are usually loaded into a computer integrated with an audio non-linear editing system. This allows a sound editor or sound designer to heavily manipulate a sound to meet his or her needs.

The most common sound design tool is the use of layering to create a new, interesting sound out of two or three old, average sounds. For example, the sound of a bullet impact into a pig carcass may be mixed with the sound of a melon being gouged to add to the &quot;stickiness&quot; or &quot;gore&quot; of the effect. If the effect is featured in a close-up, the designer may also add an &quot;impact sweetener&quot; from his or her library. The sweetener may simply be the sound of a hammer pounding hardwood, equalized so that only the low-end can be heard. The low end gives the three sounds together added weight so that the audience actually &quot;feels&quot; the weight of the bullet hit the victim.

If the victim is the villain, and his death is climactic, the sound designer may add reverb to the impact, in order to enhance the dramatic beat. And then, as the victim falls over in slow motion, the sound editor may add the sound of a broom whooshing by a microphone, pitch-shifted down and time-expanded to further emphasize the death. If the film is science-fiction, the designer may phaser the &quot;whoosh&quot; to give it a more sci-fi feel. (For a list of many sound effects processes available to a sound designer, see the bottom of this article.)

== Aesthetics ==

When creating sound effects for films, sound recordists and editors do not generally concern themselves with the verisimilitude or accuracy of the sounds they present. The sound of a bullet entering a person from a close distance may sound nothing like the sound designed in the above example, but since very few people are aware of how such a thing actually sounds, the job of designing the effect is mainly an issue of creating a conjectural sound which feeds the audience&#x27;s expectations while still suspending disbelief.
Sci-fi and fantasy genres can be more forgiving in terms of audience expectations; the listener will not be caught off guard as much by unusual sound effects. In contrast, when creating sound effects for historical accuracy and realism, the listener likely had a lifetime of exposure to some of these sounds and so there are expectations of what they should sound like.

In the previous example, the phased &#x27;whoosh&#x27; of the victim&#x27;s fall has no analog in real-life experience, but it is emotionally immediate. If a sound editor uses such sounds in the context of emotional climax or a character&#x27;s subjective experience, they can add to the drama of a situation in a way visuals simply cannot. If a visual effects artist were to do something similar to the &#x27;whooshing fall&#x27; example, it would probably look ridiculous or at least excessively melodramatic.

The &quot;conjectural sound&quot; principle applies even to happenstance sounds, such as tires squealing, doorknobs turning or people walking. If the sound editor wants to communicate that a driver is in a hurry to leave, they will cut the sound of tires squealing when the car accelerates from a stop; even if the car is on a dirt road, the effect will work if the audience is dramatically engaged. If a character is afraid of someone on the other side of a door, the turning of the doorknob can take a second or more, and the mechanism of the knob can possess dozens of clicking parts. A skillful Foley artist can make someone walking calmly across the screen seem terrified simply by giving the actor a different gait.

== Techniques ==

In music and film/television production, some typical effects used in recording and amplified performances are: 

* &quot;echo&quot; – to simulate the effect of reverberation in a large hall or cavern, one or several delayed signals are added to the original signal. To be perceived as echo, the delay has to be of order 35 milliseconds or above. Short of actually playing a sound in the desired environment, the effect of echo can be implemented using either analog or digital methods. Analog echo effects are implemented using tape delay or delay lines.
* &quot;flanger&quot; – to create an unusual sound, a delayed signal is added to the original signal with a continuously variable delay (usually smaller than 10 ms). This effect is now done electronically using DSP, but originally the effect was created by playing the same recording on two synchronized tape players, and then mixing the signals together. As long as the machines were synchronized, the mix would sound more-or-less normal, but if the operator placed his finger on the flange of one of the players (hence &quot;flanger&quot;), that machine would slow down and its signal would fall out-of-phase with its partner, producing a phasing effect. Once the operator took his finger off, the player would speed up until its tachometer was back in phase with the master, and as this happened, the phasing effect would appear to slide up the frequency spectrum. This phasing up and down the register can be performed rhythmically.
* &quot;phaser&quot; – another way of creating an unusual sound; the signal is split, a portion is filtered with an all-pass filter to produce a phase-shift, and then the unfiltered and filtered signals are mixed. The phaser effect was originally used as a simpler implementation of the flanger effect since delays were difficult to implement with analog equipment. Phasers are often used to give a &quot;synthesized&quot; or electronic effect to natural sounds, such as human speech. The voice of C-3PO from &quot;Star Wars&quot; was created by taking the actor&#x27;s voice and treating it with a phaser.
* &quot;chorus&quot; – a delayed signal is added to the original signal with a constant delay. The delay has to be short in order not to be perceived as echo, but above 5 ms to be audible. If the delay is too short, it will destructively interfere with the un-delayed signal and create a flanging effect. Often, the delayed signals will be slightly pitch shifted to more realistically convey the effect of multiple voices.
* &quot;equalization&quot; – different frequency bands are attenuated or boosted to produce desired spectral characteristics. Moderate use of equalization (often abbreviated as EQ) can be used to fine-tune the tone quality of a recording; extreme use of equalization, such as heavily cutting a certain frequency can create more unusual effects.
* &quot;filtering&quot; – Equalization is a form of filtering. In the general sense, frequency ranges can be emphasized or attenuated using low-pass, high-pass, band-pass or band-stop filters. Band-pass filtering of voice can simulate the effect of a telephone because telephones use band-pass filters.
* &quot;overdrive&quot; effects such as the use of a fuzz box can be used to produce distorted sounds, such as for imitating robotic voices or to simulate distorted radiotelephone traffic (e.g., the radio chatter between starfighter pilots in the science fiction film &quot;Star Wars&quot;). The most basic overdrive effect involves &quot;clipping&quot; the signal when its absolute value exceeds a certain threshold.
* &quot;pitch shift&quot; – similar to pitch correction, this effect shifts a signal up or down in pitch. For example, a signal may be shifted an octave up or down. This is usually applied to the entire signal, and not to each note separately. One application of pitch shifting is pitch correction. Here a musical signal is tuned to the correct pitch using digital signal processing techniques. This effect is ubiquitous in karaoke machines and is often used to assist pop singers who sing out of tune. It is also used intentionally for aesthetic effect in such pop songs as Cher&#x27;s &quot;Believe&quot; and Madonna&#x27;s &quot;Die Another Day&quot;.
* &quot;time stretching&quot; – the opposite of pitch shift, that is, the process of changing the speed of an audio signal without affecting its pitch.
* &quot;resonators&quot; – emphasize harmonic frequency content on specified frequencies.
* &quot;robotic voice effects&quot; are used to make an actor&#x27;s voice sound like a synthesized human voice.
* &quot;synthesizer&quot; – generate artificially almost any sound by either imitating natural sounds or creating completely new sounds.
* &quot;modulation&quot; – to change the frequency or amplitude of a carrier signal in relation to a predefined signal. Ring modulation, also known as amplitude modulation, is an effect made famous by Doctor Who&#x27;s Daleks and commonly used throughout sci-fi.
* &quot;compression&quot; – the reduction of the dynamic range of a sound to avoid unintentional fluctuation in the dynamics. Level compression is not to be confused with audio data compression, where the amount of data is reduced without affecting the amplitude of the sound it represents.
* &quot;3D audio effects&quot; – place sounds outside the stereo basis
* &quot;sound on sound&quot; – to record over a recording without erasing. Originally accomplished by disabling the tape-erase magnet. This allowed an artist to make parts of the work sound like a duet.
* &quot;reverse echo&quot; – a swelling effect created by reversing an audio signal and recording echo and/or delay whilst the signal runs in reverse. When played back forward the last echos are heard before the effected sound creating a rush-like swell preceding and during playback.

==See also==
*Onomatopoeia, a word that phonetically resembles the sound that it describes
*Wilhelm scream
*Stock sound effect

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==



* How to make your own Foley sound effects</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q768807" start="2" end="14" title="Sound effect" label="sound effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q768807" start="19" end="31" title="Sound effect" label="audio effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q762316" start="492" end="497" title="Foley (filmmaking)" label="Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q131395" start="671" end="679" title="dialogue" label="dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="681" end="686" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q468809" start="866" end="879" title="reverberation" label="reverberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323480" start="883" end="891" title="flanging" label="flanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937950" start="960" end="972" title="sound design" label="sound design"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1158" end="1161" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962677" start="2992" end="2997" title="walla" label="walla"/>
<link wikidata="Q762316" start="3212" end="3224" title="Foley artist" label="Foley artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="3546" end="3566" title="science fiction film" label="science fiction film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180462" start="3690" end="3702" title="Sound editor (filmmaking)" label="sound editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q762316" start="3814" end="3819" title="Foley (filmmaking)" label="Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q762316" start="3863" end="3868" title="Foley (filmmaking)" label="Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742272" start="4728" end="4741" title="theater organ" label="theater organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187884" start="4745" end="4756" title="photoplayer" label="photoplayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="6252" end="6262" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="6701" end="6716" title="sound synthesis" label="sound synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636316" start="6873" end="6889" title="positional audio" label="positional audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q706027" start="7775" end="7787" title="Toy Symphony" label="Toy Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="7789" end="7803" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q327717" start="7823" end="7836" title="Das Rheingold" label="Das Rheingold"/>
<link wikidata="Q134430" start="8011" end="8021" title="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film)" label="Snow White"/>
<link wikidata="Q62961" start="8029" end="8044" title="Klaus Doldinger" label="Klaus Doldinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q62730" start="8082" end="8090" title="Das Boot" label="Das Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q111074" start="8170" end="8180" title="John Barry (composer)" label="John Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q334780" start="8221" end="8230" title="Moonraker (film)" label="Moonraker"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="8279" end="8286" title="Sputnik" label="Sputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276177" start="10720" end="10741" title="digital synthesizer" label="digitally synthesized"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="10745" end="10752" title="sampling (music)" label="sampled"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180462" start="10903" end="10915" title="Sound editor (filmmaking)" label="sound editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q762316" start="11212" end="11217" title="Foley (filmmaking)" label="Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="11386" end="11400" title="audio engineer" label="audio engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="11765" end="11771" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q657069" start="11795" end="11817" title="historical re-enactors" label="historical re-enactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q597615" start="11891" end="11894" title="Digital Audio Tape" label="DAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="11896" end="11905" title="hard disk" label="hard disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q586636" start="11910" end="11915" title="Nagra" label="Nagra"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="11970" end="11976" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="11982" end="11988" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q626745" start="12036" end="12045" title="The Alamo (2004 film)" label="The Alamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183201" start="12066" end="12077" title="Jon Johnson" label="Jon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083230" start="12082" end="12096" title="Charles Maynes" label="Charles Maynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q335308" start="12463" end="12468" title="swine" label="swine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="12673" end="12683" title="microphone" label="microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13693" start="12853" end="12864" title="wind screen" label="wind screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="12983" end="12989" title="stereo" label="stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937950" start="13099" end="13113" title="sound designer" label="sound designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="13117" end="13131" title="audio engineer" label="audio engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41225" start="13615" end="13622" title="Big Ben" label="Big Ben"/>
<link wikidata="Q691783" start="13684" end="13696" title="wax cylinder" label="wax cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552913" start="13973" end="13983" title="multitrack recording" label="multitrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180462" start="14085" end="14097" title="Sound editor (filmmaking)" label="sound editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937950" start="14101" end="14115" title="sound designer" label="sound designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="14246" end="14254" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330119" start="14280" end="14305" title="non-linear editing system" label="non-linear editing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180462" start="14321" end="14333" title="Sound editor (filmmaking)" label="sound editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937950" start="14337" end="14351" title="sound designer" label="sound designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q104531076" start="14920" end="14929" title="Equalization (audio)" label="equalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q468809" start="15201" end="15207" title="reverb" label="reverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551588" start="15504" end="15510" title="phaser (effect)" label="phaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180462" start="16750" end="16762" title="Sound editor (filmmaking)" label="sound editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="16938" end="16952" title="special effects" label="visual effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q762316" start="17704" end="17716" title="Foley artist" label="Foley artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q182767" start="17968" end="17972" title="echo" label="echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q174948" start="18306" end="18312" title="Analog signal" label="analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505961" start="18316" end="18323" title="digital delay" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021489" start="18375" end="18385" title="Delay (audio effect)" label="tape delay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323480" start="18410" end="18417" title="flanger" label="flanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q173142" start="18613" end="18616" title="digital signal processing" label="DSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q206976" start="19134" end="19144" title="tachometer" label="tachometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551588" start="19347" end="19353" title="phaser (effect)" label="phaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819865" start="19438" end="19446" title="audio filter" label="filtered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431902" start="19455" end="19470" title="all-pass filter" label="all-pass filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q51787" start="19837" end="19842" title="C-3PO" label="C-3PO"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="19854" end="19863" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076641" start="19954" end="19960" title="chorus effect" label="chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323480" start="20234" end="20242" title="flanging" label="flanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q104531076" start="20377" end="20389" title="equalization (audio)" label="equalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357982" start="20428" end="20438" title="Attenuation" label="attenuated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819865" start="20722" end="20731" title="audio filter" label="filtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q918242" start="20854" end="20862" title="low-pass" label="low-pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q262754" start="20864" end="20873" title="high-pass" label="high-pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718101" start="20875" end="20884" title="band-pass" label="band-pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q386022" start="20888" end="20897" title="band-stop" label="band-stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="21025" end="21034" title="overdriven" label="overdrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="21070" end="21078" title="fuzz box" label="fuzz box"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="21291" end="21300" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="21391" end="21405" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295260" start="21443" end="21454" title="audio timescale-pitch modification" label="pitch shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033528" start="21716" end="21732" title="pitch correction" label="pitch correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="22010" end="22014" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639231" start="22028" end="22035" title="Believe (Cher song)" label="Believe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="22046" end="22053" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q611419" start="22067" end="22082" title="Die Another Day (song)" label="Die Another Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295260" start="22098" end="22113" title="audio timescale-pitch modification" label="time stretching"/>
<link wikidata="Q349669" start="22250" end="22260" title="resonators" label="resonators"/>
<link wikidata="Q12176530" start="22340" end="22361" title="robotic voice effects" label="robotic voice effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="22453" end="22464" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170474" start="22590" end="22600" title="modulation" label="modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564640" start="22702" end="22717" title="Ring modulation" label="Ring modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="22783" end="22793" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q853715" start="22801" end="22806" title="Dalek" label="Dalek"/>
<link wikidata="Q18433212" start="22853" end="22864" title="Audio level compression" label="compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="23016" end="23038" title="audio data compression" label="audio data compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636316" start="23144" end="23159" title="3D audio effect" label="3D audio effect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23215" end="23229" title="sound on sound (technique)" label="sound on sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577486" start="23418" end="23430" title="reverse echo" label="reverse echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170239" start="23710" end="23722" title="Onomatopoeia" label="Onomatopoeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141711" start="23788" end="23802" title="Wilhelm scream" label="Wilhelm scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617919" start="23804" end="23822" title="Stock sound effect" label="Stock sound effect"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44189" wikidata="Q429787" url="?curid=44189" title="Reciprocal altruism">
<text>In evolutionary biology, reciprocal altruism is a behaviour whereby an organism acts in a manner that temporarily reduces its fitness while increasing another organism&#x27;s fitness, with the expectation that the other organism will act in a similar manner at a later time.

The concept was initially developed by Robert Trivers to explain the evolution of cooperation as instances of mutually altruistic acts. The concept is close to the strategy of &quot;tit for tat&quot; used in game theory. In 1987, Trivers presented at a symposium on reciprocity, noting that he initially titled his article &quot;The Evolution of Delayed Return Altruism,&quot; but reviewer W. D. Hamilton suggested renaming it &quot;The Evolution of Reciprocal Altruism.&quot; While Trivers adopted the new title, he retained the original examples, causing confusion about reciprocal altruism for decades. Rothstein and Pierotti (1988) addressed this issue at the symposium, proposing new definitions that clarified the concepts. They argued that Delayed Return Altruism was a superior term and introduced &quot;pseudo-reciprocity&quot; to replace it.

==Theory==
The concept of &quot;reciprocal altruism&quot;, as introduced by Trivers, suggests that altruism, defined as an act of helping another individual while incurring some cost for this act, could have evolved since it might be beneficial to incur this cost if there is a chance of being in a reverse situation where the individual who was helped before may perform an altruistic act towards the individual who helped them initially. This concept finds its roots in the work of W.D. Hamilton, who developed mathematical models for predicting the likelihood of an altruistic act to be performed on behalf of one&#x27;s kin.

Putting this into the form of a strategy in a repeated prisoner&#x27;s dilemma would mean to cooperate unconditionally in the first period and behave cooperatively (altruistically) as long as the other agent does as well. If chances of meeting another reciprocal altruist are high enough, or if the game is repeated for a long enough amount of time, this form of altruism can evolve within a population.

This is close to the notion of &quot;tit for tat&quot; introduced by Anatol Rapoport, although there still seems a slight distinction in that &quot;tit for tat&quot; cooperates in the first period and from thereon always replicates an opponent&#x27;s previous action, whereas &quot;reciprocal altruists&quot; stop cooperation in the first instance of non-cooperation by an opponent and stay non-cooperative from thereon. This distinction leads to the fact that in contrast to reciprocal altruism, tit for tat may be able to restore cooperation under certain conditions despite cooperation having broken down.

Christopher Stephens shows a set of necessary and jointly sufficient conditions &quot;... for an instance of reciprocal altruism:

# the behaviour must reduce a donor&#x27;s fitness relative to a selfish alternative;
# the fitness of the recipient must be elevated relative to non-recipients;
# the performance of the behaviour must not depend on the receipt of an immediate benefit;
# conditions 1, 2, and 3 must apply to both individuals engaging in reciprocal helping.

There are two additional conditions necessary &quot;...for reciprocal altruism to evolve:&quot;

* A mechanism for detecting &#x27;cheaters&#x27; must exist.
* A large (indefinite) number of opportunities to exchange aid must exist.

The first two conditions are necessary for altruism as such, while the third is distinguishing reciprocal altruism from simple mutualism and the fourth makes the interaction reciprocal.
Condition number five is required as otherwise non-altruists may always exploit altruistic behaviour without any consequences and therefore evolution of reciprocal altruism would not be possible. However, it is pointed out that this &quot;conditioning device&quot; does not need to be conscious. Condition number six is required to avoid cooperation breakdown through forward induction—a possibility suggested by game theoretical models.

In 1987, Trivers told a symposium on reciprocity that he had originally submitted his article under the title &quot;The Evolution of Delayed Return Altruism&quot;, but reviewer W. D. Hamilton suggested that he change the title to &quot;The Evolution of Reciprocal Altruism&quot;. Trivers changed the title, but not the examples in the manuscript, which has led to confusion about what were appropriate examples of reciprocal altruism for the last 50 years. In their contribution to that symposium, Rothstein and Pierotti (1988) addressed this issue and proposed new definitions concerning the topic of altruism, that clarified the issue created by Trivers and Hamilton. They proposed that Delayed Return Altruism was a superior concept and used the term pseudo-reciprocity in place of DRA.

==Examples==
The following examples could be understood as altruism. However, showing reciprocal altruism in an unambiguous way requires more evidence as will be shown later.

===Cleaner fish===

An example of reciprocal altruism is cleaning symbiosis, such as between cleaner fish and their hosts, though cleaners include shrimps and birds, and clients include fish, turtles, octopuses and mammals. Aside from the apparent symbiosis of the cleaner and the host during actual cleaning, which cannot be interpreted as altruism, the host displays additional behaviour that meets the criteria for delayed return altruism:

The host fish allows the cleaner fish free entrance and exit and does not eat the cleaner, even after the cleaning is done. The host signals the cleaner it is about to depart the cleaner&#x27;s locality, even when the cleaner is not in its body. The host sometimes chases off possible dangers to the cleaner.

The following evidence supports the hypothesis:

The cleaning by cleaners is essential for the host. In the absence of cleaners the hosts leave the locality or suffer from injuries inflicted by ectoparasites. There is difficulty and danger in finding a cleaner. Hosts leave their element to get cleaned. Others wait no longer than 30 seconds before searching for cleaners elsewhere.

A key requirement for the establishment of reciprocal altruism is that the same two individuals must interact repeatedly, as otherwise the best strategy for the host would be to eat the cleaner as soon as cleaning was complete. This constraint imposes both a spatial and a temporal condition on the cleaner and on its host. Both individuals must remain in the same physical location, and both must have a long enough lifespan, to enable multiple interactions. There is reliable evidence that individual cleaners and hosts do indeed interact repeatedly.

This example meets some, but not all, of the criteria described in Trivers&#x27;s model. In the cleaner-host system the benefit to the cleaner is always immediate. However, the evolution of reciprocal altruism is contingent on opportunities for future rewards through repeated interactions. In one study, nearby host fish observed &quot;cheater&quot; cleaners and subsequently avoided them. In these examples, true reciprocity is difficult to demonstrate since failure means the death of the cleaner. However, if Randall&#x27;s claim that hosts sometimes chase off possible dangers to the cleaner is correct, an experiment might be constructed in which reciprocity could be demonstrated. In actuality this is one of Trivers&#x27; examples of Delayed Return Altruism as discussed by Rothstein and Pierotti 1988.

===Warning calls in birds===

Warning calls, although exposing a bird and putting it in danger, are frequently given by birds. An explanation in terms of altruistic behaviors given by Trivers:

It has been shown that predators learn specific localities and specialize individually on prey types and hunting techniques.
It is therefore disadvantageous for a bird to have a predator eat a conspecific, because the experienced predator may then be more likely to eat them. Alarming another bird by giving a warning call tends to prevent predators from specializing on the caller&#x27;s species and locality. In this way, birds in areas in which warning calls are given will be at a selective advantage relative to birds in areas free from warning calls.

Nevertheless, this presentation lacks important elements of reciprocity. It is very hard to detect and ostracize cheaters. There is no evidence that a bird refrains from giving calls when another bird is not reciprocating, nor evidence that individuals interact repeatedly. Given the aforementioned characteristics of bird calling, a continuous bird emigration and immigration environment (true of many avian species) is most likely to be partial to cheaters, since selection against the selfish gene is unlikely.

Another explanation for warning calls is that these are not warning calls at all:
A bird, once it has detected a bird of prey, calls to signal to the bird of prey that it was detected, and that there is no use trying to attack the calling bird. Two facts support this hypothesis:

* The call frequencies match the hearing range of the predator bird.
* Calling birds are less attacked—predator birds attack calling birds less frequently than other birds.

===Nest protecting===
Red-winged blackbird males help defend neighbor&#x27;s nests. There are many theories as to why males behave this way. One is that males only defend other nests which contain their extra-pair offspring. Extra-pair offspring are juveniles which may contain some of the male bird&#x27;s DNA. Another is the tit-for-tat strategy of reciprocal altruism. A third theory is, males help only other closely related males. A study done by The Department of Fisheries and Wildlife provided evidence that males used a tit-for-tat strategy. The Department of Fisheries and Wildlife tested many different nests by placing stuffed crows by nests, and then observing behavior of neighboring males. The behaviors they looked for included the number of calls, dives, and strikes. After analyzing the results, there was not significance evidence for kin selection; the presence of extra-pair offspring did not affect the probability of help in nest defense. However, males reduced the amount of defense given to neighbors when neighbor males reduced defense for their nests. This demonstrates a tit-for-tat strategy, where animals help those who previously helped them. This strategy is one type of reciprocal altruism.

===Vampire bats===
Vampire bats also display reciprocal altruism, as described by Wilkinson.
The bats feed each other by regurgitating blood. Since bats only feed on blood and will die after just 70 hours of not eating, this food sharing is a great benefit to the receiver and a great cost to the giver.
To qualify for reciprocal altruism, the benefit to the receiver would have to be larger than the cost to the donor. This seems to hold as these bats usually die if they do not find a blood meal two nights in a row. Also, the requirement that individuals who have behaved altruistically in the past are helped by others in the future is confirmed by the data. However, the consistency of the reciprocal behaviour, namely that a previously non-altruistic bat is refused help when it requires it, has not been demonstrated. Therefore, the bats do not seem to qualify yet as an unequivocal example of reciprocal altruism.

===Primates===
Grooming in primates meets the conditions for reciprocal altruism according to some studies. One of the studies in vervet monkeys shows that among unrelated individuals, grooming induce higher chance of attending to each other&#x27;s calls for aid. However, vervet monkeys also display grooming behaviors within group members, displaying alliances. This would demonstrate vervet monkey&#x27;s grooming behavior as a part of kin selection since the activity is done between siblings in this study. Moreover, following the criteria by Stephen, if the study is to be an example of reciprocal altruism, it must prove the mechanism for detecting cheaters.

=== Bacteria ===
Numerous species of bacteria engage in reciprocal altruistic behaviors with other species. Typically, this takes the form of bacteria providing essential nutrients for another species, while the other species provides an environment for the bacteria to live in. Reciprocal altruism is exhibited between nitrogen-fixing bacteria and plants in which they reside. Additionally, it can be observed between bacteria and some species of flies such as &quot;Bactrocera tryoni&quot;. These flies consume nutrient-producing bacteria found on the leaves of plants; in exchange, they reside within the flies&#x27; digestive system. This reciprocal altruistic behavior has been exploited by techniques designed to eliminate &quot;B. tryoni&quot;, which are fruit fly pests native to Australia.

=== Humans ===
Examples of reciprocal altruism in humans include helping injured individuals, sharing food, tools, or knowledge, and providing assistance in crises with the expectation of future aid. In social interactions, individuals often engage in direct reciprocity, such as returning favors or lending resources with an implicit understanding of future repayment. Indirect reciprocity is also observed, where individuals help others based on reputation, encouraging mutual cooperation within a community. Economic and political systems rely on reciprocal altruism through trade agreements, diplomatic alliances, and social contracts, where long-term benefits outweigh short-term costs. Additionally, studies in game theory, such as the Prisoner’s Dilemma, illustrate how cooperative behaviors emerge and stabilize when individuals recognize the advantages of mutual support.

== Exceptions ==
Some animals seem to be unable to develop reciprocal altruism. For example, pigeons defect instead of a random response or a tit-for-tat in a prisoner&#x27;s dilemma game against a computer. This may be due to favoring short-term thinking over long-term thinking.

==Regulation by emotional disposition==
In comparison to that of other animals, the human altruistic system is a sensitive and unstable one. Therefore, the tendency to give, to cheat, and the response to other&#x27;s acts of giving and cheating must be regulated by a complex psychology in each individual, social structures, and cultural traditions. Individuals differ in the degree of these tendencies and responses.
According to Trivers, the following emotional dispositions and their evolution can be understood in terms of regulation of altruism.

*Friendship and emotions of liking and disliking.
*Moralistic aggression. A protection mechanism from cheaters acts to regulate the advantage of cheaters in selection against altruists. The moralistic altruist may want to educate or even punish a cheater.
*Gratitude and sympathy. A fine regulation of altruism can be associated with gratitude and sympathy in terms of cost/benefit and the level in which the beneficiary will reciprocate.
*Guilt and reparative altruism. Prevents the cheater from cheating again. The cheater shows regret to avoid paying too dearly for past acts.
*Subtle cheating. A stable evolutionary equilibrium could include a low percentage of mimics in controversial support of adaptive sociopathy.
*Trust and suspicion. These are regulators for cheating and subtle cheating.
*Partnerships. Altruism to create friendships.

It is not known how individuals pick partners as there has been little research on choice. Modeling indicates that altruism about partner choices is unlikely to evolve, as costs and benefits between multiple individuals are variable. Therefore, the time or frequency of reciprocal actions contributes more to an individual&#x27;s choice of partner than the reciprocal act itself.

==See also==

* Altruism (biology)
* Collaboration
* The common good
* Competitive altruism
* Enlightened self-interest
* Evolutionary models of food sharing
* Gift economy
* Helping behavior
* Koinophilia
* &quot;Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution&quot; (1902)
* Norm of reciprocity
* Prosocial behavior
* Psychological egoism
* Reciprocity (social psychology)
* Reciprocity (evolution)
* Signalling theory

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q840400" start="3" end="23" title="evolutionary biology" label="evolutionary biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q429787" start="25" end="44" title="Reciprocal altruism" label="reciprocal altruism"/>
<link wikidata="Q918334" start="315" end="329" title="Robert Trivers" label="Robert Trivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q380962" start="358" end="369" title="cooperation" label="cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367487" start="458" end="469" title="tit for tat" label="tit for tat"/>
<link wikidata="Q44455" start="484" end="495" title="game theory" label="game theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451" start="666" end="680" title="W. D. Hamilton" label="W. D. Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q167323" start="1228" end="1236" title="altruism" label="altruism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451" start="1613" end="1626" title="W. D. Hamilton" label="W.D. Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q41693" start="1814" end="1837" title="prisoner&amp;#x27;s dilemma" label="prisoner&amp;#x27;s dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q380962" start="1852" end="1861" title="Cooperation" label="cooperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367487" start="2201" end="2212" title="tit for tat" label="tit for tat"/>
<link wikidata="Q487453" start="2233" end="2248" title="Anatol Rapoport" label="Anatol Rapoport"/>
<link wikidata="Q380962" start="2519" end="2530" title="cooperation" label="cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130575" start="5130" end="5148" title="cleaning symbiosis" label="cleaning symbiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727953" start="5166" end="5178" title="cleaner fish" label="cleaner fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610" start="5321" end="5330" title="symbiosis" label="symbiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="6021" end="6034" title="ectoparasites" label="ectoparasites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080021" start="8817" end="8829" title="Gene-centered view of evolution" label="selfish gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q754043" start="9321" end="9341" title="Red-winged blackbird" label="Red-winged blackbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q190691" start="10543" end="10555" title="Vampire bats" label="Vampire bats"/>
<link wikidata="Q8985570" start="11577" end="11590" title="vervet monkey" label="vervet monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840066" start="12582" end="12599" title="Bactrocera tryoni" label="Bactrocera tryoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q44455" start="13631" end="13642" title="game theory" label="game theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q41693" start="13656" end="13674" title="Prisoner&amp;#x27;s dilemma" label="Prisoner’s Dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856" start="13889" end="13896" title="pigeons" label="pigeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q41693" start="13955" end="13978" title="prisoner&amp;#x27;s dilemma" label="prisoner&amp;#x27;s dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559380" start="15875" end="15893" title="Altruism (biology)" label="Altruism (biology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145523" start="15896" end="15909" title="Collaboration" label="Collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534337" start="15912" end="15927" title="Common good" label="The common good"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156349" start="15930" end="15950" title="Competitive altruism" label="Competitive altruism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379073" start="15953" end="15978" title="Enlightened self-interest" label="Enlightened self-interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324860" start="15981" end="16016" title="Evolutionary models of food sharing" label="Evolutionary models of food sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233575" start="16019" end="16031" title="Gift economy" label="Gift economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710255" start="16034" end="16050" title="Helping behavior" label="Helping behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426329" start="16053" end="16064" title="Koinophilia" label="Koinophilia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16073" end="16106" title="Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution" label="Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107249" start="16122" end="16141" title="Norm of reciprocity" label="Norm of reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990613" start="16144" end="16162" title="Prosocial behavior" label="Prosocial behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362786" start="16165" end="16185" title="Psychological egoism" label="Psychological egoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147331" start="16188" end="16219" title="Reciprocity (social psychology)" label="Reciprocity (social psychology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302484" start="16222" end="16245" title="Reciprocity (evolution)" label="Reciprocity (evolution)"/>
<link wikidata="Q249240" start="16248" end="16265" title="Signalling theory" label="Signalling theory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44190" wikidata="Q212789" url="?curid=44190" title="The Selfish Gene">
<text>The Selfish Gene is a 1976 book on evolution by ethologist Richard Dawkins that promotes the gene-centred view of evolution, as opposed to views focused on the organism and the group. The book builds upon the thesis of George C. Williams&#x27;s &quot;Adaptation and Natural Selection&quot; (1966); it also popularized ideas developed during the 1960s by W. D. Hamilton and others. From the gene-centred view, it follows that the more two individuals are genetically related, the more sense (at the level of the genes) it makes for them to behave cooperatively with each other.

A lineage is expected to evolve to maximise its inclusive fitness—the number of copies of its genes passed on globally (rather than by a particular individual). As a result, populations will tend towards an evolutionarily stable strategy. The book also introduces the term &quot;meme&quot; for a unit of human cultural evolution analogous to the gene, suggesting that such &quot;selfish&quot; replication may also model human culture, in a different sense. Memetics has become the subject of many studies since the publication of the book. In raising awareness of Hamilton&#x27;s ideas, as well as making its own valuable contributions to the field, the book has also stimulated research on human inclusive fitness.

Dawkins uses the term &quot;selfish gene&quot; as a way of expressing the gene-centred view of evolution. As such, the book is not about a particular gene that causes selfish behaviour; in fact, much of the book&#x27;s content is devoted to explaining the evolution of altruism. In the foreword to the book&#x27;s 30th-anniversary edition, Dawkins said he &quot;can readily see that [the book&#x27;s title] might give an inadequate impression of its contents&quot; and in retrospect thinks he should have taken Tom Maschler&#x27;s advice and called the book &quot;The Immortal Gene&quot;.

In July 2017, a poll to celebrate the 30th anniversary of the Royal Society science book prize listed &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; as the most influential science book of all time.

==Background==
Dawkins builds upon George C. Williams&#x27;s book &quot;Adaptation and Natural Selection&quot; (1966), which argued that altruism is not based upon group benefit &quot;per se&quot;, but results from selection that occurs &quot;at the level of the gene mediated by the phenotype&quot; and that any selection at the group level occurred only under rare circumstances. W. D. Hamilton and others developed this approach further during the 1960s; they opposed the concepts of group selection and of selection aimed directly at benefit to the individual organism:
Despite the principle of &#x27;survival of the fittest&#x27; the ultimate criterion which determines whether [a gene] &quot;G&quot; will spread is not whether the behavior is to the benefit of the behaver, but whether it is to the benefit of the gene &quot;G&quot; ...With altruism this will happen only if the affected individual is a relative of the altruist, therefore having an increased chance of carrying the gene.
:— W. D. Hamilton, &quot;The Evolution of Altruistic Behavior&quot; (1963), pp. 354–355.
Wilkins and Hull (2014) provide an extended discussion of Dawkins&#x27;s views and of his book &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot;.

==Book==

===Contents===
Dawkins begins by discussing the altruism that people display, indicating that he will argue it is explained by gene selfishness, and attacking group selection as an explanation. He considers the origin of life with the arrival of molecules able to replicate themselves. From there, he looks at DNA&#x27;s role in evolution, and its organisation into chromosomes and genes, which in his view behave selfishly. He describes organisms as apparently purposive but fundamentally simple survival machines, which use negative feedback to achieve control. This extends, he argues, to the brain&#x27;s ability to simulate the world with subjective consciousness, and signalling between species. He then introduces the idea of the evolutionarily stable strategy, and uses it to explain why alternative competitive strategies like bullying and retaliating exist. This allows him to consider what selfishness in a gene might actually mean, describing W. D. Hamilton&#x27;s argument for kin selection, that genes for behaviour that improves the survival chances of close relatives can spread in a population, because those relatives carry the same genes.

Dawkins examines childbearing and raising children as evolutionary strategies. He attacks the idea of group selection for the good of the species as proposed by V. C. Wynne-Edwards, arguing instead that each parent necessarily behaves selfishly. A question is whether parents should invest in their offspring equally or should favour some of them and explains that what is best for the survival of the parents&#x27; genes is not always best for individual children. Similarly, Dawkins argues, there are conflicts of interest between males and females, but he notes that R. A. Fisher showed that the optimal sex ratio is 50:50. He explains that this is true even in an extreme case like the harem-keeping elephant seal, where 4% of the males get 88% of copulations. In that case, the strategy of having a female offspring is safe, as she&#x27;ll have a pup, but the strategy of having a male can bring a large return (dozens of pups), even though many males live out their lives as bachelors. Amotz Zahavi&#x27;s theory of honest signalling explains stotting as a selfish act, he argues, improving the springbok&#x27;s chances of escaping from a predator by indicating how difficult the chase would be.

Dawkins discusses why many species live in groups, achieving mutual benefits through mechanisms such as Hamilton&#x27;s selfish herd model: each individual behaves selfishly but the result is herd behaviour. Altruism too can evolve, as in the social insects such as ants and bees, where workers give up the right to reproduce in favour of a sister, the queen; in their case, the unusual (haplodiploid) system of sex determination may have helped to bring this about, as females in a nest are exceptionally closely related.

The final chapter of the first edition introduced the idea of the meme, a culturally-transmitted entity such as a hummable tune, by analogy to genetic transmission. Dawkins describes God as an old idea which probably arose many times, and which has sufficient psychological appeal to survive effectively in the meme pool. The second edition (1989) added two more chapters.

===Themes===
====&quot;Selfish&quot; genes====
In describing genes as being &quot;selfish&quot;, Dawkins states unequivocally that he does not intend to imply that they are driven by any motives or will, but merely that their effects can be metaphorically and pedagogically described &quot;as if&quot; they were. His contention is that the genes that are passed on are the ones whose evolutionary consequences serve their own implicit interest (to continue the anthropomorphism) in being replicated, not necessarily those of the organism. In later work, Dawkins brings evolutionary &quot;selfishness&quot; down to creation of a widely proliferated &quot;extended phenotype&quot;.

For some, the metaphor of &quot;selfishness&quot; is entirely clear, while to others it is confusing, misleading, or simply silly to ascribe mental attributes to something that is mindless. For example, Andrew Brown has written:

:&quot;&quot;Selfish&quot;, when applied to genes, doesn&#x27;t mean &quot;selfish&quot; at all. It means, instead, an extremely important quality for which there is no good word in the English language: &quot;the quality of being copied by a Darwinian selection process.&quot; This is a complicated mouthful. There ought to be a better, shorter word—but &quot;selfish&quot; isn&#x27;t it.&quot;

Donald Symons also finds it inappropriate to use anthropomorphism in conveying scientific meaning in general, and particularly in this instance. He writes in &quot;The Evolution of Human Sexuality&quot; (1979):

:&quot;In summary, the rhetoric of &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; exactly reverses the real situation: through [the use of] metaphor genes are endowed with properties only sentient beings can possess, such as selfishness, while sentient beings are stripped of these properties and called machines...The anthropomorphism of genes...obscures the deepest mystery in the life sciences: the origin and nature of mind.&quot;

====&quot;Replicators&quot;====
Dawkins proposes the idea of the &quot;replicator&quot;:

:&quot;It is finally time to return to the problem with which we started, to the tension between individual organism and gene as rival candidates for the central role in natural selection...One way of sorting this whole matter out is to use the terms &#x27;replicator&#x27; and &#x27;vehicle&#x27;. The fundamental units of natural selection, the basic things that survive or fail to survive, that form lineages of identical copies with occasional random mutations, are called replicators. DNA molecules are replicators. They generally, for reasons that we shall come to, gang together into large communal survival machines or &#x27;vehicles&#x27;.&quot;
::— Richard Dawkins, &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot;, p. 253 (Anniversary Edition)

The original replicator (Dawkins &quot;Replicator&quot;) was the initial molecule which first managed to reproduce itself and thus gained an advantage over other molecules within the primordial soup. As replicating molecules became more complex, Dawkins postulates, the replicators became the genes within organisms, with each organism&#x27;s body serving the purpose of a &#x27;survival machine&#x27; for its genes.

Dawkins writes that gene combinations which help an organism to survive and reproduce tend to also improve the gene&#x27;s own chances of being replicated, and, as a result, &quot;successful&quot; genes frequently provide a benefit to the organism. An example of this might be a gene that protects the organism against a disease. This helps the gene spread, and also helps the organism.

====Genes vs organisms====
There are other times when the implicit interests of the vehicle and replicator are in conflict, such as the genes behind certain male spiders&#x27; instinctive mating behaviour, which increase the organism&#x27;s inclusive fitness by allowing it to reproduce but shorten its life by exposing it to the risk of being eaten by the cannibalistic female. Another example is the existence of segregation distorter genes that are detrimental to their host, but nonetheless propagate themselves at its expense. Likewise, the persistence of junk DNA that [Dawkins believed at that time] provides no benefit to its host can be explained on the basis that it is not subject to selection. These unselected for but transmitted DNA variations connect the individual genetically to its parents but confer no survival benefit.

These examples might suggest that there is a power struggle between genes and their interactor. In fact, the claim is that there isn&#x27;t much of a struggle because the genes usually win without a fight. However, the claim is made that if the organism becomes intelligent enough to understand its own interests, as distinct from those of its genes, there can be true conflict.

An example of such a conflict might be a person using birth control to prevent fertilisation, thereby inhibiting the replication of his or her genes. But this action might not be a conflict of the &#x27;self-interest&#x27; of the organism with his or her genes, since a person using birth control might also be enhancing the survival chances of their genes by limiting family size to conform with available resources, thus avoiding extinction as predicted under the Malthusian model of population growth.

====Altruism====
Dawkins says that his &quot;purpose&quot; in writing &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; is &quot;to examine the biology of selfishness and altruism.&quot; He does this by supporting the claim that &quot;gene selfishness will usually give rise to selfishness in individual behaviour. However, as we shall see, there are special circumstances in which a gene can achieve its own selfish goals best by fostering a limited form of altruism at the level of individual animals.&quot; Gene selection provides one explanation for kin selection and eusociality, where organisms act altruistically, against their individual interests (in the sense of health, safety or personal reproduction), namely the argument that by helping related organisms reproduce, a gene succeeds in &quot;helping&quot; copies of themselves (or sequences with the same phenotypic effect) in other bodies to replicate. The claim is made that these &quot;selfish&quot; actions of genes lead to unselfish actions by organisms. A requirement upon this claim, supported by Dawkins in Chapter 10: &quot;You scratch my back, I&#x27;ll ride on yours&quot; by examples from nature, is the need to explain how genes achieve kin recognition, or manage to orchestrate mutualism and coevolution. Although Dawkins (and biologists in general) recognize these phenomena result in more copies of a gene, evidence is inconclusive whether this success is selected for at a group or individual level. In fact, Dawkins has proposed that it is at the level of the &quot;extended phenotype&quot;: 
:&quot;We agree [referring to Wilson and Sober&#x27;s book &quot;Unto others: The evolution and psychology of unselfish behavior&quot;] that genes are replicators, organisms and groups are not. We agree that the group selection controversy ought to be a controversy about groups as vehicles, and we could easily agree to differ on the answer...I coined the [term] vehicle not to praise it but to bury it...Darwinism can work on replicators whose phenotypic effects (interactors) are too diffuse, too multi-levelled, too incoherent to deserve the accolade of vehicle...Extended phenotypes can include inanimate artifacts like beaver dams...But the vehicle is not something fundamental...Ask rather &#x27;Is there a vehicle in this situation and, if so, why?&#x27;&quot;
::—Richard Dawkins, &quot;Burying the Vehicle&quot;

Although Dawkins agrees that groups can assist survival, they rank as a &quot;vehicle&quot; for survival only if the group activity is replicated in descendants, recorded in the gene, the gene being the only true replicator. An improvement in the survival lottery for the group must improve that for the gene for sufficient replication to occur. Dawkins argues qualitatively that the lottery for the gene is based upon a very long and broad record of events, and group advantages are usually too specific, too brief, and too fortuitous to change the gene lottery:
::&quot;We can now see that the organism and the group of organisms are true rivals for the vehicle role in the story, but neither of them is even a &quot;candidate&quot; for the replicator role. The controversy between &#x27;individual selection&#x27; and &#x27;group selection&#x27; is a real controversy between alternative vehicles...As it happens the outcome, in my view, is a decisive victory for the individual organism. The group is too wishy-washy an entity.&quot; 
::—Richard Dawkins, &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot;, pp. 254–255

Prior to the 1960s, it was common for altruism to be explained in terms of group selection, where the benefits to the organism or even population were supposed to account for the popularity of the genes responsible for the tendency towards that behaviour. Modern versions of &quot;multilevel selection&quot; claim to have overcome the original objections, namely, that at that time no known form of group selection led to an evolutionarily stable strategy. The claim still is made by some that it would take only a single individual with a tendency towards more selfish behaviour to undermine a population otherwise filled only with the gene for altruism towards non-kin.

==Reception==
&quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; was extremely popular when first published, causing &quot;a silent and almost immediate revolution in biology&quot;, and it continues to be widely read. It has sold over a million copies and has been translated into more than 25 languages. Proponents argue that the central point, that replicating the gene is the object of selection, usefully completes and extends the explanation of evolution given by Charles Darwin before the basic mechanisms of genetics were understood.

According to the ethologist Alan Grafen, acceptance of adaptionist theories is hampered by a lack of a mathematical unifying theory and a belief that anything in words alone must be suspect. According to Grafen, these difficulties along with an initial conflict with population genetics models at the time of its introduction &quot;explains why within biology the considerable scientific contributions it [&quot;The Selfish Gene&quot;] makes are seriously underestimated, and why it is viewed mainly as a work of exposition.&quot; According to comparative psychologist Nicky Hayes, &quot;Dawkins presented a version of sociobiology that rested heavily on metaphors drawn from animal behavior, and extrapolated these...One of the weaknesses of the sociological approach is that it tends only to seek confirmatory examples from among the huge diversity of animal behavior. Dawkins did not deviate from this tradition.&quot; More generally, critics argue that &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; oversimplifies the relationship between genes and the organism. (As an example, see Thompson.)

&quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; further popularised sociobiology in Japan after its translation in 1980. With the addition of Dawkins&#x27;s book to the country&#x27;s consciousness, the term &quot;meme&quot; entered popular culture. Yuzuru Tanaka of Hokkaido University wrote a book, &quot;Meme Media and Meme Market Architectures&quot;, while the psychologist Susan Blackmore wrote &quot;The Meme Machine&quot; (2000), with a foreword by Dawkins. The information scientist Osamu Sakura has published a book in Japanese and several papers in English on the topic. Nippon Animation produced an educational television program titled &quot;The Many Journeys of Meme&quot;.

In 1976, the ecologist Arthur Cain, one of Dawkins&#x27;s tutors at Oxford in the 1960s, called it a &quot;young man&#x27;s book&quot; (which Dawkins points out was a deliberate quote of a commentator on the New College, Oxford philosopher A. J. Ayer&#x27;s &quot;Language, Truth, and Logic&quot; (1936)). Dawkins noted that he had been &quot;flattered by the comparison, [but] knew that Ayer had recanted much of his first book and [he] could hardly miss Cain&#x27;s pointed implication that [he] should, in the fullness of time, do the same.&quot; This point also was made by the philosopher Mary Midgley: &quot;The same thing happened to AJ Ayer, she says, but he spent the rest of his career taking back what he&#x27;d written in &quot;Language, Truth and Logic&quot;. &quot;This hasn&#x27;t occurred to Dawkins&quot;, she says. &quot;He goes on saying the same thing.&quot;&quot; However, according to Wilkins and Hull, Dawkins&#x27;s thinking has developed, although perhaps not defusing this criticism:

:&quot;In Dawkins&#x27;s early writings, replicators and vehicles played different but complementary and equally important roles in selection, but as Dawkins honed his view of the evolutionary process, vehicles became less and less fundamental...In later writings Dawkins goes even further and argues that phenotypic traits are what really matter in selection and that they can be treated independently of their being organized into vehicles...Thus, it comes as no surprise when Dawkins proclaims that he &quot;coined the term &#x27;vehicle&#x27; not to praise it but to bury it.&quot; As prevalent as organisms might be, as determinate as the causal roles that they play in selection are, reference to them can and must be omitted from any perspicuous characterization of selection in the evolutionary process. Dawkins is far from a genetic &quot;determinist&quot;, but he is certainly a genetic &quot;reductionist&quot;.&quot;
::— John S Wilkins, David Hull, &quot;Dawkins on Replicators and Vehicles&quot;, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

===Units of selection===
As to the unit of selection: &quot;One internally consistent logical picture is that the unit of replication is the gene...and the organism is one kind of ...entity on which selection acts directly.&quot; Dawkins proposed the matter without a distinction between &#x27;unit of replication&#x27; and &#x27;unit of selection&#x27; that he made elsewhere: &quot;the fundamental unit of selection, and therefore of self-interest, is not the species, nor the group, nor even strictly the individual. It is the gene, the unit of heredity.&quot; However, he continues in a later chapter:

:&quot;On any sensible view of the matter Darwinian selection does not work on genes directly. ...The important differences between genes emerge only in their &quot;effects&quot;. The technical word &quot;phenotype&quot; is used for the bodily manifestation of a gene, the effect that a gene has on the body...Natural selection favours some genes rather than others not because of the nature of the genes themselves, but because of their consequences—their phenotypic effects...But we shall now see that the phenotypic effects of a gene need to be thought of as &quot;all the effects that it has on the world&quot;. ...The phenotypic effects of a gene are the tools by which it levers itself into the next generation. All I am going to add is that the tools may reach outside the individual body wall...Examples that spring to mind are artefacts like beaver dams, bird nests, and caddis houses.&quot; 
::— Richard Dawkins, &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot;, Chapter 13, pp. 234, 235, 238

Dawkins&#x27;s later formulation is in his book &quot;The Extended Phenotype&quot; (1982), where the process of selection is taken to involve every possible phenotypical effect of a gene.

Stephen Jay Gould finds Dawkins&#x27;s position tries to have it both ways:

:&quot;Dawkins claims to prefer genes and to find greater insight in this formulation. But he allows that you or I might prefer organisms—and it really doesn&#x27;t matter.&quot;
::— Stephen Jay Gould, &quot;The Structure of Evolutionary Theory&quot;, pp. 640-641

The view of &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; is that selection based upon groups and populations is rare compared to selection on individuals. Although supported by Dawkins and by many others, this claim continues to be disputed. While naïve versions of group selectionism have been disproved, more sophisticated formulations make accurate predictions in some cases while positing selection at higher levels. Both sides agree that very favourable genes are likely to prosper and replicate if they arise and both sides agree that living in groups can be an advantage to the group members. The conflict arises in part over defining concepts: 
:&quot;Cultural evolutionary theory, however, has suffered from an overemphasis on the experiences and behaviors of individuals at the expense of acknowledging complex group organization...Many important behaviors related to the success and function of human societies are only properly defined at the level of groups&quot;.

In &quot;The Social Conquest of Earth&quot; (2012), the entomologist E. O. Wilson contends that although the selfish-gene approach was accepted &quot;until 2010 [when] Martin Nowak, Corina Tarnita, and I demonstrated that inclusive fitness theory, often called kin selection theory, is both mathematically and biologically incorrect.&quot; Chapter 18 of &quot;The Social Conquest of Earth&quot; describes the deficiencies of kin selection and outlines group selection, which Wilson argues is a more realistic model of social evolution. He criticises earlier approaches to social evolution, saying: &quot;unwarranted faith in the central role of kinship in social evolution has led to the reversal of the usual order in which biological research is conducted. The proven best way in evolutionary biology, as in most of science, is to define a problem arising during empirical research, then select or devise the theory that is needed to solve it. Almost all research in inclusive-fitness theory has been the opposite: hypothesize the key roles of kinship and kin selection, then look for evidence to test that hypothesis.&quot; According to Wilson: &quot;People must have a tribe...Experiments conducted over many years by social psychologists have revealed how swiftly and decisively people divide into groups, and then discriminate in favor of the one to which they belong.&quot; (pp. 57, 59) According to Wilson: &quot;Different parts of the brain have evolved by group selection to create groupishness.&quot; (p. 61)

Some authors consider facets of this debate between Dawkins and his critics about the level of selection to be blather:
:&quot;The particularly frustrating aspects of these constantly renewed debates is that, even though they seemed to be sparked by rival theories about how evolution works, in fact they often involve only rival metaphors for the very same evolutionary logic and [the debates over these aspects] are thus empirically empty.&quot;
::— Laurent Keller, &quot;Levels of Selection in Evolution&quot;, p.4

Other authors say Dawkins has failed to make some critical distinctions, in particular, the difference between group selection for group advantage and group selection conveying individual advantage.

===Choice of words===
A good deal of objection to &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; stemmed from its failure to be always clear about &quot;selection&quot; and &quot;replication&quot;. Dawkins says the gene is the fundamental unit of selection, and then points out that selection does not act directly upon the gene, but upon &quot;vehicles&quot; or &#x27;&quot;extended phenotypes&quot;. Stephen Jay Gould took exception to calling the gene a &#x27;unit of selection&#x27; because selection acted only upon phenotypes. Summarizing the Dawkins-Gould difference of view, Sterelny says:

:&quot;Gould thinks gene differences do not cause evolutionary changes in populations, they register those changes.&quot; 
::—Kim Sterelny: &quot;Dawkins &quot;vs.&quot; Gould&quot;, p. 83

The word &quot;cause&quot; here is somewhat tricky: does a change in lottery rules (for example, inheriting a defective gene &quot;responsible&quot; for a disorder) &quot;cause&quot; differences in outcome that might or might not occur? It certainly alters the likelihood of events, but a concatenation of contingencies decides what actually occurs. Dawkins thinks the use of &quot;cause&quot; as a statistical weighting is acceptable in common usage. Like Gould, Gabriel Dover in criticizing &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; says:

:&quot;It is illegitimate to give &#x27;powers&#x27; to genes, as Dawkins would have it, to control the outcome of selection...There are no genes for interactions, as such: rather, each unique set of inherited genes contributes interactively to one unique phenotype...the true determinants of selection&quot;.
::— Gabriel Dover: &quot;Dear Mr. Darwin&quot;, p. 56

However, from a comparison with Dawkins&#x27;s discussion of this very same point, it would seem both Gould&#x27;s and Dover&#x27;s comments are more a critique of his sloppy usage than a difference of views. Hull suggested a resolution based upon a distinction between replicators and interactors. The term &quot;replicator&quot; includes genes as the most fundamental replicators but possibly other agents, and &quot;interactor&quot; includes organisms but maybe other agents, much as do Dawkins&#x27;s &#x27;vehicles&#x27;. The distinction is as follows:

:&quot;replicator&quot;: an entity that passes on its structure largely intact in successive replications.
:&quot;interactor&quot;: an entity that interacts as a cohesive whole with its environment in such a way that this interaction &quot;causes&quot; replication to be differential.
:&quot;selection&quot;: a process in which the differential extinction or proliferation of interactors causes the differential perpetuation of the replicators that produced them.

Hull suggests that, despite some similarities, Dawkins takes too narrow a view of these terms, engendering some of the objections to his views. According to Godfrey-Smith, this more careful vocabulary has cleared up &quot;misunderstandings in the &quot;units of selection&quot; debates.&quot;

===Enactive arguments===
Behavioural genetics entertains the view:

:&quot;that genes are dynamic contributors to behavioral organization and are sensitive to feedback systems from the internal and external environments.&quot; &quot;Technically behavior is not inherited; only DNA molecules are inherited. From that point on behavioral formation is a problem of constant interplay between genetic potential and environmental shaping&quot;
::—D.D. Thiessen, &quot;Mechanism specific approaches in behavior genetics&quot;, p. 91

This view from 1970 is still espoused today, and conflicts with Dawkins&#x27;s view of &quot;the gene as a form of &quot;information [that] passes through bodies and affects them, but is not affected by them on its way through&quot;&quot;. The philosophical/biological field of enactivism stresses the interaction of the living agent with its environment and the relation of probing the environment to cognition and adaptation. Gene activation depends upon the cellular milieu. An extended discussion of the contrasts between enactivism and Dawkins&#x27;s views, and with their support by Dennett, is provided by Thompson.

In &quot;Mind in Life&quot;, the philosopher Evan Thompson has assembled a multi-sourced objection to the &quot;selfish gene&quot; idea. Thompson takes issue with Dawkin&#x27;s reduction of &quot;life&quot; to &quot;genes&quot; and &quot;information&quot;:
:&quot;Life is just bytes and bytes and bytes of digital information&quot;
::— Richard Dawkins: &quot;River out of Eden: A Darwinian View of Life&quot;, p. 19

:&quot;On the bank of the Oxford canal...is a large willow tree, and it is pumping downy seeds into the air...It is raining instructions out there; it&#x27;s raining programs; it&#x27;s raining tree-growing, fluff-spreading algorithms. That is not a metaphor, it is the plain truth&quot;

::— Richard Dawkins: &quot;The Blind Watchmaker&quot;, p. 111

Thompson objects that the gene cannot operate by itself, since it requires an environment such as a cell, and life is &quot;the creative outcome of highly structured contingencies&quot;. Thompson quotes Sarkar:

:&quot;there is no clear technical notion of &quot;information&quot; in molecular biology. It is little more than a metaphor that masquerades as a theoretical concept and ...leads to a misleading picture of the nature of possible explanations in molecular biology.&quot;
::— Sahotra Sarkar &quot;Biological information: a skeptical look at some central dogmas of molecular biology&quot;, p. 187

Thompson follows with a detailed examination of the concept of DNA as a look-up-table and the role of the cell in orchestrating the DNA-to-RNA transcription, indicating that by anyone&#x27;s account the DNA is hardly the whole story. Thompson goes on to suggest that the cell-environment interrelationship has much to do with reproduction and inheritance, and a focus on the gene as a form of &quot;information [that] passes through bodies and affects them but is not affected by them on its way through&quot; is tantamount to adoption of a form of material-informational dualism that has no explanatory value and no scientific basis. (Thomson, p. 187) The enactivist view, however, is that information results from the probing and experimentation of the agent with the agent&#x27;s environment subject to the limitations of the agent&#x27;s abilities to probe and process the result of probing, and DNA is simply one mechanism the agent brings to bear upon its activity.

===Moral arguments===
Another criticism of the book is its treatment of morality, and more particularly altruism, as existing only as a form of selfishness:

:&quot;It is important to realize that the above definitions of altruism and selfishness are &quot;behavioural&quot;, not subjective. I am not concerned here with the psychology of motives...My definition is concerned only with whether the effect of an act is to lower or raise the survival prospects of the presumed altruist and the survival prospects of the presumed beneficiary.&quot; 
::— Richard Dawkins, &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot;, p. 12 
:&quot;We can even discuss ways of cultivating and nurturing pure, disinterested altruism, something that has no place in nature, something that has never existed before in the whole history of the world.&quot;
::— Richard Dawkins, &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot;, p. 179

The philosopher Mary Midgley has suggested this position is a variant of Hobbes&#x27;s explanation of altruism as enlightened self-interest, and that Dawkins goes a step further to suggest that our genetic programming can be overcome by what amounts to an extreme version of free will. Part of Mary Midgley&#x27;s concern is that Richard Dawkins&#x27;s account of &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; serves as a moral and ideological justification for selfishness to be adopted by modern human societies as simply following &quot;nature&quot;, providing an excuse for behavior with bad consequences for future human society.

Dawkins&#x27;s major concluding theme, that humanity is finally gaining power over the &quot;selfish replicators&quot; by virtue of their intelligence, is criticized also by primatologist Frans de Waal, who refers to it as an example of a &quot;veneer theory&quot; (the idea that morality is not fundamental, but is laid over a brutal foundation). Dawkins claims he merely describes how things are under evolution, and makes no moral arguments. On BBC-2 TV, Dawkins pointed to evidence for a &quot;Tit-for-Tat&quot; strategy (shown to be successful in game theory) as the most common, simple, and profitable choice.

More generally, the objection has been made that &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; discusses philosophical and moral questions that go beyond biological arguments, relying upon anthropomorphisms and careless analogies.

==Publication==
&quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; was first published by Oxford University Press in 1976 in eleven chapters with a preface by the author and a foreword by Robert Trivers. A second edition was published in 1989. This edition added two extra chapters, and substantial endnotes to the preceding chapters, reflecting new findings and thoughts. It also added a second preface by the author, but the original foreword by Trivers was dropped. The book contains no illustrations.

The book has been translated into at least 23 languages including Arabic, Thai and Turkish.

In 2006, a 30th-anniversary edition was published with the Trivers foreword and a new introduction by the author in which he states, &quot;This edition does, however---and it is a source of particular joy to me---restore the original Foreword by Robert Trivers.&quot; This edition was accompanied by a &quot;festschrift&quot; entitled &quot;Richard Dawkins: How a Scientist Changed the Way We Think&quot; (2006). In March 2006, a special event entitled &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot;: Thirty Years On was held at the London School of Economics. In March 2011, Audible Inc published an audiobook edition narrated by Richard Dawkins and Lalla Ward.

In 2016, Oxford University Press published a 40th anniversary edition with a new epilogue, in which Dawkins describes the continued relevance of the gene&#x27;s eye view of evolution and states that it, along with coalescence analysis &quot;illuminates the deep past in ways of which I had no inkling when I first wrote &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot;...&quot;

=== Editions ===

==Awards and recognition==
In April 2016, &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; was listed in &quot;The Guardian&quot;&#x27;s list of the 100 best nonfiction books, by Robert McCrum.

In July 2017, the book was listed as the most influential science book of all time in a poll to celebrate the 30th anniversary of the Royal Society science book prize, ahead of Charles Darwin&#x27;s &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot; and Isaac Newton&#x27;s &quot;Principia Mathematica&quot;.

== See also ==
* 
* 

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 

==External links==
*Video introduction by Richard Dawkins from Google Videos
*&quot;The Selfish Gene&quot;: Thirty Years On and mp3 from Edge Foundation, Inc.
*Richard Dawkins discusses &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; on the BBC &quot;World Book Club&quot;
*Richard Dawkins on the origins of &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; Royal Institution event video, 20 September 2013</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="35" end="44" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155" start="48" end="58" title="ethologist" label="ethologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q44461" start="59" end="74" title="Richard Dawkins" label="Richard Dawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080021" start="93" end="123" title="gene-centered view of evolution" label="gene-centred view of evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q874437" start="177" end="182" title="Group selection" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q552019" start="219" end="237" title="George C. Williams (biologist)" label="George C. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824096" start="251" end="283" title="Adaptation and Natural Selection" label="Adaptation and Natural Selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451" start="354" end="368" title="W. D. Hamilton" label="W. D. Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q332985" start="580" end="587" title="Lineage (evolution)" label="lineage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005215" start="626" end="643" title="inclusive fitness" label="inclusive fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069992" start="785" end="815" title="evolutionarily stable strategy" label="evolutionarily stable strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q978" start="857" end="861" title="meme" label="meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q12031891" start="888" end="906" title="cultural evolution" label="cultural evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23399" start="1035" end="1043" title="Memetics" label="Memetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884120" start="1269" end="1292" title="human inclusive fitness" label="human inclusive fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080021" start="1369" end="1399" title="gene-centered view of evolution" label="gene-centred view of evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816732" start="1806" end="1818" title="Tom Maschler" label="Tom Maschler"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="1947" end="1960" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q552019" start="2102" end="2120" title="George C. Williams (biologist)" label="George C. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824096" start="2139" end="2171" title="Adaptation and Natural Selection" label="Adaptation and Natural Selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q167323" start="2204" end="2212" title="altruism" label="altruism"/>
<link wikidata="Q874437" start="2231" end="2244" title="group selection" label="group benefit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="2282" end="2291" title="natural selection" label="selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="2351" end="2360" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451" start="2449" end="2463" title="W. D. Hamilton" label="W. D. Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q874437" start="2554" end="2569" title="group selection" label="group selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q721322" start="2672" end="2695" title="survival of the fittest" label="survival of the fittest"/>
<link wikidata="Q874437" start="3446" end="3461" title="group selection" label="group selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="3498" end="3512" title="origin of life" label="origin of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="3597" end="3600" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="3616" end="3625" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="3653" end="3663" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="3669" end="3673" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="3725" end="3733" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453786" start="3738" end="3758" title="teleology in biology" label="apparently purposive"/>
<link wikidata="Q62527" start="3813" end="3830" title="negative feedback" label="negative feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q103191" start="3834" end="3849" title="homeostasis" label="achieve control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="3883" end="3888" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="3942" end="3955" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q249240" start="3961" end="3987" title="signalling theory" label="signalling between species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069992" start="4024" end="4054" title="evolutionarily stable strategy" label="evolutionarily stable strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44455" start="4083" end="4117" title="game theory" label="alternative competitive strategies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451" start="4242" end="4256" title="W. D. Hamilton" label="W. D. Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q741598" start="4277" end="4290" title="kin selection" label="kin selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155" start="4307" end="4316" title="ethology" label="behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934589" start="4607" end="4626" title="V. C. Wynne-Edwards" label="V. C. Wynne-Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q216723" start="5016" end="5028" title="R. A. Fisher" label="R. A. Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q185231" start="5150" end="5163" title="elephant seal" label="elephant seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q201550" start="5438" end="5450" title="Amotz Zahavi" label="Amotz Zahavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q249240" start="5468" end="5485" title="honest signalling" label="honest signalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747821" start="5495" end="5503" title="stotting" label="stotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609678" start="5769" end="5781" title="selfish herd" label="selfish herd"/>
<link wikidata="Q753694" start="5892" end="5906" title="social insects" label="social insects"/>
<link wikidata="Q627153" start="5936" end="5943" title="worker bee" label="workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098692" start="6037" end="6049" title="haplodiploid" label="haplodiploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q594595" start="6061" end="6078" title="sex determination system" label="sex determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q978" start="6239" end="6243" title="meme" label="meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193384" start="6247" end="6269" title="Cultural learning" label="culturally-transmitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441519" start="6745" end="6749" title="Volition (psychology)" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="6931" end="6940" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="7008" end="7024" title="anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634176" start="7195" end="7225" title="The Extended Phenotype" label="&amp;quot;extended phenotype&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756454" start="7431" end="7443" title="Andrew Brown (Guardian journalist)" label="Andrew Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q174568" start="7855" end="7868" title="Donald Symons" label="Donald Symons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732719" start="8019" end="8051" title="The Evolution of Human Sexuality" label="The Evolution of Human Sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="9384" end="9392" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9494" end="9509" title="Abiogenesis#&amp;quot;Primordial soup theory" label="primordial soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005215" start="10358" end="10375" title="inclusive fitness" label="inclusive fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4212527" start="10455" end="10494" title="Spider cannibalism" label="being eaten by the cannibalistic female"/>
<link wikidata="Q4507240" start="10532" end="10553" title="Intragenomic conflict" label="segregation distorter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10678" end="10686" title="Noncoding DNA#Junk DNA" label="junk DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q828341" start="11804" end="11814" title="Malthusian" label="Malthusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q167323" start="12282" end="12290" title="altruism" label="altruism"/>
<link wikidata="Q741598" start="12377" end="12390" title="kin selection" label="kin selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q753694" start="12395" end="12406" title="eusociality" label="eusociality"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="12691" end="12708" title="phenotype" label="phenotypic effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410321" start="13036" end="13051" title="kin recognition" label="kin recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q186368" start="13078" end="13087" title="Mutualism (biology)" label="mutualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208841" start="13092" end="13103" title="coevolution" label="coevolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634176" start="13364" end="13394" title="The Extended Phenotype" label="&amp;quot;extended phenotype&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q874437" start="15396" end="15411" title="group selection" label="group selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q874437" start="15596" end="15628" title="Multilevel selection theory" label="&amp;quot;multilevel selection&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="16441" end="16455" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="16487" end="16495" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601296" start="16542" end="16553" title="Alan Grafen" label="Alan Grafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q190553" start="17645" end="17657" title="sociobiology" label="sociobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q155199" start="17955" end="17970" title="Susan Blackmore" label="Susan Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q470114" start="17983" end="17999" title="The Meme Machine" label="The Meme Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207421" start="18231" end="18256" title="Mīmu Iro Iro Yume no Tabi" label="The Many Journeys of Meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798179" start="18288" end="18299" title="Arthur Cain" label="Arthur Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376987" start="18473" end="18492" title="New College, Oxford" label="New College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q243757" start="18505" end="18515" title="A. J. Ayer" label="A. J. Ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431691" start="18529" end="18555" title="Language, Truth, and Logic" label="Language, Truth, and Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898525" start="18859" end="18871" title="Mary Midgley" label="Mary Midgley"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="20290" end="20325" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312854" start="20362" end="20379" title="unit of selection" label="unit of selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634176" start="21972" end="21994" title="The Extended Phenotype" label="The Extended Phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="22075" end="22087" title="Phenotype" label="phenotypical"/>
<link wikidata="Q180619" start="22107" end="22124" title="Stephen Jay Gould" label="Stephen Jay Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q874437" start="22699" end="22717" title="group selectionism" label="group selectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q24255678" start="23421" end="23449" title="The Social Conquest of Earth" label="The Social Conquest of Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q211029" start="23481" end="23493" title="E. O. Wilson" label="E. O. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q87451" start="23580" end="23592" title="Martin Nowak" label="Martin Nowak"/>
<link wikidata="Q89456789" start="23594" end="23608" title="Corina Tarnita" label="Corina Tarnita"/>
<link wikidata="Q180619" start="26036" end="26053" title="Stephen Jay Gould" label="Stephen Jay Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="26155" end="26164" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204375" start="28660" end="28680" title="Behavioural genetics" label="Behavioural genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q431627" start="29441" end="29451" title="enactivism" label="enactivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q411391" start="29591" end="29606" title="Regulation of gene expression" label="Gene activation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215263" start="29752" end="29759" title="Daniel Dennett" label="Dennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q329249" start="29832" end="29845" title="Evan Thompson" label="Evan Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="31227" end="31230" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="31307" end="31320" title="transcription (genetics)" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q431627" start="31821" end="31831" title="Enactivism" label="enactivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898525" start="33028" end="33040" title="Mary Midgley" label="Mary Midgley"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="33085" end="33098" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Hobbes&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379073" start="33126" end="33151" title="enlightened self-interest" label="enlightened self-interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="33287" end="33296" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q219488" start="33805" end="33818" title="primatologist" label="primatologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q303350" start="33819" end="33832" title="Frans de Waal" label="Frans de Waal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919677" start="33876" end="33889" title="veneer theory" label="veneer theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="33911" end="33919" title="morality" label="morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367487" start="34123" end="34155" title="Tit for tat" label="&amp;quot;Tit-for-Tat&amp;quot; strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="34354" end="34359" title="morality" label="moral"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="34531" end="34554" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q918334" start="34629" end="34643" title="Robert Trivers" label="Robert Trivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q933348" start="35348" end="35359" title="festschrift" label="festschrift"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35381" end="35438" title="Richard Dawkins: How a Scientist Changed the Way We Think" label="Richard Dawkins: How a Scientist Changed the Way We Think"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="35555" end="35581" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q439404" start="35673" end="35683" title="Lalla Ward" label="Lalla Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080021" start="35835" end="35868" title="Gene-centered view of evolution" label="gene&amp;#x27;s eye view of evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698599" start="35900" end="35920" title="Coalescent theory" label="coalescence analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="36154" end="36166" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="36372" end="36385" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="36415" end="36429" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="36443" end="36467" title="On the Origin of Species" label="On the Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="36478" end="36490" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q205921" start="36504" end="36525" title="Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica" label="Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q9366" start="36674" end="36687" title="Google Videos" label="Google Videos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337653" start="36748" end="36769" title="Edge Foundation, Inc." label="Edge Foundation, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q8035418" start="36843" end="36858" title="World Book Club" label="World Book Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171086" start="36929" end="36946" title="Royal Institution" label="Royal Institution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44191" wikidata="Q34970" url="?curid=44191" title="D. H. Lawrence">
<text>David Herbert Lawrence (11 September 1885 – 2 March 1930) was an English novelist, short story writer, poet, playwright, literary critic, travel writer, essayist, and painter. His modernist works reflect on modernity, social alienation and industrialization, while championing sexuality, vitality and instinct. Four of his most famous novels – &quot;Sons and Lovers&quot;
(1913), &quot;The Rainbow&quot; (1915), &quot;Women in Love&quot; (1920), and &quot;Lady Chatterley&#x27;s Lover&quot; (1928) – were the subject of censorship trials for their radical portrayals of romance, sexuality and use of explicit language.

Lawrence&#x27;s opinions and artistic preferences earned him a controversial reputation; he endured contemporary persecution and public misrepresentation of his creative work throughout his life, much of which he spent in a voluntary exile that he described as a &quot;savage enough pilgrimage&quot;. At the time of his death, he had been variously scorned as tasteless, avant-garde, and a pornographer who had only garnered success for erotica; however, English novelist and critic E. M. Forster, in an obituary notice, challenged this widely held view, describing him as &quot;the greatest imaginative novelist of our generation&quot;. Later, English literary critic F. R. Leavis also championed both his artistic integrity and his moral seriousness.

==Life and career==
===Early life===

Lawrence was the fourth child of Arthur John Lawrence, a barely literate miner at Brinsley Colliery, and Lydia Lawrence (née Beardsall), a former pupil-teacher who had been obliged to perform manual work in a lace factory due to her family&#x27;s financial difficulties. He spent his formative years in the coal mining town of Eastwood, Nottinghamshire. The house in which he was born, 8a Victoria Street, is now the D. H. Lawrence Birthplace Museum. His working-class background and the tensions between his parents provided the raw material for some of his early works. Lawrence roamed out from an early age in the patches of open, hilly country and remaining fragments of Sherwood Forest in Felley woods to the north of Eastwood, beginning a lifelong appreciation of the natural world, and he often wrote about &quot;the country of my heart&quot; as a setting for much of his fiction.

The young Lawrence attended Beauvale Board School (now renamed Greasley Beauvale D. H. Lawrence Primary School in his honour) from 1891 until 1898, becoming the first local pupil to win a county council scholarship to Nottingham High School in nearby Nottingham. He left in 1901, working for three months as a junior clerk at Haywood&#x27;s surgical appliances factory, but a severe bout of pneumonia ended this career. During his convalescence he often visited Hagg&#x27;s Farm, the home of the Chambers family, and began a friendship with one of the daughters, Jessie Chambers, who would inspire characters he created in his writing. An important aspect of his relationship with Chambers and other adolescent acquaintances was a shared love of books, an interest that lasted throughout Lawrence&#x27;s life.

In a private letter written in 1908, Lawrence voiced support for eugenics by the method of a &quot;lethal chamber&quot; to dispose of &quot;all the sick, the halt, the maimed&quot;.
In the years 1902 to 1906, Lawrence served as a pupil-teacher at the British School, Eastwood. He went on to become a full-time student and received a teaching certificate from University College, Nottingham (then an external college of University of London), in 1908. During these early years he was working on his first poems, some short stories, and a draft of a novel, &quot;Laetitia&quot;, which was eventually to become &quot;The White Peacock.&quot; At the end of 1907, he won a short story competition in the &quot;Nottinghamshire Guardian&quot;, the first time that he had gained any wider recognition for his literary talents.

=== Early career ===

In the autumn of 1908, the newly qualified Lawrence left his childhood home for London. While teaching in Davidson Road School, Croydon, he continued writing. Jessie Chambers submitted some of Lawrence&#x27;s early poetry to Ford Madox Ford (then known as Ford Hermann Hueffer), editor of the influential &quot;The English Review&quot;. Hueffer then commissioned the story &quot;Odour of Chrysanthemums&quot; which, when published in that magazine, encouraged Heinemann, a London publisher, to ask Lawrence for more work. His career as a professional author now began in earnest, although he taught for another year.
Shortly after the final proofs of his first published novel, &quot;The White Peacock&quot;, appeared in 1910, Lawrence&#x27;s mother died of cancer. The young man was devastated, and he was to describe the next few months as his &quot;sick year&quot;. Due to Lawrence&#x27;s close relationship with his mother, his grief became a major turning point in his life, just as the death of his character, Mrs. Morel, is a major turning point in his autobiographical novel &quot;Sons and Lovers&quot;, a work that draws upon much of the writer&#x27;s provincial upbringing. Essentially concerned with the emotional battle for Lawrence&#x27;s love between his mother and &quot;Miriam&quot; (in reality Jessie Chambers), the novel also documents Lawrence&#x27;s (through his protagonist, Paul) brief intimate relationship with Chambers that Lawrence had finally initiated in the Christmas of 1909, ending it in August 1910. The hurt this caused Chambers and, finally, her portrayal in the novel, ended their friendship; after it was published, they never spoke again.

In 1911, Lawrence was introduced to Edward Garnett, a publisher&#x27;s reader, who acted as a mentor and became a valued friend, as did his son David. Throughout these months, the young author revised &quot;Paul Morel&quot;, the first draft of what became &quot;Sons and Lovers&quot;. In addition, a teaching colleague, Helen Corke, gave him access to her intimate diaries about an unhappy love affair, which formed the basis of &quot;The Trespasser&quot;, his second novel. In November 1911, Lawrence came down with a pneumonia again; once recovered, he abandoned teaching in order to become a full-time writer. In February 1912, he broke off an engagement to Louie Burrows, an old friend from his days in Nottingham and Eastwood.
In March 1912, Lawrence met Frieda Weekley (née von Richthofen), with whom he was to share the rest of his life. Six years his senior, she was married to Ernest Weekley, his former modern languages professor at University College, Nottingham, and had three young children. However, she and Lawrence eloped and left England for Frieda&#x27;s parents&#x27; home in Metz, a garrison town (then in Germany) near the disputed border with France. Lawrence experienced his first encounter with tensions between Germany and France when he was arrested and accused of being a British spy, before being released following an intervention from Frieda&#x27;s father. After this incident, Lawrence left for a small hamlet to the south of Munich where he was joined by Frieda for their &quot;honeymoon&quot;, later memorialised in the series of love poems titled &quot;Look! We Have Come Through&quot; (1917).

During 1912 Lawrence wrote the first of his so-called &quot;mining plays&quot;, &quot;The Daughter-in-Law&quot;, written in Nottingham dialect. The play was not performed or even published in Lawrence&#x27;s lifetime.
From Germany, they walked southwards across the Alps to Italy, a journey that was recorded in the first of his travel books, a collection of linked essays titled &quot;Twilight in Italy&quot; and the unfinished novel, &quot;Mr Noon&quot;.

During his stay in Italy, Lawrence completed the final version of &quot;Sons and Lovers&quot;. Having become tired of the manuscript, he allowed Edward Garnett to cut roughly 100 pages from the text. The novel was published in 1913 and hailed as a vivid portrait of the realities of working class provincial life.

Lawrence and Frieda returned to Britain in 1913 for a short visit, during which they encountered and befriended critic John Middleton Murry and New Zealand-born short story writer Katherine Mansfield.

Also during that year, on 28 July, Lawrence met the Welsh tramp poet W. H. Davies, whose nature poetry he initially admired. Davies collected autographs, and was keen to have Lawrence&#x27;s. Georgian poetry publisher Edward Marsh secured this for Davies, probably as part of a signed poem, and also arranged a meeting between the poet and Lawrence and his wife. Despite his early enthusiasm for Davies&#x27; work, Lawrence&#x27;s view cooled after reading &quot;Foliage&quot;; whilst in Italy, he also disparaged &quot;Nature Poems&quot;, calling them &quot;so thin, one can hardly feel them&quot;.

After the couple returned to Italy, staying in a cottage in Fiascherino on the Gulf of Spezia Lawrence wrote the first draft of what would later be transformed into two of his best-known novels, &quot;The Rainbow&quot; and &quot;Women in Love&quot;, in which unconventional female characters take centre stage. Both novels were highly controversial and were banned on publication in the UK for obscenity, although &quot;Women in Love&quot; was banned only temporarily. 

&quot;The Rainbow&quot; follows three generations of a Nottinghamshire farming family from the pre-industrial to the industrial age, focusing particularly on a daughter, Ursula, and her aspiration for a more fulfilling life than that of becoming a housebound wife. &quot;Women in Love&quot; delves into the complex relationships between four major characters, including Ursula of &quot;The Rainbow&quot; and her sister Gudrun. Both novels explore grand themes and ideas that challenged conventional thought on the arts, politics, economic growth, gender, sexual experience, friendship, and marriage. Lawrence&#x27;s views as expressed in the novels are now thought to be far ahead of his time. The frank and relatively straightforward manner in which he wrote about sexual attraction was ostensibly why the books were initially banned, in particular the mention of same-sex attraction; Ursula has an affair with a woman in &quot;The Rainbow&quot;, and there is an undercurrent of attraction between the two principal male characters in &quot;Women in Love&quot;.

While working on &quot;Women in Love&quot; in Cornwall during 1916–17, Lawrence developed a strong relationship with a Cornish farmer named William Henry Hocking, which some scholars believe was possibly romantic, especially considering Lawrence&#x27;s fascination with the theme of homosexuality in &quot;Women in Love&quot;. Although Lawrence never made it clear whether their relationship was sexual, Frieda believed it was. In a 1913 letter, he writes, &quot;I should like to know why nearly every man that approaches greatness tends to homosexuality, whether he admits it or not...&quot; He is also quoted as saying, &quot;I believe the nearest I&#x27;ve come to perfect love was with a young coal-miner when I was about 16.&quot; However, given his enduring and robust relationship with Frieda, it is likely that he was primarily what might be termed today bi-curious, and whether he actually ever had homosexual relations remains an open question.

Eventually, Frieda obtained her divorce from Ernest Weekley. Lawrence and Frieda returned to Britain shortly before the outbreak of World War I and were married on 13 July 1914. During this time, Lawrence worked with London intellectuals and writers such as Dora Marsden, T. S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, and others connected with &quot;The Egoist&quot;, an important Modernist literary magazine that published some of his work. Lawrence also worked on adapting Filippo Tommaso Marinetti&#x27;s &quot;Manifesto of Futurism&quot; into English. He also met the young Jewish artist Mark Gertler, with whom he became good friends for a time; Lawrence would later express his admiration for Gertler&#x27;s 1916 anti-war painting, &quot;Merry-Go-Round&quot; as &quot;the best &quot;modern&quot; picture I have seen ... it is great and true.&quot; Gertler would inspire the character Loerke (a sculptor) in &quot;Women in Love&quot;.

Frieda&#x27;s German parentage and Lawrence&#x27;s open contempt for militarism caused them to be viewed with suspicion and live in near-destitution during wartime Britain; this may have contributed to &quot;The Rainbow&quot; being suppressed and investigated for its alleged obscenity in 1915. Later, the couple were accused of spying and signaling to German submarines off the coast of Cornwall, where they lived at Zennor. During this period, Lawrence finished his final draft of &quot;Women in Love&quot;. Not published until 1920, it is now widely recognized as a novel of great dramatic force and intellectual subtlety.

In late 1917, after constant harassment by the armed forces and other authorities, Lawrence was forced to leave Cornwall on three days&#x27; notice under the terms of the Defence of the Realm Act. He described this persecution in an autobiographical chapter of his novel &quot;Kangaroo&quot; (1923). Lawrence spent a few months of early 1918 in the small, rural village of Hermitage near Newbury, Berkshire. Subsequently, he lived for just under a year (mid-1918 to early 1919) at Mountain Cottage, Middleton-by-Wirksworth, Derbyshire, where he wrote one of his most poetic short stories, &quot;Wintry Peacock&quot;. Until 1919, poverty compelled him to shift from address to address.

During the 1918 influenza pandemic, he barely survived a severe attack of influenza.

===Exile===
After the wartime years, Lawrence began what he termed his &quot;savage pilgrimage&quot;, a time of voluntary exile from his native country. He escaped from Britain at the earliest practical opportunity and returned only twice for brief visits, spending the remainder of his life travelling with Frieda. This wanderlust took him to Australia, Italy, Ceylon (Sri Lanka), the United States, Mexico and the south of France. Abandoning Britain in November 1919, they headed south, first to the Abruzzo region in central Italy and then onwards to Capri and the Fontana Vecchia in Taormina, Sicily. From Sicily they made brief excursions to Sardinia, Monte Cassino, Malta, Northern Italy, Austria and Southern Germany.

Many of these places appear in Lawrence&#x27;s writings, including &quot;The Lost Girl&quot; (for which he won the James Tait Black Memorial Prize for fiction), &quot;Aaron&#x27;s Rod&quot; and the fragment titled &quot;Mr Noon&quot; (the first part of which was published in the Phoenix anthology of his works, and the entirety in 1984). He wrote novellas such as &quot;The Captain&#x27;s Doll&quot;, &quot;The Fox&quot; and &quot;The Ladybird&quot;. In addition, some of his short stories were issued in the collection &quot;England, My England and Other Stories&quot;. During these years Lawrence also wrote poems about the natural world in &quot;Birds, Beasts and Flowers&quot;.

Lawrence is often considered one of the finest travel writers in English. His travel books include &quot;Twilight in Italy&quot;, &quot;Etruscan Places&quot;, &quot;Mornings in Mexico&quot;, and &quot;Sea and Sardinia&quot;, which describes a brief journey he undertook in January 1921 and focuses on the life of Sardinia&#x27;s people. Less well known is his eighty-four page introduction to Maurice Magnus&#x27;s 1924 &quot;Memoirs of the Foreign Legion&quot;, in which Lawrence recalls his visit to the monastery of Monte Cassino. Lawrence told his friend Catherine Carswell that his introduction to Magnus&#x27;s &quot;Memoirs&quot; was &quot;the best single piece of writing, as &quot;writing&quot;, that he had ever done&quot;.

His other nonfiction books include two responses to Freudian psychoanalysis, &quot;Psychoanalysis and the Unconscious&quot; and &quot;Fantasia of the Unconscious&quot;; &quot;Apocalypse and Other Writings on Revelation&quot;; and &quot;Movements in European History&quot;, a school textbook published under a pseudonym, is a reflection of Lawrence&#x27;s blighted reputation in Britain.

===Later life and career===
In late February 1922, the Lawrences left Europe intending to migrate to the United States. They sailed in an easterly direction, however, first to Ceylon and then on to Australia. During a short residence in Darlington, Western Australia, Lawrence met local writer Mollie Skinner, with whom he coauthored the novel &quot;The Boy in the Bush&quot;. This stay was followed by a brief stop in the small coastal town of Thirroul, New South Wales, during which Lawrence completed &quot;Kangaroo&quot;, a novel about local fringe politics that also explored his wartime experiences in Cornwall.

The Lawrences finally arrived in the United States in September 1922. Lawrence had several times discussed the idea of setting up a utopian community with several of his friends, having written in 1915 to Willie Hopkin, his old socialist friend from Eastwood: &quot;I want to gather together about twenty souls and sail away from this world of war and squalor and found a little colony where there shall be no money but a sort of communism as far as necessaries of life go, and some real decency … a place where one can live simply, apart from this civilisation … [with] a few other people who are also at peace and happy and live, and understand and be free.…&quot;It was with this in mind that they made for Taos, New Mexico, a Pueblo town where many white &quot;bohemians&quot; had settled, including Mabel Dodge Luhan, a prominent socialite. Here they eventually acquired the 160-acre (0.65 km2) Kiowa Ranch, now called the D. H. Lawrence Ranch, in 1924 from Dodge Luhan in exchange for the manuscript of &quot;The Plumed Serpent&quot;. The couple stayed in New Mexico for two years, with extended visits to Lake Chapala and Oaxaca in Mexico. While Lawrence was in New Mexico, he was visited by Aldous Huxley.

Editor and book designer Merle Armitage wrote a book about D. H. Lawrence in New Mexico. &quot;Taos Quartet in Three Movements&quot; was originally to appear in Flair Magazine, but the magazine folded before its publication. This short work describes the tumultuous relationship of D. H. Lawrence, his wife Frieda, artist Dorothy Brett, and Mabel Dodge Sterne Luhan. Armitage took it upon himself to print 16 hardcover copies of this work for his friends. Richard Pousette-Dart executed the drawings for &quot;Taos Quartet&quot;, published in 1950.

While in the U.S., Lawrence rewrote and published &quot;Studies in Classic American Literature&quot;, a set of critical essays begun in 1917 and described by Edmund Wilson as &quot;one of the few first-rate books that have ever been written on the subject&quot;. These interpretations, with their insights into symbolism, New England Transcendentalism and the Puritan sensibility, were a significant factor in the revival of the reputation of Herman Melville during the early 1920s. In addition, Lawrence completed new fictional works, including &quot;The Boy in the Bush&quot;, &quot;The Plumed Serpent&quot;, &quot;St Mawr&quot;, &quot;The Woman who Rode Away&quot;, &quot;The Princess&quot; and other short stories. He also produced the collection of linked travel essays that became &quot;Mornings in Mexico&quot;.

A brief voyage to England at the end of 1923 was a failure and Lawrence soon returned to Taos, convinced his life as an author now lay in the United States. However, in March 1925 he suffered a near fatal attack of malaria and tuberculosis while on a third visit to Mexico. Although he eventually recovered, the diagnosis of his condition obliged him to return once again to Europe. He was dangerously ill and poor health limited his ability to travel for the remainder of his life. The Lawrences made their home in a villa in Northern Italy near Florence, where he wrote &quot;The Virgin and the Gipsy&quot; and the various versions of &quot;Lady Chatterley&#x27;s Lover&quot; (1928). The latter book, his last major novel, was initially published in private editions in Florence and Paris and reinforced his notoriety. A story set once more in Nottinghamshire about a cross-class relationship between a Lady and her gamekeeper, it broke new ground in describing their sexual relationship in explicit yet literary language. Lawrence hoped to challenge the British taboos around sex: to enable men and women &quot;to think sex, fully, completely, honestly, and cleanly.&quot; Lawrence responded robustly to those who took offense, even publishing satirical poems (&quot;Pansies&quot; and &quot;Nettles&quot;) as well as a tract on &quot;Pornography and Obscenity&quot;.

The return to Italy allowed him to renew old friendships; during these years he was particularly close to Aldous Huxley, who was to edit the first collection of Lawrence&#x27;s letters after his death, along with a memoir. After Lawrence visited local archaeological sites (particularly old tombs) with artist Earl Brewster in April 1927, his collected essays inspired by the excursions were published as &quot;Sketches of Etruscan Places&quot;, a book that contrasts the lively past with Benito Mussolini&#x27;s fascism.
Lawrence continued to produce short stories and other works of fiction such as &quot;The Escaped Cock&quot; (also published as &quot;The Man Who Died&quot;), an unorthodox reworking of the story of Jesus Christ&#x27;s Resurrection.

During his final years, Lawrence renewed his serious interest in oil painting. Official harassment persisted and an exhibition of his paintings at the Warren Gallery in London was raided by the police in mid 1929 and several works were confiscated.

===Death===

Lawrence continued to write despite his failing health. In his last months he wrote numerous poems, reviews and essays, as well as a robust defence of his last novel against those who sought to suppress it. His last significant work was a reflection on the Book of Revelation, &quot;Apocalypse&quot;. After being discharged from a sanatorium, he died on 2 March 1930 at the Villa Robermond in Vence, France, from complications of tuberculosis. Frieda commissioned an elaborate headstone for his grave bearing a mosaic of his adopted emblem of the phoenix. After Lawrence&#x27;s death, Frieda lived with the couple&#x27;s friend Angelo Ravagli on their Taos ranch and eventually married him in 1950. In 1935, Ravagli arranged, on Frieda&#x27;s behalf, to have Lawrence&#x27;s body exhumed and cremated. However, upon boarding the ship he learned he would have to pay taxes on the ashes, so he instead spread them in the Mediterranean, a more preferable resting place, in his opinion, than a concrete block in a chapel. The ashes brought back were dust and earth and remain interred on the Taos ranch in a small chapel amid the mountains of New Mexico.

==Written works==

===Novels===
Lawrence is best known for his novels &quot;Sons and Lovers&quot;, &quot;The Rainbow&quot;, &quot;Women in Love&quot; and &quot;Lady Chatterley&#x27;s Lover&quot;. In these books, Lawrence explores the possibilities for life within an industrial setting, particularly the nature of relationships that can be had within such a setting. Though often classed as a realist, Lawrence in fact uses his characters to give form to his personal philosophy. His depiction of sexuality, seen as shocking when his work was first published in the early 20th century, has its roots in this highly personal way of thinking and being.

Lawrence was very interested in the sense of touch, and his focus on physical intimacy has its roots in a desire to restore an emphasis on the body and rebalance it with what he perceived to be Western civilization&#x27;s overemphasis on the mind; in a 1929 essay, &quot;Men Must Work and Women As Well,&quot; he wrote:&quot;Now then we see the trend of our civilization, in terms of human feeling and human relation. It is, and there is no denying it, towards a greater and greater abstraction from the physical, towards a further and further physical separateness between men and women, and between individual and individual... It only remains for some men and women, individuals, to try to get back their bodies and preserve the other flow of warmth, affection and physical unison. There is nothing else to do.&quot; &quot;Phoenix II: Uncollected, Unpublished, and Other Prose Works by D.H. Lawrence&quot;, ed. Warren Roberts and Harry T. Moore (New York: The Viking Press, 1968), pp. 589, 591.In his later years, Lawrence developed the potentialities of the short novel form in &quot;St Mawr&quot;, &quot;The Virgin and the Gypsy&quot; and &quot;The Escaped Cock&quot;.

===Short stories===
Lawrence&#x27;s best-known short stories include &quot;The Captain&#x27;s Doll&quot;, &quot;The Fox&quot;, &quot;The Ladybird&quot;, &quot;Odour of Chrysanthemums&quot;, &quot;The Princess&quot;, &quot;The Rocking-Horse Winner&quot;, &quot;St Mawr&quot;, &quot;The Virgin and the Gypsy&quot; and &quot;The Woman who Rode Away&quot;. (&quot;The Virgin and the Gypsy&quot; was published as a novella after he died.) Among his most praised collections is &quot;The Prussian Officer and Other Stories&quot;, published in 1914. His collection &quot;The Woman Who Rode Away and Other Stories&quot;, published in 1928, develops the theme of leadership that Lawrence also explored in novels such as &quot;Kangaroo&quot; and &quot;The Plumed Serpent&quot; and the story &quot;Fanny and Annie&quot;.

===Poetry===
Lawrence wrote almost 800 poems, most of them relatively short. His first poems were written in 1904 and two of his poems, &quot;Dreams Old&quot; and &quot;Dreams Nascent&quot;, were among his earliest published works in &quot;The English Review&quot;. It has been claimed that his early works clearly place him in the school of Georgian poets, and indeed some of his poems appear in the &quot;Georgian Poetry&quot; anthologies. However, James Reeves in his book on Georgian Poetry, notes that Lawrence was never really a Georgian poet. Indeed, later critics contrast Lawrence&#x27;s energy and dynamism with the complacency of Georgian poetry.

Just as the First World War dramatically changed the work of many of the poets who saw service in the trenches, Lawrence&#x27;s own work dramatically changed, during his years in Cornwall. During this time, he wrote free verse influenced by Walt Whitman. He set forth his manifesto for much of his later verse in the introduction to &quot;New Poems&quot;. &quot;We can get rid of the stereotyped movements and the old hackneyed associations of sound or sense. We can break down those artificial conduits and canals through which we do so love to force our utterance. We can break the stiff neck of habit […] But we cannot positively prescribe any motion, any rhythm.&quot;

Lawrence rewrote some of his early poems when they were collected in 1928. This was in part to fictionalise them, but also to remove some of the artifice of his first works. As he put it himself: &quot;A young man is afraid of his demon and puts his hand over the demon&#x27;s mouth sometimes and speaks for him.&quot; His best-known poems are probably those dealing with nature such as those in the collection &quot;Birds, Beasts and Flowers&quot;, including the Tortoise poems, and &quot;Snake&quot;, one of his most frequently anthologised, displays some of his most frequent concerns: those of man&#x27;s modern distance from nature and subtle hints at religious themes.&lt;poem&gt;
In the deep, strange-scented shade of the great dark carob tree
I came down the steps with my pitcher
And must wait, must stand and wait, for there he was at the trough before me.
(From &quot;Snake&quot;)
&lt;/poem&gt;

&quot;Look! We have come through!&quot; is his other work from the period of the end of the war and it reveals another important element common to much of his writings; his inclination to lay himself bare in his writings. Ezra Pound in his &quot;Literary Essays&quot; complained of Lawrence&#x27;s interest in his own &quot;disagreeable sensations&quot; but praised him for his &quot;low-life narrative.&quot; This is a reference to Lawrence&#x27;s dialect poems akin to the Scots poems of Robert Burns, in which he reproduced the language and concerns of the people of Nottinghamshire from his youth.

&lt;poem&gt;
Tha thought tha wanted ter be rid o&#x27; me.
&#x27;Appen tha did, an&#x27; a&#x27;.
Tha thought tha wanted ter marry an&#x27; se
If ter couldna be master an&#x27; th&#x27; woman&#x27;s boss,
Tha&#x27;d need a woman different from me,
An&#x27; tha knowed it; ay, yet tha comes across
Ter say goodbye! an&#x27; a&#x27;.
(From &quot;The Drained Cup&quot;)
&lt;/poem&gt;

Although Lawrence&#x27;s works after his Georgian period are clearly in the modernist tradition, they were often very different from those of many other modernist writers, such as Pound. Pound&#x27;s poems were often austere, with every word carefully worked on. Lawrence felt all poems had to be personal sentiments, and that a sense of spontaneity was vital. He called one collection of poems &quot;Pansies&quot;, partly for the simple ephemeral nature of the verse, but also as a pun on the French word &quot;panser&quot;, to dress or bandage a wound. &quot;Pansies&quot;, as he made explicit in the introduction to &quot;New Poems&quot;, is also a pun on Blaise Pascal&#x27;s &quot;Pensées&quot;. &quot;The Noble Englishman&quot; and &quot;Don&#x27;t Look at Me&quot; were removed from the official edition of &quot;Pansies&quot; on the grounds of obscenity, which wounded him. Even though he lived most of the last ten years of his life abroad, his thoughts were often still on England. Published in 1930, just eleven days after his death, his last work &quot;Nettles&quot; was a series of bitter, nettling but often wry attacks on the moral climate of England.

&lt;poem&gt;
O the stale old dogs who pretend to guard
the morals of the masses,
how smelly they make the great back-yard
wetting after everyone that passes.
(From &quot;The Young and Their Moral Guardians&quot;)
&lt;/poem&gt;

Two notebooks of Lawrence&#x27;s unprinted verse were posthumously published as &quot;Last Poems&quot; and &quot;More Pansies&quot;. These contain two of Lawrence&#x27;s most famous poems about death, &quot;Bavarian Gentians&quot; and &quot;The Ship of Death&quot;.

===Literary criticism===
Lawrence&#x27;s criticism of other authors often provides insight into his own thinking and writing. Of particular note is his &quot;Study of Thomas Hardy and Other Essays&quot;. In &quot;Studies in Classic American Literature&quot; Lawrence&#x27;s responses to writers like Walt Whitman, Herman Melville and Edgar Allan Poe also shed light on his craft.

===Plays===
Lawrence wrote &quot;A Collier&#x27;s Friday Night&quot; about 1906–1909, though it was not published until 1939 and not performed until 1965. He wrote &quot;The Daughter-in-Law&quot; in 1913, though it was not staged until 1967, when it was well received. In 1911 he wrote &quot;The Widowing of Mrs. Holroyd&quot;, which he revised in 1914; it was staged in the US in 1916 and in the UK in 1920, in an amateur production. It was filmed in 1976; an adaptation was shown on television (BBC 2) in 1995. He also wrote &quot;Touch and Go&quot; towards the end of World War I, and his last play, &quot;David&quot;, in 1925.

==Painting==
D. H. Lawrence had a lifelong interest in painting, which became one of his main forms of expression in his last years. His paintings were exhibited at the Warren Gallery in London&#x27;s Mayfair in 1929. The exhibition was extremely controversial, with many of the 13,000 people visiting mainly to gawk. The &quot;Daily Express&quot; claimed, &quot;&quot;Fight with an Amazon&quot; represents a hideous, bearded man holding a fair-haired woman in his lascivious grip while wolves with dripping jaws look on expectantly, [this] is frankly indecent&quot;. However, several artists and art experts praised the paintings. Gwen John, reviewing the exhibition in &quot;Everyman&quot;, spoke of Lawrence&#x27;s &quot;stupendous gift of self-expression&quot; and singled out &quot;The Finding of Moses&quot;, &quot;Red Willow Trees&quot; and &quot;Boccaccio Story&quot; as &quot;pictures of real beauty and great vitality&quot;. Others singled out &quot;Contadini&quot; for special praise. After a complaint, the police seized thirteen of the twenty-five paintings, including &quot;Boccaccio Story&quot; and &quot;Contadini&quot;. Despite declarations of support from many writers, artists, and members of Parliament, Lawrence was able to recover his paintings only by agreeing never to exhibit them in England again. Years after his death, his widow Frieda asked artist and friend Joseph Glasco to arrange an exhibition of Lawrence&#x27;s paintings, which he discussed with his gallerist Catherine Viviano. The largest collection of the paintings is now at La Fonda de Taos hotel in Taos, New Mexico. Several others, including &quot;Boccaccio Story&quot; and &quot;Resurrection&quot;, are at the Humanities Research Centre of the University of Texas at Austin.

==&quot;Lady Chatterley&quot; trial==

A heavily censored abridgement of &quot;Lady Chatterley&#x27;s Lover&quot; was published in the United States by Alfred A. Knopf in 1928. This edition was posthumously reissued in paperback in the United States by both Signet Books and Penguin Books in 1946. The first unexpurgated edition of &quot;Lady Chatterley&#x27;s Lover&quot; was printed in July 1928 in Florence by a small publisher, Giuseppe Orioli: 1000 copies in a very good print, according D. H. Lawrence, who wrote a thank-you poem to Orioli. When the unexpurgated edition of &quot;Lady Chatterley&#x27;s Lover&quot; was published by Penguin Books in Britain in 1960, the trial of Penguin under the Obscene Publications Act of 1959 became a major public event and a test of the new obscenity law. The 1959 act (introduced by Roy Jenkins) had made it possible for publishers to escape conviction if they could show that a work was of literary merit. One of the objections was to the frequent use of the word &quot;fuck&quot; and its derivatives and the word &quot;cunt&quot;.

Various academic critics and experts of diverse kinds, including E. M. Forster, Helen Gardner, Richard Hoggart, Raymond Williams and Norman St John-Stevas, were called as witnesses, and the verdict, delivered on 2 November 1960, was &quot;not guilty&quot;. This resulted in a far greater degree of freedom for publishing explicit material in the UK. The prosecution was ridiculed for being out of touch with changing social norms when the chief prosecutor, Mervyn Griffith-Jones, asked if it were the kind of book &quot;you would wish your wife or servants to read&quot;.

The Penguin second edition, published in 1961, contains a publisher&#x27;s dedication, which reads: &quot;For having published this book, Penguin Books were prosecuted under the Obscene Publications Act, 1959 at the Old Bailey in London from 20 October to 2 November 1960. This edition is therefore dedicated to the twelve jurors, three women and nine men, who returned a verdict of &#x27;Not Guilty&#x27; and thus made D. H. Lawrence&#x27;s last novel available for the first time to the public in the United Kingdom.&quot;

==Philosophy and politics==

Despite often writing about political, spiritual and philosophical matters, Lawrence was essentially contrary by nature and hated to be pigeonholed. Critics such as Terry Eagleton have argued that Lawrence was right-wing due to his lukewarm attitude to democracy, which he intimated would tend towards the leveling down of society and the subordination of the individual to the sensibilities of the &quot;average&quot; man. In his letters to Bertrand Russell around 1915, Lawrence voiced his opposition to enfranchising the working class and his hostility to the burgeoning labour movements, and disparaged the French Revolution, referring to &quot;Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity&quot; as the &quot;three-fanged serpent.&quot; Rather than a republic, Lawrence called for an absolute dictator and equivalent dictatrix to lord over the lower peoples. In 1953, recalling his relationship with Lawrence in the First World War, Russell characterised Lawrence as a &quot;proto-German Fascist,&quot; saying &quot;I was a firm believer in democracy, whereas he had developed the whole philosophy of Fascism before the politicians had thought of it.&quot; Russell felt Lawrence to be a &quot;positive force for evil&quot;. However, in 1924 Lawrence wrote an epilogue to &quot;Movements in European History&quot; (a textbook he wrote, originally published in 1921) in which he denounced fascism and Soviet-style socialism as bullying and &quot;a mere worship of Force&quot;. Further, he declared &quot;I believe a good form of socialism, if it could be brought about, would be the best form of government.&quot; In the late 1920s, he told his sister he would vote Labour if he was living back in England. In general, though, Lawrence disliked any organized groupings, and in his essay &quot;Democracy&quot;, written in the late twenties, he argued for a new kind of democracy in which

each man shall be spontaneously himself – each man himself, each woman herself, without any question of equality or inequality entering in at all; and that no man shall try to determine the being of any other man, or of any other woman.

Lawrence held seemingly contradictory views on feminism. The evidence of his written works, particularly his earlier novels, indicates a commitment to representing women as strong, independent, and complex; he produced major works in which young, self-directing female characters were central. In his youth he supported extending the vote to women, and he once wrote, &quot;All women in their natures are like giantesses. They will break through everything and go on with their own lives.&quot; However, some feminist critics, notably Kate Millett, have criticised, indeed ridiculed, Lawrence&#x27;s sexual politics, Millett claiming that he uses his female characters as mouthpieces to promote his creed of male supremacy and that his story &quot;The Woman Who Rode Away&quot; showed Lawrence as a pornographic sadist with its portrayal of &quot;human sacrifice performed upon the woman to the greater glory and potency of the male.&quot; Brenda Maddox further highlights this story and two others written around the same time, &quot;St. Mawr&quot; and &quot;The Princess&quot;, as &quot;masterworks of misogyny.&quot;

Despite the inconsistency and at times inscrutability of his philosophical writings, Lawrence continues to find an audience, and the publication of a new scholarly edition of his letters and writings has demonstrated the range of his achievement. Philosophers like Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari found in Lawrence&#x27;s critique of Sigmund Freud an important precursor of anti-Oedipal accounts of the unconscious that has been much influential.

==Posthumous reputation==

The obituaries shortly after Lawrence&#x27;s death were, with the exception of the one by E. M. Forster, unsympathetic or hostile. However, there were those who articulated a more favourable recognition of the significance of this author&#x27;s life and works. For example, his long-time friend Catherine Carswell summed up his life in a letter to the periodical &quot;Time and Tide&quot; published on 16 March 1930. In response to his critics, she wrote:In the face of formidable initial disadvantages and lifelong delicacy, poverty that lasted for three quarters of his life and hostility that survives his death, he did nothing that he did not really want to do, and all that he most wanted to do he did. He went all over the world, he owned a ranch, he lived in the most beautiful corners of Europe, and met whom he wanted to meet and told them that they were wrong and he was right. He painted and made things, and sang, and rode. He wrote something like three dozen books, of which even the worst page dances with life that could be mistaken for no other man&#x27;s, while the best are admitted, even by those who hate him, to be unsurpassed. Without vices, with most human virtues, the husband of one wife, scrupulously honest, this estimable citizen yet managed to keep free from the shackles of civilisation and the cant of literary cliques. He would have laughed lightly and cursed venomously in passing at the solemn owls—each one secretly chained by the leg—who now conduct his inquest. To do his work and lead his life in spite of them took some doing, but he did it, and long after they are forgotten, sensitive and innocent people—if any are left—will turn Lawrence&#x27;s pages and will know from them what sort of a rare man Lawrence was.Aldous Huxley also defended Lawrence in his introduction to a collection of letters published in 1932. However, the most influential advocate of Lawrence&#x27;s literary reputation was Cambridge literary critic F. R. Leavis, who asserted that the author had made an important contribution to the tradition of English fiction. Leavis stressed that &quot;The Rainbow&quot;, &quot;Women in Love&quot;, and the short stories and tales were major works of art. Later, the obscenity trials over the unexpurgated edition of &quot;Lady Chatterley&#x27;s Lover&quot; in America in 1959, and in Britain in 1960, and subsequent publication of the full text, ensured Lawrence&#x27;s popularity (and notoriety) with a wider public.

Since 2008, an annual D. H. Lawrence Festival has been organised in Eastwood to celebrate Lawrence&#x27;s life and works; in September 2016, events were held in Cornwall to celebrate the centenary of Lawrence&#x27;s connection with Zennor.

==Selected depictions of Lawrence&#x27;s life==
*&quot;Priest of Love&quot;: a 1981 film based on the non-fiction biography of Lawrence with the same title. It stars Ian McKellen as Lawrence. The film is mostly focused on Lawrence&#x27;s time in Taos, New Mexico, and Italy, although the source biography covers most of his life.
*&quot;Coming Through&quot;: a 1985 film about Lawrence and Weekley, portrayed by Kenneth Branagh and Helen Mirren respectively.
*&quot;Zennor in Darkness&quot;: a 1993 novel by Helen Dunmore in which Lawrence and his wife feature prominently.
*&quot;On the Rocks&quot;: a 2008 stage play by Amy Rosenthal showing Lawrence, his wife Frieda Lawrence, short-story writer Katherine Mansfield and critic and editor John Middleton Murry in Cornwall in 1916–17.
*&quot;Lawrence – Scandalous! Censored! Banned!&quot;: A musical based on the life of Lawrence. Winner of the 2009 Marquee Theatre Award for Best Original Musical. Received its London premiere in October 2013 at the Bridewell Theatre.
*&quot;Husbands and Sons&quot;: A stage play adapted by Ben Power from three of Lawrence&#x27;s plays, &quot;The Daughter-in-Law&quot;, &quot;A Collier&#x27;s Friday Night&quot;, and &quot;The Widowing of Mrs Holroyd&quot;, which were each based on Lawrence&#x27;s formative years in the mining community of Eastwood, Nottinghamshire. &quot;Husbands and Sons&quot; was co-produced by the National Theater and the Royal Exchange Theater and directed by Marianne Elliott in London in 2015. 
*&quot;Frieda: The Original Lady Chatterley&quot; (Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 2019): a novel by Annabel Abbs.

==Works==
===Novels===
*&quot;The White Peacock&quot; (1911)
*&quot;The Trespasser&quot; (1912)
*&quot;Sons and Lovers&quot; (1913)
*&quot;The Rainbow&quot; (1915)
*&quot;Women in Love&quot; (1920)
*&quot;The Lost Girl&quot; (1920)
*&quot;Aaron&#x27;s Rod&quot; (1922)
*&quot;Kangaroo&quot; (1923)
*&quot;The Boy in the Bush&quot; (1924), coauthored with M.L. (Mollie or Molly) Skinner
*&quot;The Plumed Serpent&quot; (1926)
*&quot;Lady Chatterley&#x27;s Lover&quot; (1928)
*&quot;The Escaped Cock&quot; (1929), republished as &quot;The Man Who Died&quot;

===Short-story collections===
*&quot;The Prussian Officer and Other Stories&quot; (1914)
*&quot;England, My England and Other Stories&quot; (1922)
*&quot;The Complete Short Stories&quot; (1922) Three volumes, reissued in 1961 by The Viking Press, Inc.
*&quot;The Fox, The Captain&#x27;s Doll, The Ladybird&quot; (1923)
*&quot;St Mawr and Other Stories&quot; (1925)
*&quot;The Woman who Rode Away and Other Stories&quot; (1928)
*&quot;The Rocking-Horse Winner&quot; (1926)
*&quot;The Virgin and the Gipsy and Other Stories&quot; (1930)
*&quot;Love Among the Haystacks and Other Pieces&quot; (1930)
*&quot;The Lovely Lady and Other Tales&quot; (1932)
*&quot;The Tales of D.H. Lawrence&quot; (1934) – Heinemann
*&quot;Collected Stories&quot; (1994) – Everyman&#x27;s Library

===Collected letters===
*&quot;The Letters of D. H. Lawrence, Volume I, September 1901 – May 1913&quot;, ed. James T. Boulton, Cambridge University Press, 1979, 
*&quot;The Letters of D. H. Lawrence, Volume II, June 1913 – October 1916&quot;, ed. George J. Zytaruk and James T. Boulton, Cambridge University Press, 1981, 
*&quot;The Letters of D. H. Lawrence, Volume III, October 1916 – June 1921&quot;, ed. James T. Boulton and Andrew Robertson, Cambridge University Press, 1984, 
*&quot;The Letters of D. H. Lawrence, Volume IV, June 1921 – March 1924 &quot;, ed. Warren Roberts, James T. Boulton and Elizabeth Mansfield, Cambridge University Press, 1987, 
*&quot;The Letters of D. H. Lawrence, Volume V, March 1924 – March 1927&quot;, ed. James T. Boulton and Lindeth Vasey, Cambridge University Press, 1989, 
*&quot;The Letters of D. H. Lawrence, Volume VI, March 1927 – November 1928 &quot;, ed. James T. Boulton and Margaret Boulton with Gerald M. Lacy, Cambridge University Press, 1991, 
*&quot;The Letters of D. H. Lawrence, Volume VII, November 1928 – February 1930&quot;, ed. Keith Sagar and James T. Boulton, Cambridge University Press, 1993, 
*&quot;The Letters of D. H. Lawrence, with index, Volume VIII&quot;, ed. James T. Boulton, Cambridge University Press, 2001, 
*&quot;The Selected Letters of D. H. Lawrence&quot;, Compiled and edited by James T. Boulton, Cambridge University Press, 1997, 
*&quot;D. H. Lawrence&#x27;s Letters to Bertrand Russell&quot;, edited by Harry T. Moore, New York: Gotham Book Mart, 1948.

===Poetry collections===
*&quot;Love Poems and others&quot; (1913)
*&quot;Amores&quot; (1916)
*&quot;Look! We have come through!&quot; (1917)
*&quot;New Poems&quot; (1918)
*&quot;Bay: a book of poems&quot; (1919)
*&quot;Tortoises&quot; (1921)
*&quot;Birds, Beasts and Flowers&quot; (1923)
*&quot;The Collected Poems of D H Lawrence&quot; (1928)
*&quot;Pansies&quot; (1929)
*&quot;Nettles&quot; (1930)
*&quot;The Triumph of the Machine&quot; (1930; one of Faber and Faber&#x27;s Ariel Poems series, illustrated by Althea Willoughby)
*&quot;Last Poems&quot; (1932)
*&quot;Fire and other poems&quot; (1940)
*&quot;The Complete Poems of D.H. Lawrence&quot; (1964), ed. Vivian de Sola Pinto and F. Warren Roberts
*&quot;The White Horse&quot; (1964)
*&quot;D.H. Lawrence: Selected Poems&quot; (1972), ed. Keith Sagar.
*&quot;Snake and Other Poems&quot;

===Plays===
*&quot;The Daughter-in-Law&quot; (1913)
*&quot;The Widowing of Mrs. Holroyd&quot; (1914)
*&quot;Touch and Go&quot; (1920)
*&quot;David&quot; (1926)
*&quot;The Fight for Barbara&quot; (1933)
*&quot;A Collier&#x27;s Friday Night&quot; (1934)
*&quot;The Married Man&quot; (1940)
*&quot;The Merry-Go-Round&quot; (1941)
*&quot;The Complete Plays of D.H. Lawrence&quot; (1965)
*&quot;The Plays&quot;, edited by Hans-Wilhelm Schwarze and John Worthen, Cambridge University Press, 1999, 

===Non-fiction books and pamphlets===
*&quot;Study of Thomas Hardy and Other Essays&quot; (1914), edited by Bruce Steele, Cambridge University Press, 1985, , Literary criticism and metaphysics
*&quot;Movements in European History&quot; (1921), edited by Philip Crumpton, Cambridge University Press, 1989, , Originally published under the name of Lawrence H. Davison
*&quot;Psychoanalysis and the Unconscious&quot; and &quot;Fantasia of the Unconscious&quot; (1921/1922), edited by Bruce Steele, Cambridge University Press, 2004 
*&quot;Studies in Classic American Literature&quot; (1923), edited by Ezra Greenspan, Lindeth Vasey and John Worthen, Cambridge University Press, 2003, 
*&quot;Reflections on the Death of a Porcupine and Other Essays&quot; (1925), edited by Michael Herbert, Cambridge University Press, 1988, 
*&quot;A Propos of Lady Chatterley&#x27;s Lover&quot; (1929) – Lawrence wrote this pamphlet to explain his novel.
*&quot;My Skirmish With Jolly Roger&quot; (1929), Random House – expanded into &quot;A Propos of Lady Chatterley&#x27;s Lover&quot;
*&quot;Apocalypse and the Writings on Revelation&quot; (1931), edited by Mara Kalnins, Cambridge University Press, 1980, 
*&quot;&quot; (1936)
*&quot;Phoenix II: Uncollected, Unpublished, and Other Prose Works by D. H. Lawrence&quot; (1968)
*&quot;Introductions and Reviews&quot;, edited by N. H. Reeve and John Worthen, Cambridge University Press, 2004, 
*&quot;Late Essays and Articles&quot;, edited by James T. Boulton, Cambridge University Press, 2004, 
*&quot;Selected Letters&quot;, Oneworld Classics, 2008. Edited by James T. Boulton. 
*&quot;The New Adelphi&quot;, June–August 1930 issue, edited by John Middleton Murry. Includes, by Lawrence, ″Nottingham and the Mining Countryside,″ Nine Letters (1918–1919) to Katherine Mansfield, and Selected Passages from non-fiction works. Also includes essays on Lawrence by John Middleton Murry, Rebecca West, Max Plowman, Waldo Frank, and others.
* Memoir of Maurice Magnus, Keith Cushman, ed. 1 December 1987, Black Sparrow Press. This book includes the unexpurgated version of Lawrence&#x27;s introduction to Magnus&#x27;s &quot;Memoirs of the Foreign Legion&quot; and related material.

===Travel books===
*&quot;Twilight in Italy and Other Essays&quot; (1916), edited by Paul Eggert, Cambridge University Press, 1994, . &quot;Twilight in Italy&quot; paperback reissue, I.B. Tauris, 2015, 
*&quot;Sea and Sardinia&quot; (1921), edited by Mara Kalnins, Cambridge University Press, 1997, 
*&quot;Mornings in Mexico and Other Essays&quot; (1927), edited by Virginia Crosswhite Hyde, Cambridge University Press, 2009, .
*&quot;Sketches of Etruscan Places and Other Italian Essays&quot; (1932), edited by Simonetta de Filippis, Cambridge University Press, 1992, ; &quot;Etruscan Places&quot;, New York: The Viking Press (1932).

===Works translated by Lawrence===
*Lev Isaakovich Shestov &quot;All Things are Possible&quot; (1920)
*Ivan Alekseyevich Bunin &quot;The Gentleman from San Francisco&quot; (1922), tr. with S. S. Koteliansky
*Giovanni Verga &quot;Mastro-Don Gesualdo&quot; (1923)
*Giovanni Verga &quot;Little Novels of Sicily&quot; (1925)
*Giovanni Verga &quot;Cavalleria Rusticana and other stories&quot; (1928)
*Antonio Francesco Grazzini (Lasca) &quot;The Story of Doctor Manente&quot; (1929)

===Manuscripts and early drafts of works===
*&quot;Paul Morel&quot; (1911–12), edited by Helen Baron, Cambridge University Press, 2003 (first publication), , an early manuscript version of &quot;Sons and Lovers&quot;
*&quot;The First Women in Love&quot; (1916–17) edited by John Worthen and Lindeth Vasey, Cambridge University Press, 1998, 
*&quot;Mr Noon&quot; (unfinished novel) Parts I and II, edited by Lindeth Vasey, Cambridge University Press, 1984, 
*&quot;The Symbolic Meaning: The Uncollected Versions of Studies in Classic American Literature&quot;, edited by Armin Arnold, Centaur Press, 1962
*&quot;Quetzalcoatl&quot; (1925), edited by Louis L Martz, W W Norton Edition, 1998, , Early draft of &quot;The Plumed Serpent&quot;
*&quot;The First and Second Lady Chatterley Novels&quot;, edited by Dieter Mehl and Christa Jansohn, Cambridge University Press, 1999, .

===Paintings===
*&quot;The Paintings of D. H. Lawrence&quot;, London: Mandrake Press, 1929.
*&quot;D. H. Lawrence&#x27;s Paintings&quot;, ed. Keith Sagar, London: Chaucer Press, 2003.
*&quot;The Collected Art Works of D. H. Lawrence&quot;, ed. Tetsuji Kohno, Tokyo: Sogensha, 2004.
==See also==
==References==
==Further reading==
===Bibliographic resources===

*Paul Poplawski (1995) &quot;The Works of D.H. Lawrence: A Chronological Checklist&quot; (Nottingham, D H Lawrence Society)
*Paul Poplawski (1996) &quot;D.H. Lawrence: A Reference Companion&quot; (Westport, Conn., and London: Greenwood Press)
*W. Roberts and P. Poplawski (2001) &quot;A Bibliography of D.H. Lawrence&quot;. 3rd ed. (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press)
*Charles L. Ross and Dennis Jackson, eds. (1995) &quot;Editing D.H. Lawrence: New Versions of a Modern Author&quot; (Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Press)
*Keith Sagar (1979) &quot;D.H. Lawrence: A Calendar of His Works&quot; (Manchester, Manchester University Press)
*Keith Sagar (1982) &quot;D.H. Lawrence Handbook&quot; (Manchester, Manchester University Press)

===Biographical studies===
*Richard Aldington (1950) &quot;Portrait of a Genius, But ... (The Life of D. H. Lawrence, 1885–1930)&quot; (London: Heinemann)
*Arthur J. Bachrach &quot;D. H. Lawrence in New Mexico: &quot;The Time is Different There&quot;&quot;, Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2006. 
*Dorothy Brett (1933). &quot;Lawrence and Brett: A Friendship&quot; (Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Company)
*Catherine Carswell (1932) &quot;The Savage Pilgrimage&quot; (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, reissued 1981)
*Frieda Lawrence (1934) &quot;Not I, But The Wind&quot; (Santa Fe: Rydal Press)
*E.T. (Jessie Chambers Wood) (1935) &quot;D. H. Lawrence: A Personal Record&quot; (Jonathan Cape)
*Mabel Dodge Luhan (1932) &quot;Lorenzo in Taos: D.H. Lawrence and Mabel Dodge Luhan&quot; (Sunstone Press, 2007 facsimile ed.)
*Witter Bynner (1951) &quot;Journey with Genius: Recollections and Reflections Concerning the D. H. Lawrences&quot; (John Day Company)
*Edward Nehls (1957–59) &quot;D. H. Lawrence: A Composite Biography, Volumes I-III&quot; (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press)
*Anaïs Nin (1963) &quot;D. H. Lawrence: An Unprofessional Study&quot; (Athens: Swallow Press)
*Emile Delavenay (1972) &quot;D. H. Lawrence: The Man and his Work: The Formative Years, 1885–1919&quot;, trans. Katherine M. Delavenay (London: Heinemann)
*Joseph Foster (1972) &quot;D. H. Lawrence in Taos&quot; (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press)
*Harry T. Moore (1974) &quot;The Priest of Love: A Life of D. H. Lawrence&quot; (London: Heinemann)
*Harry T. Moore and Warren Roberts (1966) &quot;D. H. Lawrence and His World&quot; (New York: The Viking Press), largely photographs
*Harry T. Moore (1951, revised ed. 1964) &quot;D. H. Lawrence: His Life and Works&quot; (New York: Twayne Publishers, Inc.)
*Paul Delany (1979) &quot;D. H. Lawrence&#x27;s Nightmare: The Writer and his Circle in the Years of the Great War&quot; (Hassocks: Harvester Press)
*Joseph Davis (1989) &quot;D. H. Lawrence at Thirroul&quot; (Sydney, Australia: Collins)
*Joseph Davis (2022) &quot;D. H. Lawrence at Thirroul: One Hundred Years On&quot; (Thirroul, Australia: Wyewurry): https://www.academia.edu/.../D_H_LAWRENCE_AT_THIRROUL_ONE...
*G.H. Neville (1981) &quot;A Memoir of D. H. Lawrence: The Betrayal&quot; (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
*Raymond T. Caffrey (1985) &quot;Lady Chatterley&#x27;s Lover: The Grove Press Publication of the Unexpurgated Text&quot; (Syracuse University Library Associates Courier Volume XX)
*C.J. Stevens &quot;The Cornish Nightmare (D. H. Lawrence in Cornwall)&quot;, Whitston Pub. Co., 1988, , D. H. Lawrence and the war years
*C.J. Stevens &quot;Lawrence at Tregerthen (D. H. Lawrence)&quot;, Whitston Pub. Co., 1988, 
*Michael W. Weithmann: Lawrence of Bavaria. The English Writer D. H. Lawrence in Bavaria and Beyond. Collected Essays. Reisen David Herbert Lawrences in Bayern und in die Alpenländer. Passau 2003 urn:nbn:de:bvb:739-opus-596
*John Worthen (1991) &quot;D. H. Lawrence: The Early Years, 1885–1912&quot; (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
*Mark Kinkead-Weekes (1996) &quot;D. H. Lawrence: Triumph to Exile, 1912–1922&quot; (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
*Brenda Maddox (1994) &quot;D. H. Lawrence: The Story of a Marriage&quot; (New York: Simon &amp; Schuster). UK edition &quot;The Married Man: A Life of D. H. Lawrence&quot;, London: Sinclair-Stevenson, 1994.
*David Ellis (1998) &quot;D. H. Lawrence: Dying Game, 1922–1930&quot; (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
*David Ellis (2008) &quot;Death and the Author: How D. H. Lawrence Died, and Was Remembered&quot; (Oxford University Press)
*Geoff Dyer (1999) &quot;Out of Sheer Rage: Wrestling with D. H. Lawrence&quot; (New York: North Point Press)
*Keith Sagar (1980) &quot;The Life of D. H. Lawrence&quot; (New York: Pantheon)
*Keith Sagar (2003) &quot;The Life of D. H. Lawrence: An Illustrated Biography&quot; (London: Chaucer Press)
*Stephen Spender, ed. (1973) &quot;D. H. Lawrence: Novelist, Poet, Prophet&quot; (New York: Harper &amp; Row; London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson)
*John Worthen (2005) &quot;D. H. Lawrence: The Life of an Outsider&quot; (London: Penguin/Allen Lane)
*Michael Squires (2008) &quot;D. H. Lawrence and Frieda : A Portrait of Love and Loyalty&quot; (London: Carlton Publishing Group) 
*Richard Owen (2014) &quot;Lady Chatterley&#x27;s Villa: DH Lawrence on the Italian Riviera&quot; (London: The Armchair Traveller)
*James C. Cowan (1970) &quot;D.H. Lawrence&#x27;s American Journey: A Study in Literature and Myth&quot; (Cleveland: The Press of Case Western Reserve University)
*Knud Merrild (1938) &quot;A Poet And Two Painters: A Memoir of D. H. Lawrence&quot; (London: G. Routledge)
*Frances Wilson (2021) &quot;Burning Man: The Ascent of D. H. Lawrence&quot; (London: Bloomsbury Circus); &quot;Burning Man: The Trials of D. H. Lawrence&quot; (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux)
*Norman Page, ed. (1981) &quot;D.H. Lawrence: Interviews and Recollections&quot; (two volumes) (Totowa, NJ: Barnes &amp; Noble)
*Elaine Feinstein (1994) &quot;Lawrence&#x27;s Women: The Intimate Life of D.H. Lawrence&quot; (London: HarperCollins Publishers); (1993) &quot;Lawrence and the Women: The Intimate Life of D.H. Lawrence&quot; (New York: HarperCollins Publishers)
*Geoffrey Trease (1973) &quot;D. H. Lawrence: The Phoenix and the Flame&quot; (London: Macmillan)

===Literary criticism===
*Keith Alldritt (1971) &quot;The Visual Imagination of D.H. Lawrence&quot;, London: Edward Arnold
*Michael Bell (1992) &quot;D.H. Lawrence: Language and Being&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
*Richard Beynon, ed. (1997) &quot;D.H. Lawrence: The Rainbow and Women in Love&quot;, Cambridge: Icon Books
*Michael Black (1986) &quot;D.H. Lawrence: The Early Fiction&quot;, London: Palgrave MacMillan
*Michael Black (1991)&quot; D.H. Lawrence: The Early Philosophical Works: A Commentary&quot;, London and Basingstoke: Macmillan
*Michael Black (1992) &quot;Sons and Lovers&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
*Michael Black (2001) &quot;Lawrence&#x27;s England: The Major Fiction, 1913–1920&quot;, London: Palgrave-MacMillan
*Keith Brown, ed. (1990) &quot;Rethinking Lawrence&quot;, Milton Keynes: Open University Press
*Anthony Burgess (1985) &quot;Flame into Being: The Life And Work Of D.H. Lawrence&quot;, London: William Heinemann
*Aidan Burns (1980) &quot;Nature and Culture in D.H. Lawrence&quot;, London and Basingstoke: Macmillan
*L. D. Clark (1980) &quot; The Minoan Distance: The Symbolism of Travel in D.H. Lawrence&quot;, Tucson: University of Arizona Press
*Colin Clarke (1969) &quot;River of Dissolution: D.H. Lawrence and English Romanticism&quot;, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul
*Carol Dix (1980) &quot;D.H. Lawrence and Women&quot;, London: Macmillan
*R.P. Draper (1970)&quot; D.H. Lawrence: The Critical Heritage&quot;, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul
*David Ellis and Howard Mills (1988) &quot;D. H. Lawrence&#x27;s Non-Fiction: Art, Thought and Genre&quot; (Cambridge University Press)
*David Ellis (2015) &quot;Love and Sex in D. H. Lawrence&quot; (Clemson University Press)
*Anne Fernihough (1993) &quot;D.H. Lawrence: Aesthetics and Ideology&quot;, Oxford: Clarendon Press
*Anne Fernihough, ed. (2001) &quot;The Cambridge Companion to D.H. Lawrence&quot;, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press
*Peter Fjågesund (1991) &quot;The Apocalyptic World of D. H. Lawrence&quot;, Norwegian University Press
*John R. Harrison (1966) &quot;The Reactionaries: Yeats, Lewis, Pound, Eliot, Lawrence: A Study of the Anti-Democratic Intelligentsia&quot;, London: Schocken Books
*Frederick J. Hoffman and Harry T. Moore, eds. (1953), &quot;The Achievement of D.H. Lawrence&quot;, Norman: University of Oklahoma Press 
*Graham Holderness (1982) &quot;D. H. Lawrence: History, Ideology and Fiction&quot;, Dublin: Gill and Macmillan
*Graham Hough (1956) &quot;The Dark Sun: A Study of D.H. Lawrence&quot;, London: Duckworth
*John Humma (1990) &quot;Metaphor and Meaning in D.H. Lawrence&#x27;s Later Novels,&quot; University of Missouri Press
*Virginia Hyde (1992), &quot;The Risen Adam: D.H. Lawrence&#x27;s Revisionist Typology&quot;, Pennsylvania State University Press
*Virginia Hyde and Earl Ingersoll, eds. (2010), &quot;&quot;Terra Incognita&quot;: D.H. Lawrence at the Frontiers&quot;, Fairleigh Dickinson University Press
*Earl Ingersoll and Virginia Hyde, eds. (2009), &quot;Windows to the Sun: D.H. Lawrence&#x27;s &quot;Thought-Adventures&quot;&quot;, Fairleigh Dickinson University Press
*Frank Kermode (1973) &quot;Lawrence&quot;, London: Fontana
*Mark Kinkead-Weekes (1968) &quot;The Marble and the Statue: The Exploratory Imagination of D.H. Lawrence&quot;, pp. 371–418, in Maynard Mack and Ian Gregor (eds.), &quot;Imagined Worlds: Essays on Some English Novels and Novelists in Honour of John Butt&quot; (London: Methuen and Co.)
*F.R. Leavis (1955) &quot;D.H. Lawrence: Novelist&quot; (London, Chatto and Windus)
*F.R. Leavis (1976) &quot;Thought, Words and Creativity: Art and Thought in D. H. Lawrence&quot;, London, Chatto and Windus
*Sheila MacLeod (1985) &quot;Lawrence&#x27;s Men and Women&quot; (London: Heinemann)
*Barbara Mensch (1991) &quot; D.H. Lawrence and the Authoritarian Personality&quot; (London and Basingstoke: Macmillan)
*Kate Millett (1970) &quot;Sexual Politics&quot; (Garden City, NY: Doubleday)
*Colin Milton (1987) &quot;Lawrence and Nietzsche: A Study in Influence&quot; (Aberdeen: Aberdeen University Press)
*Robert E Montgomery (1994) &quot;The Visionary D.H. Lawrence: Beyond Philosophy and Art&quot; (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
*Harry T. Moore, ed., &quot;A D.H. Lawrence Miscellany&quot;, Southern Illinois University Press (1959) and William Heinemann Ltd (1961)
*Alastair Niven (1978) &quot;D.H. Lawrence: The Novels&quot; (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
*Cornelia Nixon (1986) &quot;Lawrence&#x27;s Leadership Politics and the Turn Against Women&quot; (Berkeley: University of California Press)
*Joyce Carol Oates (1972–1982) &quot;Joyce Carol Oates on D.H. Lawrence&quot;.
*Tony Pinkney (1990) &quot;D.H. Lawrence&quot; (London and New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf)
*Stephen Potter (1930) &quot;D.H. Lawrence: A First Study&quot; (London and New York: Jonathan Cape)
*Charles L. Ross (1991) &quot;Women in Love: A Novel of Mythic Realism&quot; (Boston, Mass.: Twayne)
*Keith Sagar (1966) &quot;The Art of D.H. Lawrence&quot; (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
*Keith Sagar (1985) &quot;D.H. Lawrence: Life into Art&quot; (Athens, Georgia: University of Georgia Press)
*Keith Sagar (2008) &quot;D.H. Lawrence: Poet&quot; (Penrith, UK: Humanities-Ebooks)
*Daniel J. Schneider (1986) &quot;The Consciousness of D.H. Lawrence: An Intellectual Biography&quot; (Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas)
*Herbert J. Seligmann (1924) &quot;D.H. Lawrence: An American Interpretation&quot;
*Michael Squires and Keith Cushman (1990) &quot;The Challenge of D.H. Lawrence&quot; (Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press)
*Berend Klaas van der Veen (1983) &quot;The Development of D.H. Lawrence&#x27;s Prose Themes, 1906–1915&quot; (Oldenzaal: Offsetdruk)
*Peter Widdowson, ed. (1992) &quot;D.H. Lawrence&quot; (London and New York: Longman)
*Michael Wilding (1980) &#x27;Political Fictions&#x27; (London: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul)
*John Worthen (1979) &quot;D.H. Lawrence and the Idea of the Novel&quot; (London and Basingstoke: Macmillan).
*T.R. Wright (2000) &quot;D.H. Lawrence and the Bible&quot; (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
==External links==
*
*Works by D. H. Lawrence at Project Gutenberg Australia (includes content not in the public domain in some jurisdictions)
*
*&quot;With the Guns&quot; article by Lawrence. &quot;Guardian&quot; 18 August 1914. Accessed 2010-09-15
*D. H. Lawrence free downloadable books including kindle editions at feedbooks
*Nickolas Muray&#x27;s portrait sittings of D. H. Lawrence; photo #1, photo#2, photo #3
*The D. H. Lawrence Review, scholarly journal

===Lawrence archives===
*D. H. Lawrence Collection at the Bancroft Library
*D. H. Lawrence Collection and Frieda Lawrence Collection at the Harry Ransom Center
*D. H. Lawrence Papers, Correspondence and Photography Collection at the University of New Mexico
*D. H. Lawrence Collection at the University of Nottingham
*Alfred M. and Clarisse B. Hellman&#x27;s D.H. Lawrence collection at Columbia University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34970" start="0" end="22" title="D. H. Lawrence" label="David Herbert Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q971480" start="180" end="189" title="Literary modernism" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="207" end="216" title="modernity" label="modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q545825" start="218" end="235" title="social alienation" label="social alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="240" end="257" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q80771" start="350" end="365" title="Sons and Lovers" label="Sons and Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288936" start="386" end="397" title="The Rainbow" label="The Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443714" start="418" end="431" title="Women in Love" label="Women in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q750670" start="456" end="484" title="Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover" label="Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q189119" start="1103" end="1116" title="E. M. Forster" label="E. M. Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428288" start="1289" end="1301" title="F. R. Leavis" label="F. R. Leavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871554" start="1494" end="1511" title="Brinsley Colliery" label="Brinsley Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089041" start="1558" end="1571" title="pupil-teacher" label="pupil-teacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q231250" start="1621" end="1633" title="lace" label="lace factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="1719" end="1730" title="coal mining" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736112" start="1739" end="1747" title="Eastwood, Nottinghamshire" label="Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q23092" start="1749" end="1764" title="Nottinghamshire" label="Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203399" start="1829" end="1861" title="D. H. Lawrence Birthplace Museum" label="D. H. Lawrence Birthplace Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q919191" start="2087" end="2102" title="Sherwood Forest" label="Sherwood Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442462" start="2106" end="2112" title="Felley" label="Felley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736112" start="2135" end="2143" title="Eastwood, Nottinghamshire" label="Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321471" start="2489" end="2503" title="county council" label="county council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063652" start="2519" end="2541" title="Nottingham High School" label="Nottingham High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="2552" end="2562" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074814" start="2642" end="2661" title="Surgical instrument" label="surgical appliances"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="2692" end="2701" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089041" start="3342" end="3355" title="pupil-teacher" label="pupil-teacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268660" start="3445" end="3465" title="Qualified Teacher Status" label="teaching certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q472316" start="3471" end="3501" title="University College, Nottingham" label="University College, Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="3531" end="3551" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774542" start="3726" end="3743" title="The White Peacock" label="The White Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161659" start="3817" end="3841" title="Nottinghamshire Guardian" label="Nottinghamshire Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="4082" end="4089" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q537112" start="4179" end="4194" title="Ford Madox Ford" label="Ford Madox Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732245" start="4265" end="4283" title="The English Review" label="The English Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078330" start="4333" end="4356" title="Odour of Chrysanthemums" label="Odour of Chrysanthemums"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273015" start="4414" end="4423" title="Heinemann (book publisher)" label="Heinemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774542" start="4638" end="4655" title="The White Peacock" label="The White Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="4712" end="4718" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056541" start="5014" end="5036" title="autobiographical novel" label="autobiographical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q80771" start="5043" end="5058" title="Sons and Lovers" label="Sons and Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651229" start="5667" end="5681" title="Edward Garnett" label="Edward Garnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258095" start="5685" end="5708" title="publisher&amp;#x27;s reader" label="publisher&amp;#x27;s reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q704860" start="5775" end="5780" title="David Garnett" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q80771" start="5893" end="5908" title="Sons and Lovers" label="Sons and Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008393" start="5951" end="5962" title="Helen Corke" label="Helen Corke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770124" start="6066" end="6080" title="The Trespasser (novel)" label="The Trespasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q69447" start="6391" end="6426" title="Frieda von Richthofen" label="Frieda Weekley (née von Richthofen)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393994" start="6517" end="6531" title="Ernest Weekley" label="Ernest Weekley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="6544" end="6560" title="Linguistics" label="modern languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q472316" start="6574" end="6604" title="University College, Nottingham" label="University College, Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812388" start="6662" end="6668" title="eloped" label="eloped"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="6726" end="6730" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q88556" start="6734" end="6747" title="garrison town" label="garrison town"/>
<link wikidata="Q567497" start="6850" end="6885" title="France–Germany relations" label="tensions between Germany and France"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="6938" end="6941" title="spy" label="spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="7088" end="7094" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816384" start="7346" end="7365" title="The Daughter-in-Law" label="The Daughter-in-Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328985" start="7384" end="7402" title="East Midlands English" label="Nottingham dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="7526" end="7530" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929438" start="7702" end="7709" title="Mr Noon" label="Mr Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="8145" end="8151" title="Literary criticism" label="critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090185" start="8152" end="8172" title="John Middleton Murry" label="John Middleton Murry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016348" start="8177" end="8193" title="New Zealanders in the United Kingdom" label="New Zealand-born"/>
<link wikidata="Q270632" start="8213" end="8232" title="Katherine Mansfield" label="Katherine Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q985138" start="8304" end="8316" title="W. H. Davies" label="W. H. Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872572" start="8377" end="8386" title="autograph" label="autograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509327" start="8427" end="8442" title="Georgian poetry" label="Georgian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292947" start="8453" end="8465" title="Edward Marsh (polymath)" label="Edward Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223267" start="8915" end="8929" title="Gulf of Spezia" label="Gulf of Spezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288936" start="9037" end="9048" title="The Rainbow" label="The Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443714" start="9065" end="9078" title="Women in Love" label="Women in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q22759" start="9194" end="9200" title="Book censorship" label="banned"/>
<link wikidata="Q31110" start="9230" end="9239" title="obscenity" label="obscenity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443714" start="9256" end="9269" title="Women in Love" label="Women in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027480" start="9424" end="9438" title="industrial age" label="industrial age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="9817" end="9825" title="the arts" label="the arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q464859" start="10073" end="10090" title="sexual attraction" label="sexual attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="10417" end="10425" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q255155" start="11234" end="11244" title="bi-curious" label="bi-curious"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="11459" end="11470" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q460349" start="11585" end="11597" title="Dora Marsden" label="Dora Marsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="11599" end="11610" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q163366" start="11612" end="11622" title="Ezra Pound" label="Ezra Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919056" start="11656" end="11666" title="The Egoist (periodical)" label="The Egoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q971480" start="11687" end="11696" title="Literary modernism" label="Modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368848" start="11697" end="11714" title="literary magazine" label="literary magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q216582" start="11781" end="11806" title="Filippo Tommaso Marinetti" label="Filippo Tommaso Marinetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983009" start="11820" end="11841" title="Manifesto of Futurism" label="Manifesto of Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q359506" start="11898" end="11910" title="Mark Gertler (artist)" label="Mark Gertler"/>
<link wikidata="Q17139793" start="12050" end="12064" title="Merry-Go-Round (Gertler painting)" label="Merry-Go-Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q177266" start="12316" end="12326" title="militarism" label="militarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288936" start="12455" end="12466" title="The Rainbow" label="The Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q31110" start="12523" end="12532" title="obscenity" label="obscenity"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="12600" end="12617" title="German submarines" label="German submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="12635" end="12643" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q189654" start="12665" end="12671" title="Zennor" label="Zennor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443714" start="12736" end="12749" title="Women in Love" label="Women in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896674" start="13045" end="13069" title="Defence of the Realm Act" label="Defence of the Realm Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6362515" start="13151" end="13159" title="Kangaroo (novel)" label="Kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813871" start="13247" end="13256" title="Hermitage, Berkshire" label="Hermitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q655874" start="13262" end="13280" title="Newbury, Berkshire" label="Newbury, Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q687333" start="13373" end="13396" title="Middleton-by-Wirksworth" label="Middleton-by-Wirksworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23098" start="13398" end="13408" title="Derbyshire" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377955" start="13469" end="13483" title="Wintry Peacock" label="Wintry Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="13571" end="13594" title="1918 influenza pandemic" label="1918 influenza pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="13634" end="13643" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548061" start="13967" end="13977" title="wanderlust" label="wanderlust"/>
<link wikidata="Q918153" start="14008" end="14014" title="British Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="14016" end="14025" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="14062" end="14077" title="south of France" label="south of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284" start="14148" end="14155" title="Abruzzo" label="Abruzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q173292" start="14200" end="14205" title="Capri" label="Capri"/>
<link wikidata="Q199952" start="14233" end="14241" title="Taormina" label="Taormina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="14293" end="14301" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154372" start="14303" end="14316" title="Monte Cassino" label="Monte Cassino"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="14318" end="14323" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823831" start="14445" end="14458" title="The Lost Girl" label="The Lost Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q392586" start="14487" end="14518" title="James Tait Black Memorial Prize" label="James Tait Black Memorial Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661765" start="14539" end="14555" title="Aaron&amp;#x27;s Rod (novel)" label="Aaron&amp;#x27;s Rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929438" start="14592" end="14599" title="Mr Noon" label="Mr Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="14720" end="14728" title="novellas" label="novellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721270" start="14743" end="14766" title="The Captain&amp;#x27;s Doll" label="The Captain&amp;#x27;s Doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735094" start="14780" end="14787" title="The Fox (novella)" label="The Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745207" start="14804" end="14816" title="The Ladybird" label="The Ladybird"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377955" start="14899" end="14936" title="England, My England and Other Stories" label="England, My England and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916040" start="15022" end="15047" title="Birds, Beasts and Flowers" label="Birds, Beasts and Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912952" start="15221" end="15239" title="Mornings in Mexico" label="Mornings in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473567" start="15257" end="15273" title="Sea and Sardinia" label="Sea and Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="15369" end="15377" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27656666" start="15449" end="15463" title="Maurice Magnus" label="Maurice Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q154372" start="15575" end="15588" title="Monte Cassino" label="Monte Cassino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050940" start="15615" end="15633" title="Catherine Carswell" label="Catherine Carswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="15843" end="15851" title="Freudian" label="Freudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="15852" end="15866" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000176" start="16027" end="16056" title="Movements in European History" label="Movements in European History"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223966" start="16416" end="16426" title="Darlington, Western Australia" label="Darlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q14954680" start="16473" end="16487" title="Mollie Skinner" label="Mollie Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719685" start="16529" end="16548" title="The Boy in the Bush" label="The Boy in the Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785125" start="16624" end="16632" title="Thirroul" label="Thirroul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6362515" start="16689" end="16697" title="Kangaroo (novel)" label="Kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373919" start="16930" end="16947" title="utopian community" label="utopian community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="17026" end="17035" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q876315" start="17508" end="17512" title="Taos, New Mexico" label="Taos"/>
<link wikidata="Q252814" start="17528" end="17534" title="Taos Pueblo" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="17557" end="17578" title="Bohemianism" label="&amp;quot;bohemians&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882354" start="17602" end="17619" title="Mabel Dodge Luhan" label="Mabel Dodge Luhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203614" start="17726" end="17746" title="D. H. Lawrence Ranch" label="D. H. Lawrence Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q318350" start="17910" end="17922" title="Lake Chapala" label="Lake Chapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="17927" end="17933" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q81447" start="17997" end="18010" title="Aldous Huxley" label="Aldous Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q52156785" start="18038" end="18052" title="Merle Armitage" label="Merle Armitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250269" start="18335" end="18348" title="Dorothy Brett" label="Dorothy Brett"/>
<link wikidata="Q870701" start="18469" end="18490" title="Richard Pousette-Dart" label="Richard Pousette-Dart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628058" start="18619" end="18657" title="Studies in Classic American Literature" label="Studies in Classic American Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q704931" start="18721" end="18734" title="Edmund Wilson" label="Edmund Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="18874" end="18880" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q331563" start="18885" end="18914" title="New England Transcendentalism" label="New England Transcendentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="18923" end="18942" title="Puritans" label="Puritan sensibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="19006" end="19021" title="Herman Melville" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719685" start="19115" end="19134" title="The Boy in the Bush" label="The Boy in the Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017955" start="19148" end="19166" title="The Plumed Serpent" label="The Plumed Serpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594717" start="19180" end="19187" title="St Mawr" label="St Mawr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775568" start="19201" end="19224" title="The Woman who Rode Away" label="The Woman who Rode Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823706" start="19238" end="19250" title="The Princess (story)" label="The Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072723" start="19324" end="19337" title="Travel literature" label="travel essays"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912952" start="19356" end="19374" title="Mornings in Mexico" label="Mornings in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="19598" end="19605" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="19610" end="19622" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="19649" end="19655" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="19930" end="19938" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772804" start="19961" end="19985" title="The Virgin and the Gipsy" label="The Virgin and the Gipsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q750670" start="20026" end="20054" title="Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover" label="Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250561" start="20705" end="20710" title="Tract (literature)" label="tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q81447" start="20860" end="20873" title="Aldous Huxley" label="Aldous Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q263494" start="21064" end="21077" title="Earl Brewster" label="Earl Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q302237" start="21165" end="21192" title="Sketches of Etruscan Places" label="Sketches of Etruscan Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="21243" end="21259" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680359" start="21361" end="21377" title="The Escaped Cock" label="The Escaped Cock"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="21494" end="21506" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="Resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="22029" end="22047" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46124" start="22103" end="22113" title="sanatorium" label="sanatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q192368" start="22165" end="22170" title="Vence" label="Vence"/>
<link wikidata="Q48444" start="22319" end="22326" title="Phoenix (mythology)" label="phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762946" start="22400" end="22414" title="Angelo Ravagli" label="Angelo Ravagli"/>
<link wikidata="Q876315" start="22424" end="22428" title="Taos, New Mexico" label="Taos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="22911" end="22921" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q80771" start="23000" end="23015" title="Sons and Lovers" label="Sons and Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288936" start="23029" end="23040" title="The Rainbow" label="The Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443714" start="23054" end="23067" title="Women in Love" label="Women in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q750670" start="23084" end="23112" title="Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover" label="Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q667661" start="23317" end="23324" title="Literary realism" label="realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466147" start="23612" end="23626" title="Haptic communication" label="sense of touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594717" start="24664" end="24671" title="St Mawr" label="St Mawr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772804" start="24685" end="24709" title="The Virgin and the Gypsy" label="The Virgin and the Gypsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680359" start="24726" end="24742" title="The Escaped Cock" label="The Escaped Cock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721270" start="24826" end="24849" title="The Captain&amp;#x27;s Doll" label="The Captain&amp;#x27;s Doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735094" start="24863" end="24870" title="The Fox (short story)" label="The Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745207" start="24884" end="24896" title="The Ladybird" label="The Ladybird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078330" start="24910" end="24933" title="Odour of Chrysanthemums" label="Odour of Chrysanthemums"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823706" start="24947" end="24959" title="The Princess (story)" label="The Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761295" start="24973" end="24997" title="The Rocking-Horse Winner" label="The Rocking-Horse Winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594717" start="25011" end="25018" title="St Mawr" label="St Mawr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772804" start="25032" end="25056" title="The Virgin and the Gypsy" label="The Virgin and the Gypsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775568" start="25073" end="25096" title="The Woman who Rode Away" label="The Woman who Rode Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758649" start="25229" end="25267" title="The Prussian Officer and Other Stories" label="The Prussian Officer and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017955" start="25493" end="25511" title="The Plumed Serpent" label="The Plumed Serpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509327" start="25904" end="25918" title="Georgian poets" label="Georgian poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141932" start="26013" end="26025" title="James Reeves (writer)" label="James Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="26233" end="26248" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q141126" start="26437" end="26447" title="free verse" label="free verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q81438" start="26462" end="26474" title="Walt Whitman" label="Walt Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q163366" start="28024" end="28034" title="Ezra Pound" label="Ezra Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="28292" end="28304" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q23092" start="28372" end="28387" title="Nottinghamshire" label="Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891671" start="28940" end="28949" title="modernist poetry" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290" start="29446" end="29459" title="Blaise Pascal" label="Blaise Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17360856" start="29473" end="29480" title="Pensées" label="Pensées"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628058" start="30663" end="30701" title="Studies in Classic American Literature" label="Studies in Classic American Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q81438" start="30750" end="30762" title="Walt Whitman" label="Walt Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="30764" end="30779" title="Herman Melville" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="30784" end="30799" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816384" start="31001" end="31020" title="The Daughter-in-Law" label="The Daughter-in-Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774784" start="31123" end="31151" title="The Widowing of Mrs. Holroyd" label="The Widowing of Mrs. Holroyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="31402" end="31413" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q124184" start="31664" end="31671" title="Mayfair" label="Mayfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="31791" end="31804" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q274339" start="32095" end="32104" title="Gwen John" label="Gwen John"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959956" start="32140" end="32148" title="Everyman (magazine)" label="Everyman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32664" end="32685" title="Member of Parliament#United Kingdom" label="members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283474" start="32851" end="32864" title="Joseph Glasco" label="Joseph Glasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q876315" start="33053" end="33069" title="Taos, New Mexico" label="Taos, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="33200" end="33229" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q750670" start="33311" end="33339" title="Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover" label="Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431868" start="33384" end="33399" title="Alfred A. Knopf" label="Alfred A. Knopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="33507" end="33520" title="Penguin Books" label="Penguin Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565486" start="33664" end="33679" title="Giuseppe Orioli" label="Giuseppe Orioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075399" start="33935" end="33967" title="Obscene Publications Act 1959" label="Obscene Publications Act of 1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q323488" start="34061" end="34072" title="Roy Jenkins" label="Roy Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600" start="34299" end="34303" title="cunt" label="cunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q189119" start="34377" end="34390" title="E. M. Forster" label="E. M. Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702334" start="34392" end="34405" title="Helen Gardner (critic)" label="Helen Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534871" start="34407" end="34422" title="Richard Hoggart" label="Richard Hoggart"/>
<link wikidata="Q394628" start="34424" end="34440" title="Raymond Williams" label="Raymond Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q333578" start="34445" end="34466" title="Norman St John-Stevas" label="Norman St John-Stevas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820901" start="34769" end="34790" title="Mervyn Griffith-Jones" label="Mervyn Griffith-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194829" start="35101" end="35111" title="Old Bailey" label="Old Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q315349" start="35605" end="35619" title="Terry Eagleton" label="Terry Eagleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="35650" end="35660" title="right-wing" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="35882" end="35898" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="36051" end="36068" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="36349" end="36364" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000176" start="36710" end="36739" title="Movements in European History" label="Movements in European History"/>
<link wikidata="Q292268" start="38092" end="38104" title="Kate Millett" label="Kate Millett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914650" start="38157" end="38172" title="sexual politics" label="sexual politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960732" start="38497" end="38510" title="Brenda Maddox" label="Brenda Maddox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721053" start="38826" end="38864" title="The Cambridge Edition of the Letters and Works of D. H. Lawrence" label="a new scholarly edition of his letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="38943" end="38957" title="Gilles Deleuze" label="Gilles Deleuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q352465" start="38962" end="38976" title="Félix Guattari" label="Félix Guattari"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="39014" end="39027" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q189119" start="39245" end="39258" title="E. M. Forster" label="E. M. Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050940" start="39450" end="39468" title="Catherine Carswell" label="Catherine Carswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805262" start="39524" end="39537" title="Time and Tide (magazine)" label="Time and Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="41095" end="41104" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428288" start="41121" end="41133" title="F. R. Leavis" label="F. R. Leavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q750670" start="41433" end="41461" title="Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover" label="Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q189654" start="41862" end="41868" title="Zennor" label="Zennor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242893" start="41926" end="41940" title="Priest of Love" label="Priest of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="42037" end="42049" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q876315" start="42117" end="42133" title="Taos, New Mexico" label="Taos, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985213" start="42208" end="42222" title="Coming Through (1985 film)" label="Coming Through"/>
<link wikidata="Q55294" start="42283" end="42298" title="Kenneth Branagh" label="Kenneth Branagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q349391" start="42303" end="42315" title="Helen Mirren" label="Helen Mirren"/>
<link wikidata="Q23003269" start="42337" end="42355" title="Zennor in Darkness" label="Zennor in Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q462266" start="42379" end="42392" title="Helen Dunmore" label="Helen Dunmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989336" start="42452" end="42464" title="On the Rocks (2008 play)" label="On the Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749365" start="42493" end="42506" title="Amy Rosenthal" label="Amy Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23891189" start="42873" end="42890" title="Bridewell Theatre" label="Bridewell Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886308" start="42948" end="42957" title="Ben Power" label="Ben Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816384" start="43001" end="43020" title="The Daughter-in-Law" label="The Daughter-in-Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774784" start="43081" end="43108" title="The Widowing of Mrs Holroyd" label="The Widowing of Mrs Holroyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736112" start="43200" end="43208" title="Eastwood, Nottinghamshire" label="Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q23092" start="43210" end="43225" title="Nottinghamshire" label="Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="43280" end="43296" title="Royal National Theatre" label="National Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445926" start="43305" end="43327" title="Royal Exchange, Manchester" label="Royal Exchange Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762215" start="43344" end="43360" title="Marianne Elliott" label="Marianne Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q14175176" start="43432" end="43454" title="Hodder &amp;amp; Stoughton" label="Hodder &amp;amp; Stoughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q46326205" start="43474" end="43486" title="Annabel Abbs" label="Annabel Abbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774542" start="43519" end="43536" title="The White Peacock" label="The White Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770124" start="43557" end="43571" title="The Trespasser (novel)" label="The Trespasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q80771" start="43592" end="43607" title="Sons and Lovers" label="Sons and Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288936" start="43628" end="43639" title="The Rainbow" label="The Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443714" start="43660" end="43673" title="Women in Love" label="Women in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823831" start="43694" end="43707" title="The Lost Girl" label="The Lost Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661765" start="43728" end="43744" title="Aaron&amp;#x27;s Rod (novel)" label="Aaron&amp;#x27;s Rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q6362515" start="43765" end="43773" title="Kangaroo (novel)" label="Kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719685" start="43794" end="43813" title="The Boy in the Bush" label="The Boy in the Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017955" start="43882" end="43900" title="The Plumed Serpent" label="The Plumed Serpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q750670" start="43921" end="43949" title="Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover" label="Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680359" start="43970" end="43986" title="The Escaped Cock" label="The Escaped Cock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758649" start="44083" end="44121" title="The Prussian Officer and Other Stories" label="The Prussian Officer and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377955" start="44142" end="44179" title="England, My England and Other Stories" label="England, My England and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735094" start="44305" end="44312" title="The Fox (novella)" label="The Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721270" start="44314" end="44337" title="The Captain&amp;#x27;s Doll" label="The Captain&amp;#x27;s Doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594717" start="44372" end="44379" title="St Mawr" label="St Mawr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761295" start="44480" end="44504" title="The Rocking-Horse Winner" label="The Rocking-Horse Winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772804" start="44525" end="44549" title="The Virgin and the Gipsy" label="The Virgin and the Gipsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59631812" start="44928" end="44944" title="James T. Boulton" label="James T. Boulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916040" start="46604" end="46629" title="Birds, Beasts and Flowers" label="Birds, Beasts and Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q898097" start="46809" end="46824" title="Faber and Faber" label="Faber and Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790483" start="46832" end="46843" title="Ariel Poems" label="Ariel Poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q59857851" start="46867" end="46884" title="Althea Willoughby" label="Althea Willoughby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937802" start="47019" end="47039" title="Vivian de Sola Pinto" label="Vivian de Sola Pinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816384" start="47221" end="47240" title="The Daughter-in-Law" label="The Daughter-in-Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774784" start="47261" end="47289" title="The Widowing of Mrs. Holroyd" label="The Widowing of Mrs. Holroyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264908" start="47645" end="47657" title="John Worthen (literary critic)" label="John Worthen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47740" end="47778" title="Study of Thomas Hardy and Other Essays" label="Study of Thomas Hardy and Other Essays"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000176" start="47895" end="47924" title="Movements in European History" label="Movements in European History"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48068" end="48102" title="Psychoanalysis and the Unconscious" label="Psychoanalysis and the Unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48119" end="48146" title="Fantasia of the Unconscious" label="Fantasia of the Unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628058" start="48231" end="48269" title="Studies in Classic American Literature" label="Studies in Classic American Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264908" start="48328" end="48340" title="John Worthen (literary critic)" label="John Worthen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48384" end="48440" title="Reflections on the Death of a Porcupine and Other Essays" label="Reflections on the Death of a Porcupine and Other Essays"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48524" end="48564" title="A Propos of Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover" label="A Propos of Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48638" end="48666" title="My Skirmish With Jolly Roger" label="My Skirmish With Jolly Roger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48716" end="48756" title="A Propos of Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover" label="A Propos of Lady Chatterley&amp;#x27;s Lover"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48770" end="48811" title="Apocalypse and the Writings on Revelation" label="Apocalypse and the Writings on Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="48913" end="48990" title="Phoenix II: Uncollected, Unpublished, and Other Prose Works by D. H. Lawrence" label="Phoenix II: Uncollected, Unpublished, and Other Prose Works by D. H. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49011" end="49036" title="Introductions and Reviews" label="Introductions and Reviews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264908" start="49070" end="49082" title="John Worthen (literary critic)" label="John Worthen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49126" end="49150" title="Late Essays and Articles" label="Late Essays and Articles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49228" end="49244" title="Selected Letters" label="Selected Letters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49313" end="49328" title="The New Adelphi" label="The New Adelphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q236669" start="49609" end="49621" title="Rebecca West" label="Rebecca West"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795130" start="49623" end="49634" title="Max Plowman" label="Max Plowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858007" start="49636" end="49647" title="Waldo Frank" label="Waldo Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q27656666" start="49673" end="49687" title="Maurice Magnus" label="Maurice Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473567" start="50114" end="50130" title="Sea and Sardinia" label="Sea and Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912952" start="50211" end="50229" title="Mornings in Mexico" label="Mornings in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q302237" start="50340" end="50392" title="Sketches of Etruscan Places and Other Italian Essays" label="Sketches of Etruscan Places and Other Italian Essays"/>
<link wikidata="Q314189" start="50577" end="50599" title="Lev Isaakovich Shestov" label="Lev Isaakovich Shestov"/>
<link wikidata="Q46602" start="50644" end="50667" title="Ivan Alekseyevich Bunin" label="Ivan Alekseyevich Bunin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387855" start="50730" end="50747" title="S. S. Koteliansky" label="S. S. Koteliansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q271814" start="50749" end="50763" title="Giovanni Verga" label="Giovanni Verga"/>
<link wikidata="Q271814" start="50804" end="50818" title="Giovanni Verga" label="Giovanni Verga"/>
<link wikidata="Q271814" start="50863" end="50877" title="Giovanni Verga" label="Giovanni Verga"/>
<link wikidata="Q602056" start="50937" end="50963" title="Antonio Francesco Grazzini" label="Antonio Francesco Grazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264908" start="51294" end="51306" title="John Worthen (literary critic)" label="John Worthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929438" start="51368" end="51375" title="Mr Noon" label="Mr Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017955" start="51732" end="51750" title="The Plumed Serpent" label="The Plumed Serpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q28967524" start="51841" end="51856" title="Christa Jansohn" label="Christa Jansohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q514998" start="53035" end="53052" title="Richard Aldington" label="Richard Aldington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273015" start="53151" end="53160" title="Heinemann (publisher)" label="Heinemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799180" start="53163" end="53181" title="Arthur J. Bachrach" label="Arthur J. Bachrach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250269" start="53318" end="53331" title="Dorothy Brett" label="Dorothy Brett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050940" start="53426" end="53444" title="Catherine Carswell" label="Catherine Carswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q69447" start="53542" end="53557" title="Frieda Lawrence" label="Frieda Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882354" start="53720" end="53737" title="Mabel Dodge Luhan" label="Mabel Dodge Luhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586777" start="53848" end="53861" title="Witter Bynner" label="Witter Bynner"/>
<link wikidata="Q220018" start="54113" end="54122" title="Anaïs Nin" label="Anaïs Nin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006582" start="55532" end="55544" title="C.J. Stevens" label="C.J. Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006582" start="55670" end="55682" title="C.J. Stevens" label="C.J. Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264908" start="55987" end="55999" title="John Worthen (literary critic)" label="John Worthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960732" start="56227" end="56240" title="Brenda Maddox" label="Brenda Maddox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="56311" end="56331" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q59773266" start="56435" end="56446" title="David Ellis (biographer)" label="David Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502891" start="56669" end="56679" title="Geoff Dyer" label="Geoff Dyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q448764" start="56968" end="56983" title="Stephen Spender" label="Stephen Spender"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264908" start="57111" end="57123" title="John Worthen (literary critic)" label="John Worthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20891815" start="57638" end="57650" title="Knud Merrild" label="Knud Merrild"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195867" start="57746" end="57760" title="Frances Wilson (writer)" label="Frances Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353211" start="58072" end="58088" title="Elaine Feinstein" label="Elaine Feinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q725421" start="58318" end="58333" title="Geoffrey Trease" label="Geoffrey Trease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828677" start="58754" end="58767" title="Michael Black (literary critic)" label="Michael Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828677" start="58849" end="58862" title="Michael Black (literary critic)" label="Michael Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828677" start="58977" end="58990" title="Michael Black (literary critic)" label="Michael Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828677" start="59066" end="59079" title="Michael Black (literary critic)" label="Michael Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q217619" start="59277" end="59292" title="Anthony Burgess" label="Anthony Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q59773266" start="59931" end="59942" title="David Ellis (biographer)" label="David Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020343" start="60630" end="60644" title="Schocken Books" label="Schocken Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q18098278" start="60785" end="60802" title="Graham Holderness" label="Graham Holderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q796430" start="60897" end="60909" title="Graham Hough" label="Graham Hough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443556" start="61565" end="61578" title="Frank Kermode" label="Frank Kermode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428288" start="61912" end="61923" title="F.R. Leavis" label="F.R. Leavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428288" start="61996" end="62007" title="F.R. Leavis" label="F.R. Leavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q66615546" start="62120" end="62134" title="Sheila MacLeod" label="Sheila MacLeod"/>
<link wikidata="Q292268" start="62325" end="62337" title="Kate Millett" label="Kate Millett"/>
<link wikidata="Q217557" start="63033" end="63050" title="Joyce Carol Oates" label="Joyce Carol Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115319" start="63112" end="63124" title="Tony Pinkney" label="Tony Pinkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054881" start="63203" end="63217" title="Stephen Potter" label="Stephen Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q52156728" start="63844" end="63864" title="Herbert J. Seligmann" label="Herbert J. Seligmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264908" start="64376" end="64388" title="John Worthen (literary critic)" label="John Worthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354532" start="64634" end="64661" title="Project Gutenberg Australia" label="Project Gutenberg Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q752987" start="64915" end="64929" title="Nickolas Muray" label="Nickolas Muray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854158" start="65107" end="65123" title="Bancroft Library" label="Bancroft Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="65189" end="65208" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190812" start="65282" end="65306" title="University of New Mexico" label="University of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q472316" start="65341" end="65365" title="University of Nottingham" label="University of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="65436" end="65455" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44193" wikidata="Q796483" url="?curid=44193" title="DocBook">
<text>DocBook is a semantic markup language for technical documentation. It was originally intended for writing technical documents related to computer hardware and software, but it can be used for any other sort of documentation.

As a semantic language, DocBook enables its users to create document content in a presentation-neutral form that captures the logical structure of the content; that content can then be published in a variety of formats, including HTML, XHTML, EPUB, PDF, man pages, WebHelp and HTML Help, without requiring users to make any changes to the source. In other words, when a document is written in DocBook format it becomes easily portable into other formats, rather than needing to be rewritten.

== Design ==
DocBook is an XML language. In its current version (5.x), DocBook&#x27;s language is formally defined by a RELAX NG schema with integrated Schematron rules. (There are also W3C XML Schema+Schematron and Document Type Definition (DTD) versions of the schema available, but these are considered non-standard.)

As a semantic language, DocBook documents do not describe what their contents &quot;look like&quot;, but rather the meaning of those contents. For example, rather than explaining how the abstract for an article might be visually formatted, DocBook simply says that a particular section &quot;is&quot; an abstract. It is up to an external processing tool or application to decide where on a page the abstract should go and what it should look like or whether or not it should be included in the final output at all.

DocBook provides a vast number of semantic element tags. They are divided into three broad categories, namely structural, block-level, and inline.

&quot;Structural&quot; tags specify broad characteristics of their contents. The codice_1 element, for example, specifies that its child elements represent the parts of a book. This includes a title, chapters, glossaries, appendices, and so on. DocBook&#x27;s structural tags include, but are not limited to:

* &quot;codice_2:&quot; Titled collection of one or more codice_1s or codice_4s, can be nested with other sets
* &quot;codice_1:&quot; Titled collection of codice_6s, codice_4s, and/or codice_8s, with optional glossaries, appendices, etc.
* &quot;codice_8:&quot; Titled collection of one or more codice_6s—can be nested with other parts, and may have special introductory text
* &quot;codice_4:&quot; Titled, unnumbered collection of block-level elements
* &quot;codice_6:&quot; Titled, numbered collection of block-level elements—chapters don&#x27;t require explicit numbers, a chapter number is the number of previous chapter elements in the XML document plus 1
* &quot;codice_13:&quot; Contains text that represents an appendix
* &quot;codice_14:&quot; Text represents the dedication of the contained structural element

Structural elements can contain other structural elements. Structural elements are the only permitted top-level elements in a DocBook document.

&quot;Block-level&quot; tags are elements like paragraph, lists, etc. Not all these elements can directly contain text. Sequential block-level elements render one &quot;after&quot; another. After, in this case, can differ depending on the language. In most Western languages, &quot;after&quot; means below: text paragraphs are printed down the page. Other languages&#x27; writing systems can have different directionality; for example, in Japanese, paragraphs are often printed in downward columns, with the columns running from right to left, so &quot;after&quot; in that case would be to the left. DocBook semantics are entirely neutral to these kinds of language-based concepts.

&quot;Inline-level&quot; tags are elements like emphasis, hyperlinks, etc. They wrap text within a block-level element. These elements do not cause the text to break when rendered in a paragraph format, but typically they cause the document processor to apply some kind of distinct typographical treatment to the enclosed text, by changing the font, size, or similar attributes. (The DocBook specification &quot;does&quot; say that it expects different typographical treatment, but it does not offer specific requirements as to what this treatment may be.) That is, a DocBook processor doesn&#x27;t have to transform an codice_15 tag into &quot;italics&quot;. A reader-based DocBook processor could increase the size of the words, or, a text-based processor could use bold instead of italics.

=== Sample document ===
 &lt;?xml version=&quot;1.0&quot; encoding=&quot;UTF-8&quot;?&gt;
 &lt;book xml:id=&quot;simple_book&quot; xmlns=&quot;http://docbook.org/ns/docbook&quot; version=&quot;5.0&quot;&gt;
 &lt;title&gt;Very simple book&lt;/title&gt;
 &lt;chapter xml:id=&quot;chapter_1&quot;&gt;
 &lt;title&gt;Chapter 1&lt;/title&gt;
 &lt;para&gt;Hello world!&lt;/para&gt;
 &lt;para&gt;I hope that your day is proceeding &lt;emphasis&gt;splendidly&lt;/emphasis&gt;!&lt;/para&gt;
 &lt;/chapter&gt;
 &lt;chapter xml:id=&quot;chapter_2&quot;&gt;
 &lt;title&gt;Chapter 2&lt;/title&gt;
 &lt;para&gt;Hello again, world!&lt;/para&gt;
 &lt;/chapter&gt;
 &lt;/book&gt;
Semantically, this document is a &quot;book&quot;, with a &quot;title&quot;, that contains two &quot;chapters&quot; each with their own &quot;titles&quot;. Those &quot;chapters&quot; contain &quot;paragraphs&quot; that have text in them. The markup is fairly readable in English.

In more detail, the root element of the document is codice_1. All DocBook elements are in an XML Namespace, so the root element has an &quot;xmlns&quot; attribute to set the current namespace. Also, the root element of a DocBook document must have a &quot;version&quot; that specifies the version of the format that the document is built on.

(XML documents can include elements from multiple namespaces at once, like the codice_17 attributes in the example.)

A codice_1 element must contain a codice_19, or an codice_20 element containing a codice_19. This must be before any child structural elements. Following the title are the structural children, in this case, two codice_6 elements. Each of these must have a codice_19. They contain codice_24 block elements, which can contain free text and other inline elements like the codice_15 in the second paragraph of the first chapter.

=== Schemas and validation ===

Rules are formally defined in the DocBook XML schema. Appropriate programming tools can validate an XML document (DocBook or otherwise), against its corresponding schema, to determine if (and where) the document fails to conform to that schema. XML editing tools can also use schema information to avoid creating non-conforming documents in the first place.

== Authoring and processing ==

Because DocBook is XML, documents can be created and edited with any text editor. A dedicated XML editor is likewise a functional DocBook editor. DocBook provides schema files for popular XML schema languages, so any XML editor that can provide content completion based on a schema can do so for DocBook. Many graphical or WYSIWYG XML editors come with the ability to edit DocBook like a word processor. 

Tables, list items, and other stylized content can be copied and pasted into the DocBook editor and will be preserved in the DocBook XML output. Because DocBook conforms to a well-defined XML schema, documents can be validated and processed using any tool or programming language that includes XML support.

== History ==

DocBook began in 1991 in discussion groups on Usenet and eventually became a joint project of HAL Computer Systems and O&#x27;Reilly &amp; Associates and eventually spawned its own maintenance organization (the Davenport Group) before moving in 1998 to the &quot;SGML Open&quot; consortium, which subsequently became OASIS. DocBook is currently maintained by the &quot;DocBook Technical Committee&quot; at OASIS.

DocBook is available in both SGML and XML forms, as a DTD. RELAX NG and W3C XML Schema forms of the XML version are available. Starting with DocBook 5, the RELAX NG version is the &quot;normative&quot; form from which the other formats are generated.

DocBook originally started out as an SGML application, but an equivalent XML application was developed and has now replaced the SGML one for most uses. (Starting with version 4 of the SGML DTD, the XML DTD continued with this version numbering scheme.) Initially, a key group of software companies used DocBook since their representatives were involved in its initial design. Eventually, however, DocBook was adopted by the open source community where it has become a standard for creating documentation for many projects, including FreeBSD, KDE, GNOME desktop documentation, the GTK+ API references, the Linux kernel documentation (which, as of July 2016, is transitioning to Sphinx/reStructuredText), and the work of the Linux Documentation Project.

=== Pre DocBook v5.0 ===

Until DocBook 5, DocBook was defined normatively by a Document Type Definition (DTD). Because DocBook was built originally as an application of SGML, the DTD was the only available schema language. DocBook 4.x formats can be SGML or XML, but the XML version does not have its own namespace.

DocBook 4.x formats had to live within the restrictions of being defined by a DTD. The most significant restriction was that an element name uniquely defines its possible contents. That is, an element named codice_20 must contain the same information no matter where it is in the DocBook file. As such, there are many kinds of info elements in DocBook 4.x: codice_27, codice_28, etc. Each has a slightly different content model, but they do share some of their content model. Additionally, they repeat context information. The book&#x27;s codice_20 element is that, because it is a direct child of the book; it does not need to be named specially for a human reader. However, because the format was defined by a DTD, it did have to be named as such. The root element does not have or need a &quot;version&quot;, as the version is built into the DTD declaration at the top of a pre-DocBook 5 document.

DocBook 4.x documents are not compatible with DocBook 5, but can be converted into DocBook 5 documents via an XSLT stylesheet. One (codice_30) is provided as part of the distribution of the DocBook 5 schema and specification package.

== Output formats ==

DocBook files are used to prepare output files in a wide variety of formats. Nearly always, this is accomplished using DocBook XSL stylesheets. These are XSLT stylesheets that transform DocBook documents into a number of formats (HTML, XSL-FO for later conversion into PDF, etc.). These stylesheets can be sophisticated enough to generate tables of contents, glossaries, and indexes. They can oversee the selection of particular designated portions of a master document to produce different versions of the same document (such as a &quot;tutorial&quot; or a &quot;quick-reference guide&quot;, where each of these consist of a subset of the material). Users can write their own customized stylesheets or even a full-fledged program to process the DocBook into an appropriate output format as their needs dictate.

Norman Walsh and the DocBook Project development team maintain the key application for producing output from DocBook source documents: A set of XSLT stylesheets (as well as a legacy set of DSSSL stylesheets) that can generate high-quality HTML and print (FO/PDF) output, as well as output in other formats, including RTF, man pages and HTML Help.

Web help is a chunked HTML output format in the DocBook XSL stylesheets that was introduced in version 1.76.1. The documentation for web help also provides an example of web help and is part of the DocBook XSL distribution.

The major features are its fully CSS-based page layout, search of the help content, and a table of contents in collapsible-tree form. Search has stemming, match highlighting, explicit page-scoring, and the standard multilingual tokenizer. The search and TOC are in a pane that appears as a frameset, but is actually implemented with div tags and cookies (so that it is progressive).

== Simplified DocBook ==

DocBook offers a large number of features that may be overwhelming to a new user. For those who want the convenience of DocBook without a steep learning curve, &quot;Simplified DocBook&quot; was designed. It is a small subset of DocBook designed for single documents such as articles or white papers (i.e., &quot;books&quot; are not supported). The Simplified DocBook DTD is currently at version 1.1.

== Criticism ==
Ingo Schwarze, the author of OpenBSD&#x27;s mandoc, considers DocBook inferior to the semantic &quot;mdoc&quot; macro for man pages. In an attempt to write a DocBook-to-mdoc converter (previous converters like docbook-to-man do not cover semantic elements), he finds the semantic parts &quot;bloated, redundant, and incomplete at the same time&quot; compared to elements covered in mdoc. Moreover, Schwarze finds the DocBook specification not specific enough about the use of tags, the language non-portable across versions, rough in details and overall inconsistent.

== See also ==

*List of document markup languages
*Comparison of document markup languages
*DocBook XSL
*Darwin Information Typing Architecture
*LinuxDoc
*LaTeX

== References ==

== Further reading ==
Norman Walsh is the principal author of the book &quot;DocBook: The Definitive Guide&quot;, the official documentation of DocBook. This book is available online under the GFDL, and also as a print publication.
* 
* 
== External links ==
* DocBook.org - Collection of DocBook information, including a 4.x and 5.0 version of &quot;DocBook: The Definitive Guide&quot; and all versions of the DocBook schemas/DTDs.
* DocBook Repository at OASIS - Normative home of DocBook schema/DTD.
* DocBook XSL Project page at SourceForge.net, XSLT 1.0 Stylesheets for DocBook at GitHub
* DocBook Demystification HOWTO
* DocBook: The Definitive Guide, 1st edition, v. 2.0.6 - Fully bookmarked PDF of the Guide for DocBook 3.x and 4.x.
* Writing with DocBook elements.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q796483" start="0" end="7" title="DocBook" label="DocBook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437428" start="13" end="21" title="Semantics (computer science)" label="semantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37045" start="22" end="37" title="markup language" label="markup language"/>
<link wikidata="Q788790" start="52" end="65" title="documentation" label="documentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511030" start="286" end="333" title="separation of presentation and content" label="document content in a presentation-neutral form"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="456" end="460" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q166074" start="462" end="467" title="XHTML" label="XHTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q475488" start="469" end="473" title="EPUB" label="EPUB"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="475" end="478" title="Portable Document Format" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512572" start="480" end="489" title="Manual page (Unix)" label="man pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023647" start="503" end="512" title="Microsoft Compiled HTML Help" label="HTML Help"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="746" end="749" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314117" start="839" end="847" title="RELAX NG" label="RELAX NG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043076" start="848" end="854" title="XML schema" label="schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780096" start="871" end="881" title="Schematron" label="Schematron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16342" start="905" end="919" title="W3C XML Schema" label="W3C XML Schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q212327" start="935" end="959" title="Document Type Definition" label="Document Type Definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q333291" start="1228" end="1236" title="Abstract (summary)" label="abstract"/>
<link wikidata="Q352858" start="2737" end="2745" title="Addendum" label="appendix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3356" end="3405" title="Writing system#Directionality" label="writing systems can have different directionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295992" start="5497" end="5510" title="XML Namespace" label="XML Namespace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043076" start="6365" end="6375" title="XML schema" label="XML schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760545" start="6808" end="6818" title="XML editor" label="XML editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043076" start="6877" end="6889" title="XML schema" label="schema files"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7024" end="7033" title="XML editor#Graphical editors" label="graphical"/>
<link wikidata="Q170542" start="7037" end="7044" title="WYSIWYG" label="WYSIWYG"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7045" end="7056" title="XML editor#WYSIWYG editors" label="XML editors"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="7102" end="7116" title="word processor" label="word processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="7489" end="7495" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628920" start="7537" end="7557" title="HAL Computer Systems" label="HAL Computer Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065097" start="7562" end="7592" title="O&amp;#x27;Reilly Media" label="O&amp;#x27;Reilly &amp;amp; Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455952" start="7760" end="7765" title="OASIS (organization)" label="OASIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q207819" start="7886" end="7890" title="SGML" label="SGML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="7895" end="7898" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q212327" start="7911" end="7914" title="Document Type Definition" label="DTD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314117" start="7916" end="7924" title="RELAX NG" label="RELAX NG"/>
<link wikidata="Q16342" start="7929" end="7943" title="W3C XML Schema" label="W3C XML Schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q207819" start="8237" end="8241" title="SGML" label="SGML"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="8642" end="8649" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431" start="8651" end="8654" title="KDE" label="KDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q44316" start="8656" end="8661" title="GNOME" label="GNOME"/>
<link wikidata="Q189464" start="8689" end="8693" title="GTK+" label="GTK+"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="8694" end="8697" title="Application programming interface" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="8714" end="8726" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633731" start="8786" end="8792" title="Sphinx (documentation generator)" label="Sphinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q287315" start="8793" end="8809" title="reStructuredText" label="reStructuredText"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137555" start="8832" end="8859" title="Linux Documentation Project" label="Linux Documentation Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q207819" start="9032" end="9036" title="SGML" label="SGML"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287006" start="10458" end="10469" title="DocBook XSL" label="DocBook XSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q32110" start="10493" end="10497" title="XSLT" label="XSLT"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="10569" end="10573" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q32087" start="10575" end="10581" title="XSL-FO" label="XSL-FO"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="10608" end="10611" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q32110" start="11296" end="11300" title="XSLT" label="XSLT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233980" start="11341" end="11346" title="DSSSL" label="DSSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="11391" end="11395" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q32087" start="11407" end="11409" title="XSL Formatting Objects" label="FO"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="11410" end="11413" title="Portable Document Format" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q467454" start="11469" end="11472" title="Rich Text Format" label="RTF"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512572" start="11474" end="11482" title="man page" label="man page"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287006" start="11548" end="11559" title="DocBook XSL" label="DocBook XSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416732" start="11870" end="11878" title="stemming" label="stemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q835922" start="11953" end="11962" title="Tokenization (lexical analysis)" label="tokenizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440657" start="12015" end="12023" title="Frameset (HTML)" label="frameset"/>
<link wikidata="Q107293011" start="12058" end="12066" title="div and span" label="div tags"/>
<link wikidata="Q34215" start="12582" end="12589" title="OpenBSD" label="OpenBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748127" start="12597" end="12603" title="mandoc" label="mandoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512572" start="12675" end="12684" title="man pages" label="man pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867281" start="13139" end="13172" title="List of document markup languages" label="List of document markup languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155868" start="13174" end="13213" title="Comparison of document markup languages" label="Comparison of document markup languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287006" start="13215" end="13226" title="DocBook XSL" label="DocBook XSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166919" start="13228" end="13266" title="Darwin Information Typing Architecture" label="Darwin Information Typing Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555031" start="13268" end="13276" title="LinuxDoc" label="LinuxDoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310" start="13278" end="13283" title="LaTeX" label="LaTeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q22169" start="13496" end="13500" title="GNU Free Documentation License" label="GFDL"/>
<link wikidata="Q165400" start="13836" end="13851" title="SourceForge.net" label="SourceForge.net"/>
<link wikidata="Q364" start="13889" end="13895" title="GitHub" label="GitHub"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44195" wikidata="Q196232" url="?curid=44195" title="Friends of the Earth">
<text>Friends of the Earth International (FoEI) is an international network of grassroots environmental organizations in 73 countries. About half of the member groups call themselves &quot;Friends of the Earth&quot; in their own languages; the others use other names. The organization was founded in 1969 in San Francisco by David Brower, Donald Aitken, and Gary Soucie after Brower&#x27;s split with the Sierra Club because of the latter&#x27;s positive approach to nuclear energy. It became an international network of organizations in 1971 with a meeting of representatives from four countries: U.S., Sweden, the UK and France.

FoEI currently has a secretariat (based in Amsterdam, Netherlands) which provides support for the network and its agreed major campaigns. The executive committee of elected representatives from national groups sets policy and oversees the work of the secretariat. In 2016, Uruguayan activist Karin Nansen was elected to serve as chair of the organization. Sri Lankan activist Hemantha Withanage has served as chair of FoEI since 2021.

== Campaign issues ==
Friends of the Earth International is an international membership organisation, with members spread across the world. Its advocacy programs focus on environmental, economic and social issues, highlighting their political and human rights contexts.

As per its website, the current campaign priorities of Friends of the Earth International are: economic justice and resisting neoliberalism; forests and biodiversity; food sovereignty; and climate justice and energy. The campaign priorities of FOEI are set at its bi-annual general meeting. Additionally, FOEI also plans campaigns in other fields, such as waste and overconsumption, international financial institutions, ecological debt, mining and extractive industries, and opposition to nuclear power. FOEI has campaigned for the closure of the Diablo Canyon nuclear plant in California. FOEI also supports campaigns from the regions or member groups, such as the one on the consumption and intensive production of meat (&quot;Meat Atlas&quot;) by Friends of the Earth Europe.

FOEI claims that it has been successful as it has eliminated billions in taxpayer subsidies to corporate polluters, reformed the World Bank to address environmental and human rights concerns, pushed the debate on global warming to pressure the U.S. and U.K. to attempt the best legislation possible, stopped more than 150 destructive dams and water projects worldwide, pressed and won landmark regulations of strip mines and oil tankers and banned international whaling. Its critics claim that the organization tries only to obtain media attention (as by releasing the song &quot;Love Song to the Earth&quot;), but does not stay with locals to actually solve complicated problems, and that it prevents development in developing countries. They have also been critical of its policy to accept high levels of funding from companies and charities related to oil and gas.

One of Friends of the Earth&#x27;s most recent campaigns and legal battles was the &quot;Shell Case&quot;, led by Milieudefensie (Friends of the Earth Netherlands). In 2021, a court in the Netherlands ruled in a landmark case that the oil giant Shell must reduce its emissions in 2030 by 45% compared to 2019 levels. This was the first time that a company had been legally obliged to align its policies with the Paris Agreement. This was later overturned in November 2024.

In January 2025 when UK Prime Minister Keir Starmer announced plans to take on NIMBYs who block major infrastructure projects, such as nuclear power, roads, railway and wind farms, Friends of the Earth criticized Starmer, saying he was scapegoating people with &quot;valid concerns about a project&#x27;s impact&quot;.

== Structure of the network ==
The member organization in a particular country may name itself Friends of the Earth or an equivalent translated phrase in the national language, e.g., Friends of the Earth (US), Friends of the Earth (EWNI) (England Wales and Northern Ireland), Amigos de la Tierra (Spain and Argentina). However, roughly half of the member groups work under their own names, sometimes reflecting an independent origin and subsequent accession to the network, such as Pro Natura (Switzerland), the Korean Federation for Environmental Movement, Environmental Rights Action (FOE Nigeria) and WALHI (FOE Indonesia).

Friends of the Earth International (FoEI) is supported by a secretariat based in Amsterdam, and an executive committee known as ExCom. The ExCom is elected by all member groups at a general meeting held every two years, and it is the ExCom which employs the secretariat. At the same general meeting, overall policies and priority activities are agreed.

In addition to work which is coordinated at the FoEI level, national member groups are free to carry out their own campaigns and to work bi- or multi-laterally as they see fit, as long as this does not go against agreed policy at the international level.

== Publications ==
The &quot;Meat Atlas&quot; is an annual report on the methods and impact of industrial animal agriculture. The publication consists of 27 short essays and, with the help of graphs, visualises facts about the production and consumption of meat. The &quot;Meat Atlas&quot; is jointly published by Friends of the Earth and Heinrich Böll Foundation.

== Notable supporters ==
* Rock musician George Harrison became associated with Friends of the Earth after attending their anti-nuclear demonstrations in London in 1980. He dedicated his 1989 greatest hits album, &quot;Best of Dark Horse&quot;, to Friends of the Earth, among other environmental organisations.
* Jay Kay, frontman of the funk and acid jazz group Jamiroquai, is known for donating a part of the profits earned from his album sales to Friends of the Earth and Oxfam, among other causes.
* Thom Yorke, lead singer of Radiohead, has publicly supported a number of Friends of the Earth campaigns, including the Big Ask, which led the UK government to introduce the Climate Change Bill in the Queen&#x27;s Speech on 15 November 2006. This was after 130,000 people across the country had asked their MP to support such a bill.
* Proceeds from sales of the single &quot;Love Song to the Earth&quot; (2015), performed by Paul McCartney, Jon Bon Jovi, Sheryl Crow, Fergie, Sean Paul, and Colbie Caillat among others, went to Friends of the Earth U.S. and the United Nations Foundation.

== Member organizations ==
=== Asia ===
* Friends of the Earth Japan
* Indonesian Forum for Environment, Indonesia
* Korean Federation for Environmental Movement
* Friends of the Earth Middle East
* Legal Rights and Natural Resources Center – Kasama sa Kalikasan
* Centre for Environmental Justice, Sri Lanka
* Sahabat Alam Malaysia

=== Europe ===
* Friends of the Earth Europe, Brussels
** Young Friends of the Earth Europe, Brussels
** Friends of the Earth – France
** Friends of the Earth Scotland
** Pro Natura (Switzerland)
** Amigos de la tierra, Spain
** Bund für Umwelt und Naturschutz Deutschland, Germany
** Friends of the Earth (EWNI), England, Wales and Northern Ireland
** Birmingham Friends of the Earth
** , Austria
** Friends of the Earth Malta
** Friends of the Earth Finland
** Friends of the Earth Hungary
** Priatelia Zeme Slovensko (Friends of the Earth Slovakia)
* Friends of the Earth (EWNI), (England, Wales and Northern Ireland)
** Manchester Friends of the Earth
* Green Action, Croatia
* Hnutí DUHA, Czech Republic
* Milieudefensie, Netherlands
* Norwegian Society for the Conservation of Nature, Norway
* Friends of the Earth (Malta)
* NOAH, founded in 1969 in Denmark, national organisation of Foe since 1988, Denmark.

=== North America ===
* Friends of the Earth Canada
** , Canada
* Friends of the Earth (US)

=== Oceania ===
* Friends of the Earth Australia

== See also ==
* &quot;Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Environmental Services, Inc.&quot;
* List of environmental organizations
* Anti-nuclear movement in the United States
* List of anti-nuclear groups in the United States
* Friends of the Earth (HK)

== Notes and references ==
== Bibliography ==
* Brian Doherty and Timothy Doyle, &quot;Environmentalism, Resistance and Solidarity. The Politics of Friends of the Earth International&quot; (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2013). 
* Jan-Henrik Meyer, “&#x27;Where do we go from Wyhl?&#x27; Transnational Anti-Nuclear Protest targeting European and International Organisations in the 1970s,” &quot;Historical Social Research&quot; 39: 1 (2014): 212–235. 

== External links ==
* Article of Friends of the Earth France &quot;Multinationals : Ecologists See Red&quot;
* Friends of the Earth International YouTube channel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q196232" start="0" end="34" title="Friends of the Earth" label="Friends of the Earth International"/>
<link wikidata="Q196232" start="36" end="40" title="Friends of the Earth" label="FoEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670725" start="84" end="110" title="environmental organization" label="environmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="302" end="315" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017571" start="319" end="331" title="David Brower" label="David Brower"/>
<link wikidata="Q508775" start="399" end="410" title="Sierra Club" label="Sierra Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="461" end="475" title="Nuclear power" label="nuclear energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="592" end="596" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="598" end="604" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="610" end="612" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="617" end="623" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="669" end="678" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="680" end="691" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901501" start="899" end="908" title="Uruguayans" label="Uruguayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q111084176" start="918" end="930" title="Karin Nansen" label="Karin Nansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190382" start="1428" end="1444" title="economic justice" label="economic justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="1459" end="1472" title="neoliberalism" label="neoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="1474" end="1480" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="1486" end="1498" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361172" start="1500" end="1516" title="food sovereignty" label="food sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291678" start="1522" end="1537" title="climate justice" label="climate justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="1771" end="1777" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="1782" end="1803" title="Extractive industry" label="extractive industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q574580" start="1809" end="1819" title="Anti-nuclear movement" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="1823" end="1836" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516546" start="1881" end="1908" title="Diablo Canyon Power Plant" label="Diablo Canyon nuclear plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288465" start="2011" end="2055" title="Environmental impact of meat production" label="consumption and intensive production of meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633438" start="2063" end="2073" title="Meat Atlas" label="Meat Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504331" start="2084" end="2111" title="Friends of the Earth Europe" label="Friends of the Earth Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="2243" end="2253" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053889" start="2562" end="2583" title="International Whaling Commission" label="international whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q107004432" start="3072" end="3082" title="Milieudefensie v Royal Dutch Shell" label="Shell Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851862" start="3097" end="3111" title="Milieudefensie" label="Milieudefensie"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="3395" end="3410" title="Paris Agreement" label="Paris Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q849024" start="3536" end="3542" title="NIMBY" label="NIMBYs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504330" start="3960" end="3985" title="Friends of the Earth (US)" label="Friends of the Earth (US)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504328" start="3987" end="4014" title="Friends of the Earth (EWNI)" label="Friends of the Earth (EWNI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q196232" start="4053" end="4072" title="Amigos de la Tierra" label="Amigos de la Tierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q689707" start="4259" end="4283" title="Pro Natura (Switzerland)" label="Pro Natura (Switzerland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q623683" start="4289" end="4333" title="Korean Federation for Environmental Movement" label="Korean Federation for Environmental Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741905" start="4381" end="4386" title="WALHI" label="WALHI"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="4486" end="4495" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100614" start="4587" end="4602" title="general meeting" label="general meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633438" start="5044" end="5054" title="Meat Atlas" label="Meat Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q912362" start="5110" end="5139" title="Intensive animal farming" label="industrial animal agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q651061" start="5354" end="5378" title="Heinrich Böll Foundation" label="Heinrich Böll Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="5422" end="5437" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="5535" end="5541" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q830352" start="5600" end="5618" title="Best of Dark Horse 1976–1989" label="Best of Dark Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q259691" start="5694" end="5701" title="Jay Kay" label="Jay Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="5719" end="5723" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q221772" start="5728" end="5737" title="acid jazz" label="acid jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q202041" start="5744" end="5754" title="Jamiroquai" label="Jamiroquai"/>
<link wikidata="Q267941" start="5856" end="5861" title="Oxfam" label="Oxfam"/>
<link wikidata="Q188668" start="5885" end="5895" title="Thom Yorke" label="Thom Yorke"/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="5912" end="5921" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q546276" start="6004" end="6011" title="Big Ask (campaign)" label="Big Ask"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="6310" end="6324" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q150916" start="6326" end="6338" title="Jon Bon Jovi" label="Jon Bon Jovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q200586" start="6340" end="6351" title="Sheryl Crow" label="Sheryl Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q180004" start="6353" end="6359" title="Fergie (singer)" label="Fergie"/>
<link wikidata="Q200577" start="6361" end="6370" title="Sean Paul" label="Sean Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q228860" start="6376" end="6390" title="Colbie Caillat" label="Colbie Caillat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741905" start="6546" end="6578" title="Indonesian Forum for Environment" label="Indonesian Forum for Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q623683" start="6592" end="6636" title="Korean Federation for Environmental Movement" label="Korean Federation for Environmental Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281997" start="6639" end="6671" title="Friends of the Earth Middle East" label="Friends of the Earth Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q105394008" start="6740" end="6772" title="Centre for Environmental Justice" label="Centre for Environmental Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12702286" start="6786" end="6807" title="Sahabat Alam Malaysia" label="Sahabat Alam Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504331" start="6826" end="6853" title="Friends of the Earth Europe" label="Friends of the Earth Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058127" start="6867" end="6893" title="Young Friends of the Earth" label="Young Friends of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820419" start="6914" end="6943" title="Friends of the Earth – France" label="Friends of the Earth – France"/>
<link wikidata="Q21711024" start="6947" end="6976" title="Friends of the Earth Scotland" label="Friends of the Earth Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q689707" start="6980" end="7004" title="Pro Natura (Switzerland)" label="Pro Natura (Switzerland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q196232" start="7008" end="7027" title="Amigos de la tierra" label="Amigos de la tierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q897009" start="7038" end="7081" title="Bund für Umwelt und Naturschutz Deutschland" label="Bund für Umwelt und Naturschutz Deutschland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504328" start="7094" end="7121" title="Friends of the Earth (EWNI)" label="Friends of the Earth (EWNI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242520" start="7304" end="7328" title="Priatelia Zeme Slovensko" label="Priatelia Zeme Slovensko"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504328" start="7363" end="7390" title="Friends of the Earth (EWNI)" label="Friends of the Earth (EWNI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504328" start="7433" end="7464" title="Manchester Friends of the Earth" label="Manchester Friends of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q703614" start="7467" end="7479" title="Green Action" label="Green Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873790" start="7491" end="7501" title="Hnutí DUHA" label="Hnutí DUHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851862" start="7520" end="7534" title="Milieudefensie" label="Milieudefensie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772737" start="7550" end="7598" title="Norwegian Society for the Conservation of Nature" label="Norwegian Society for the Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504329" start="7609" end="7637" title="Friends of the Earth (Malta)" label="Friends of the Earth (Malta)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504330" start="7791" end="7816" title="Friends of the Earth (US)" label="Friends of the Earth (US)"/>
<link wikidata="Q178156" start="7836" end="7866" title="Friends of the Earth Australia" label="Friends of the Earth Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504327" start="7891" end="7957" title="Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Environmental Services, Inc." label="Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Environmental Services, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2670725" start="7966" end="8001" title="List of environmental organizations" label="List of environmental organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774421" start="8004" end="8046" title="Anti-nuclear movement in the United States" label="Anti-nuclear movement in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774406" start="8049" end="8097" title="List of anti-nuclear groups in the United States" label="List of anti-nuclear groups in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504333" start="8100" end="8125" title="Friends of the Earth (HK)" label="Friends of the Earth (HK)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44198" wikidata="Q650105" url="?curid=44198" title="Mexican War">
<text>Mexican War may refer to:
*Mexican War of Independence (1810–21)
*Mexican–American War (1846–48)
*Second French intervention in Mexico (1861–67)
*Mexican Revolution (1910–20)
*Cristero War (1926–1929)

==See also==
*List of wars involving Mexico
*Mexican Drug War</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q650105" start="0" end="11" title="Mexican War" label="Mexican War"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="27" end="54" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="66" end="86" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q952881" start="98" end="134" title="Second French intervention in Mexico" label="Second French intervention in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="146" end="164" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q279662" start="176" end="188" title="Cristero War" label="Cristero War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425213" start="216" end="245" title="List of wars involving Mexico" label="List of wars involving Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q475678" start="247" end="263" title="Mexican Drug War" label="Mexican Drug War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44199" wikidata="Q1233980" url="?curid=44199" title="Document Style Semantics and Specification Language">
<text>The Document Style Semantics and Specification Language (DSSSL) is an international standard developed to provide stylesheets for SGML documents.

DSSSL consists of two parts: a tree transformation process that can be used to manipulate the tree structure of documents prior to presentation, and a formatting process that associates the elements in the source document with specific nodes in the target representation—the flow object tree. DSSSL specifications are device-independent pieces of information that can be interchanged between different platforms. DSSSL does not standardize the back-end formatters that generate the language&#x27;s output. Such formatters may render the output for on-screen display, or write it to a computer file in a specific format (such as PostScript or Rich Text Format).

Based on a subset of the Scheme programming language, it is specified by the standard ISO/IEC 10179:1996. It was developed by ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 34 (ISO/IEC Joint Technical Committee 1, Subcommittee 34 - Document description and processing languages).

SGML contains information in a machine-readable but not very human-readable format. A &quot;stylesheet&quot; is used to present the information stored in SGML in a more pleasing or accessible way. DSSSL can convert to a wide range of formats, including RTF, HTML, and LaTeX.

DSSSL is compatible with any SGML-based document type, but it has been used most often with DocBook. In 1997, software engineer Geir Ove Grønmo published a syntax highlighting language definition for KEDIT.

With the appearance of XML as an alternative to SGML, XML&#x27;s associated stylesheet language XSL was also widely and rapidly adopted, from around 1999. Although DSSSL continued to be in use within the shrinking SGML field, XSL was very soon in use more extensively, and by more coders, than DSSSL had ever achieved. This was emphasised when previous SGML strongholds such as DocBook converted from SGML to XML, and also converted their favoured stylesheet language from DSSSL to XSL.

Sometime in or before 1994, Opera Software began drafting a &quot;DSSSL Lite&quot; specification for the consideration of the World Wide Web Consortium, since DSSSL was thought to be too complex for the World Wide Web.

==See also==
* S-expression
* XML transformation language

==References==
== External links ==
*James Clark&#x27;s DSSSL page
*DSSSL Example - what DSSSL looks like</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1233980" start="4" end="55" title="Document Style Semantics and Specification Language" label="Document Style Semantics and Specification Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233980" start="57" end="62" title="Document Style Semantics and Specification Language" label="DSSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029123" start="114" end="125" title="Style sheet language" label="stylesheets"/>
<link wikidata="Q207819" start="130" end="134" title="Standard Generalized Markup Language" label="SGML"/>
<link wikidata="Q82753" start="731" end="744" title="computer file" label="computer file"/>
<link wikidata="Q235557" start="759" end="765" title="File format" label="format"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="775" end="785" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q467454" start="789" end="805" title="Rich Text Format" label="Rich Text Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q187560" start="834" end="861" title="Scheme (programming language)" label="Scheme programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="895" end="898" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="899" end="902" title="International Electrotechnical Commission" label="IEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974114" start="935" end="954" title="ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 34" label="ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q372222" start="1121" end="1135" title="human-readable" label="human-readable"/>
<link wikidata="Q467454" start="1313" end="1316" title="Rich Text Format" label="RTF"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="1318" end="1322" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310" start="1328" end="1333" title="LaTeX" label="LaTeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q796483" start="1428" end="1435" title="DocBook" label="DocBook"/>
<link wikidata="Q747907" start="1492" end="1511" title="syntax highlighting" label="syntax highlighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597422" start="1536" end="1541" title="KEDIT" label="KEDIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="1567" end="1570" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q32061" start="1640" end="1643" title="XSL" label="XSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q796483" start="1922" end="1929" title="DocBook" label="DocBook"/>
<link wikidata="Q215639" start="2060" end="2074" title="Opera Software" label="Opera Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="2158" end="2183" title="World Wide Web Consortium" label="World Wide Web Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="2235" end="2249" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113529" start="2267" end="2279" title="S-expression" label="S-expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217190" start="2282" end="2309" title="XML transformation language" label="XML transformation language"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44202" wikidata="Q7603923" url="?curid=44202" title="Statecraft">
<text>Statecraft may refer to:

* Statecraft (game), a card game
* The politics of a state (polity)
* The use of power in international relations
* &quot;&quot;, a 2003 book by Margaret Thatcher</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30646707" start="28" end="45" title="Statecraft (game)" label="Statecraft (game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="65" end="73" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="79" end="93" title="state (polity)" label="state (polity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345203" start="107" end="139" title="power in international relations" label="power in international relations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44203" wikidata="Q163366" url="?curid=44203" title="Ezra Pound">
<text>Ezra Weston Loomis Pound (30 October 1885 – 1 November 1972) was an American poet and critic, a major figure in the early modernist poetry movement, and a collaborator in Fascist Italy and the Salò Republic during World War II. His works include &quot;Ripostes&quot; (1912), &quot;Hugh Selwyn Mauberley&quot; (1920), and his 800-page epic poem &quot;The Cantos&quot; (–1962).

Pound&#x27;s contribution to poetry began in the early 20th century with his role in developing Imagism, a movement stressing precision and economy of language. Working in London as foreign editor of several American literary magazines, he helped discover and shape the work of contemporaries such as H. D., Robert Frost, T. S. Eliot, Ernest Hemingway, and James Joyce. He was responsible for the 1914 serialization of Joyce&#x27;s &quot;A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man&quot;, the 1915 publication of Eliot&#x27;s &quot;The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock&quot;, and the serialization from 1918 of Joyce&#x27;s &quot;Ulysses&quot;. Hemingway wrote in 1932 that, for poets born in the late 19th or early 20th century, not to be influenced by Pound would be &quot;like passing through a great blizzard and not feeling its cold&quot;.

Angered by the carnage of World War I, Pound blamed the war on finance capitalism, which he called &quot;usury&quot;. He moved to Italy in 1924 and through the 1930s and 1940s promoted an economic theory known as social credit, wrote for publications owned by the British fascist Sir Oswald Mosley, embraced Benito Mussolini&#x27;s fascism, and expressed support for Adolf Hitler. During World War II, Pound recorded hundreds of paid radio propaganda broadcasts for the fascist Italian government and its later incarnation as a German puppet state, in which he attacked the United States federal government, Franklin D. Roosevelt, Great Britain, international finance, munitions makers, arms dealers, Jews, and others, as abettors and prolongers of the war. He also praised both eugenics and the Holocaust in Italy, while urging American GIs to throw down their rifles and surrender. In 1945, Pound was captured by the Italian Resistance and handed over to the U.S. Army&#x27;s Counterintelligence Corps, who held him pending extradition and prosecution based on an indictment for treason. He spent months in a U.S. military detention camp near Pisa, including three weeks in an outdoor steel cage. Ruled mentally unfit to stand trial, Pound was incarcerated for over 12 years at St. Elizabeths psychiatric hospital in Washington, D.C., whose doctors viewed Pound as a narcissist and a psychopath, but otherwise completely sane.

While in custody in Italy, Pound began work on sections of &quot;The Cantos&quot;, which were published as &quot;The Pisan Cantos&quot; (1948), for which he was awarded the Bollingen Prize for Poetry in 1949 by the Library of Congress, causing enormous controversy. After a campaign by his fellow writers, he was released from St. Elizabeth&#x27;s in 1958 and returned to Italy, where he posed for the press giving the Fascist salute and called the United States &quot;an insane asylum&quot;. Pound remained in Italy until his death in 1972. His economic and political views have ensured that his life and literary legacy remain highly controversial.

==Early life and education (1885–1908)==
===Family background===
Pound was born in 1885 in a two-story clapboard house in Hailey, Idaho Territory, the only child of Homer Loomis Pound and Isabel Weston, who married in 1884. Homer had worked in Hailey since 1883 as registrar of the United States General Land Office. Pound&#x27;s grandfather, Thaddeus Coleman Pound, a Republican Congressman and the 10th Lieutenant Governor of Wisconsin, had secured him the appointment. Homer had previously worked for Thaddeus in the lumber business.

Both sides of Pound&#x27;s family emigrated from England in the 17th century. On his father&#x27;s side, the immigrant ancestor was John Pound, a Quaker who arrived from England around 1650. Ezra&#x27;s paternal grandmother, Susan Angevine Loomis, married Thaddeus Coleman Pound. On his mother&#x27;s side, Pound was descended from William Wadsworth, a Puritan who immigrated to Boston on the &quot;Lion&quot; in 1632. Captain Joseph Wadsworth helped to write the first Connecticut constitution. The Wadsworths married into the Westons of New York; Harding Weston and Mary Parker were Pound&#x27;s maternal grandparents. After serving in the military, Harding remained unemployed, so his brother Ezra Weston and Ezra&#x27;s wife, Frances Amelia Wessells Freer (Aunt Frank), helped to look after Isabel, Pound&#x27;s mother.

===Early education===
Isabel Pound was unhappy in Hailey and took Ezra with her to New York in 1887 when he was 18 months old. Her husband followed and found a job as an assayer at the Philadelphia Mint. After a move to 417 Walnut Street in Jenkintown, Pennsylvania, the family bought a six-bedroom house in 1893 at 166 Fernbrook Avenue, Wyncote. Pound&#x27;s education began in dame schools: Miss Elliott&#x27;s school in Jenkintown in 1892 and the Heathcock family&#x27;s Chelten Hills School in Wyncote in 1893. Known as &quot;Ra&quot; (pronounced &quot;Ray&quot;), he attended Wyncote Public School from September 1894. His first publication was on 7 November 1896 in the &quot;Jenkintown Times-Chronicle&quot; (&quot;by E. L. Pound, Wyncote, aged 11 years&quot;), a limerick about William Jennings Bryan, who had just lost the 1896 presidential election.

In 1897, aged 12, he transferred to Cheltenham Military Academy (CMA), where he wore an American Civil War-style uniform and was taught drilling and how to shoot. The following year he made his first trip overseas, a three-month tour with his mother and Aunt Frank, who took him to England, Belgium, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Spain, and Morocco. He attended CMA until 1900, at times as a boarder, but it seems he did not graduate.

===University===

In 1901, at 15 years old, Pound was admitted to the College of Liberal Arts at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. Years later he said his aim was to avoid drill at the military academy. His one distinction in first year was in geometry, but otherwise his grades were mostly poor, including in Latin, his major; he achieved a B in English composition and a pass in English literature. In his second year he switched from the degree course to &quot;non-degree special student status&quot;, he said &quot;to avoid irrelevant subjects&quot;. He was not elected to a fraternity at Penn, but it seemed not to bother him.

His parents and Aunt Frank took him on another three-month European tour in 1902, and the following year he transferred to Hamilton College in Clinton, New York, possibly because of his grades. Again he was not invited to join a fraternity, but this time he had hoped to do so, according to letters home, because he wanted to live in a fraternity house, and by April 1904 he regarded the move as a mistake. Signed up for the Latin–Scientific course, he appears to have avoided some classes; his transcript is short of credits. He studied the Provençal dialect and read Dante and Anglo-Saxon poetry, including &quot;Beowulf&quot; and the 8th-century Old English poem &quot;The Seafarer&quot;.

After graduating from Hamilton in 1905 with a PhB, he returned to Penn, where he fell in love with Hilda Doolittle (who later wrote under the name &quot;H.D.&quot;). She was then a student at Bryn Mawr College, and he hand-bound 25 of his poems for her, calling it &quot;Hilda&#x27;s Book&quot;. After receiving his MA in Romance languages in 1906, he registered to write a PhD thesis on the jesters in Lope de Vega&#x27;s plays; a two-year Harrison fellowship covered his tuition and a $500 grant, with which he sailed again to Europe. He spent three weeks in Madrid in various libraries, including in the Royal Library. On 31 May 1906 he was standing outside the palace during the attempted assassination of King Alfonso and left the city for fear of being mistaken for an anarchist. After Spain he visited Paris and London, returning to the United States in July 1906. His first essay, &quot;Raphaelite Latin&quot;, was published in the &quot;Book News Monthly&quot; that September. He took courses in English in 1907, where he fell out with just about everyone, including the department head, Felix Schelling, with silly remarks during lectures and by winding an enormous tin watch very slowly while Schelling spoke. In the spring of 1907 he learned that his fellowship would not be renewed. Schelling told him he was wasting everyone&#x27;s time, and he left without finishing his doctorate.

===Teaching===

From September 1907 Pound taught French and Spanish at Wabash College, a Presbyterian college with 345 students in Crawfordsville, Indiana, which he called &quot;the sixth circle of hell&quot;. One former student remembered him as a breath of fresh air; another said he was &quot;exhibitionist, egotistic, self-centered and self-indulgent&quot;.

He was dismissed after a few months. Smoking was forbidden, but he would smoke cigarillos in his room in the same corridor as the president&#x27;s office. He was asked to leave the college in January 1908 when his landladies, Ida and Belle Hall, found a woman in his room. Shocked at having been expelled, he left for Europe soon after, sailing from New York in March on the RMS &quot;Slavonia&quot;.

==London (1908–1914)==
===&quot;A Lume Spento&quot;===
Pound arrived in Gibraltar on 23 March 1908, where he earned $15 a day working as a guide for an American family there and in Spain. After stops in Seville, Grenada, and Genoa, by the end of April he was in Venice, living over a bakery near the San Vio bridge. In the summer he decided to self-publish his first collection of 44 poems in the 72-page &quot;A Lume Spento&quot; (&quot;With Tapers Quenched&quot;), 150 copies of which were printed in July 1908. The title is from the third canto of Dante&#x27;s &quot;Purgatorio&quot;, alluding to the death of Manfred, King of Sicily. Pound dedicated the book to the Philadelphia artist William Brooke Smith, a friend from university who had recently died of tuberculosis.

In &quot;Canto LXXVI&quot; of &quot;The Pisan Cantos&quot;, he records that he considered throwing the proofs into the Grand Canal, abandoning the book and poetry altogether: &quot;by the soap-smooth stone posts where San Vio / meets with il Canal Grande / between Salviati and the house that was of Don Carlos / shd/I chuck the lot into the tide-water? / le bozze &quot;A Lume Spento&quot;/ / and by the column of Todero / shd/I shift to the other side / or wait 24 hours&quot;.

===Move to London===

In August 1908 Pound moved to London, carrying 60 copies of &quot;A Lume Spento&quot;. English poets such as Maurice Hewlett, Rudyard Kipling, and Alfred Tennyson had made a particular kind of Victorian verse—stirring, pompous, and propagandistic—popular. According to modernist scholar James Knapp, Pound rejected the idea of poetry as &quot;versified moral essay&quot;; he wanted to focus on the individual experience, the concrete rather than the abstract.

Pound at first stayed in a boarding house at 8 Duchess Street, near the British Museum Reading Room; he had met the landlady during his travels in Europe in 1906. He soon moved to Islington (cheaper at 12s 6d a week board and lodging), but his father sent him £4, and he was able to move back into central London, to 48 Langham Street, near Great Titchfield Street. The house sat across an alley from the Yorkshire Grey pub, which made an appearance in &quot;Canto LXXX&quot; (&quot;The Pisan Cantos&quot;), &quot;concerning the landlady&#x27;s &quot;doings&quot; / with a lodger unnamed / az waz near Gt Tichfield St. next door to the pub&quot;.

Pound persuaded the bookseller Elkin Mathews on Vigo Street to display &quot;A Lume Spento&quot;, and in an unsigned article on 26 November 1908, Pound reviewed it himself in the &quot;Evening Standard&quot;: &quot;The unseizable magic of poetry is in this queer paper book; and words are no good in describing it.&quot; The following month he self-published a second collection, &quot;A Quinzaine for this Yule&quot;. It was his first book to have commercial success, and Elkin Matthews had another 100 copies printed. In January and February 1909, after the death of John Churton Collins left a vacancy, Pound lectured for an hour a week in the evenings on &quot;The Development of Literature in Southern Europe&quot; at the Regent Street Polytechnic. Mornings might be spent in the British Museum Reading Room, followed by lunch at the Vienna Café on Oxford Street, where Pound first met Wyndham Lewis in 1910. &quot;There were mysterious figures / that emerged from recondite recesses / and ate at the WIENER CAFÉ&quot;. Ford Madox Ford described Pound as &quot;approach[ing] with the step of a dancer, making passes with a cane at an imaginary opponent&quot;:

He would wear trousers made of green billiard cloth, a pink coat, a blue shirt, a tie hand-painted by a Japanese friend, an immense sombrero, a flaming beard cut to a point, and a single, large blue earring.
===Meeting Dorothy Shakespear, &quot;Personae&quot;===
At a literary salon in 1909, Pound met the novelist Olivia Shakespear and later at the Shakespears&#x27; home at 12 Brunswick Gardens, Kensington, was introduced to her daughter, Dorothy, who became Pound&#x27;s wife in 1914. The critic Iris Barry described her as &quot;carrying herself delicately with the air, always, of a young Victorian lady out skating, and a profile as clear and lovely as that of a porcelain Kuan-yin&quot;. &quot;Listen to it—Ezra! Ezra!—And a third time—Ezra!&quot;, Dorothy wrote in her diary on 16 February 1909.

Pound mixed with the cream of London&#x27;s literary circle, including Hewlett, Laurence Binyon, Frederic Manning, Ernest Rhys, May Sinclair, Ellen Terry, George Bernard Shaw, Hilaire Belloc, T. E. Hulme, and F. S. Flint. Through the Shakespears, he was introduced to the poet W. B. Yeats, Olivia Shakespear&#x27;s former lover. He had already sent Yeats a copy of &quot;A Lume Spento&quot;, and Yeats had apparently found it &quot;charming&quot;. Pound wrote to William Carlos Williams on 3 February 1909: &quot;Am by way of falling into the crowd that does things here. London, deah old Lundon, is the place for poesy.&quot; According to Richard Aldington, London found Pound amusing. The newspapers interviewed him, and he was mentioned in &quot;Punch&quot; magazine, which on 23 June 1909 described &quot;Mr. Ezekiel Ton&quot; as &quot;the most remarkable thing in poetry since Robert Browning ... [blending] the imagery of the unfettered West, the vocabulary of Wardour Street, and the sinister abandon of Borgiac Italy&quot;.

In April 1909 Elkin Mathews published &quot;Personae of Ezra Pound&quot; (half the poems were from &quot;A Lume Spento&quot;) and in October a further 27 poems (16 new) as &quot;Exultations&quot;. Edward Thomas described &quot;Personae&quot; in &quot;English Review&quot; as &quot;full of human passion and natural magic&quot;. Rupert Brooke complained in the &quot;Cambridge Review&quot; that Pound had fallen under the influence of Walt Whitman, writing in &quot;unmetrical sprawling lengths that, in his hands, have nothing to commend them&quot;. But he did acknowledge that Pound had &quot;great talents&quot;.

In or around September, Pound moved into new rooms at Church Walk, off Kensington High Street, where he lived most of the time until 1914. He visited a friend, Walter Rummel, in Paris in March 1910 and was introduced to the American heiress and pianist Margaret Lanier Cravens. Although they had only just met, she offered to become a patron to the tune of $1,000 a year, and from then until her death in 1912 she apparently sent him money regularly.

===&quot;The Spirit of Romance&quot;, &quot;Canzoni&quot;, the &quot;New Age&quot;===
In June 1910 Pound returned for eight months to the United States; his arrival coincided with the publication in London of his first book of literary criticism, &quot;The Spirit of Romance&quot;, based on his lecture notes from the polytechnic. &quot;Patria Mia&quot;, his essays on the United States, were written at this time. In August he moved to New York, renting rooms on Waverly Place and Park Avenue South, facing Gramercy Square. Although he loved New York, he felt alienated by the commercialism and newcomers from Eastern and Southern Europe who were displacing the white Anglo-Saxon Protestants. The recently built New York Public Library Main Branch he found especially offensive. During this period his antisemitism became apparent; he referred in &quot;Patria Mia&quot; to the &quot;detestable qualities&quot; of Jews. After persuading his parents to finance his passage back to Europe, he sailed from New York on the RMS &quot;Mauretania&quot; on 22 February 1911. It was nearly 30 years—April 1939—before he visited the U.S. again.

After three days in London he went to Paris, where he worked on a new collection of poetry, &quot;Canzoni&quot; (1911), panned by the &quot;Westminster Gazette&quot; as &quot;affectation combined with pedantry&quot;. He wrote in Ford Madox Ford&#x27;s obituary that Ford had rolled on the floor with laughter at its &quot;stilted language&quot;. When he returned to London in August, he rented a room in Marylebone at 2A Granville Place, then shared a house at 39 Addison Road North, W11. By November A. R. Orage, editor of the socialist journal the &quot;New Age,&quot; had hired him to write a weekly column. Orage appears in &quot;The Cantos&quot; (Possum is T. S. Eliot): &quot;but the lot of &#x27;em, Yeats, Possum and Wyndham / had no ground beneath &#x27;em. / Orage had.&quot;

Pound contributed to the &quot;New Age&quot; from 30 November 1911 to 13 January 1921, attending editorial meetings in the basement of a grimy ABC tearoom in Chancery Lane. There and at other meetings he met Arnold Bennett, Cecil Chesterton, Beatrice Hastings, S. G. Hobson, Hulme, Katherine Mansfield, and H. G. Wells. In the &quot;New Age&quot; office in 1918, he also met C. H. Douglas, a British engineer who was developing his economic theory of social credit, which Pound found attractive. Douglas reportedly believed that Jews were a problem and needed to abandon a Messianic view of themselves as the &quot;dominating race&quot;. According to Colin Holmes, the &quot;New Age&quot; itself published antisemitic material. It was within this environment, not in Italy, according to Tim Redman, that Pound first encountered antisemitic ideas about &quot;usury&quot;. &quot;In Douglas&#x27;s program,&quot; Christopher Hitchens wrote in 2008, &quot;Pound had found his true muse: a blend of folkloric Celtic twilight with a paranoid hatred of the money economy and a dire suspicion about an ancient faith.&quot;

===&quot;Poetry&quot; magazine, &quot;Ripostes&quot;, Imagism===
In May 1911, H.D. left Philadelphia for London. She was accompanied by the poet Frances Gregg and Gregg&#x27;s mother; when they returned in September, H.D. stayed on. Pound introduced her to his friends, including Aldington, who became her husband in 1913. Before that, the three of them lived in Church Walk, Kensington—Pound at no. 10, Aldington at no. 8, and Doolittle at no. 6—and worked daily in the British Museum Reading Room.

At the British Museum, Laurence Binyon introduced Pound to the East Asian artistic and literary concepts Pound used in his later poetry, including Japanese ukiyo-e prints. The visitors&#x27; book first shows Pound in the Prints and Drawings Students&#x27; Room (known as the Print Room) on 9 February 1909, and later in 1912 and 1913, with Dorothy Shakespear, examining Chinese and Japanese art. Pound was working at the time on the poems that became &quot;Ripostes&quot; (1912), trying to move away from his earlier work. &quot;I hadn&#x27;t in 1910 made a language&quot;, he wrote years later. &quot;I don&#x27;t mean a language to use, but even a language to think in.&quot;

In August 1912 Harriet Monroe hired Pound as foreign correspondent of &quot;Poetry: A Magazine of Verse&quot;, a new magazine in Chicago. The first edition, in October, featured two of his own poems—&quot;To Whistler, American&quot; and &quot;Middle Aged&quot;. Also that month Stephen Swift and Co. in London published &quot;Ripostes of Ezra Pound&quot;, a collection of 25 poems, including a contentious translation of &quot;The Seafarer&quot;, that demonstrate his shift toward minimalist language. In addition to Pound&#x27;s work, the collection contains five poems by Hulme.

&quot;Ripostes&quot; includes the first mention of &quot;Les Imagistes&quot;: &quot;As for the future, &quot;Les Imagistes&quot;, the descendants of the forgotten school of 1909, have that in their keeping.&quot; While in the British Museum tearoom one afternoon with Doolittle and Aldington, Pound edited one of Doolittle&#x27;s poems and wrote &quot;H.D. Imagiste&quot; underneath; he described this later as the founding of a movement in poetry, &quot;Imagisme&quot;. In the spring or early summer of 1912, they agreed, Pound wrote in 1918, on three principles:
&quot;Poetry&quot; published Pound&#x27;s &quot;A Few Don&#x27;ts by an Imagist&quot; in March 1913. Superfluous words, particularly adjectives, should be avoided, as well as expressions like &quot;dim lands of peace&quot;. He wrote: &quot;It dulls the image. It mixes an abstraction with the concrete. It comes from the writer&#x27;s not realizing that the natural object is always the &quot;adequate&quot; symbol.&quot; Poets should &quot;go in fear of abstractions&quot;. He wanted &quot;to stand for hard light, clear edges&quot;, he wrote later to Amy Lowell.

An example of Imagist poetry is Pound&#x27;s &quot;In a Station of the Metro&quot;, published in &quot;Poetry&quot; in April 1913 and inspired by an experience on the Paris Underground. &quot;I got out of a train at, I think, La Concorde&quot;, he wrote in &quot;How I began&quot; in &quot;T. P.&#x27;s Weekly&quot; on 6 June 1913, &quot;and in the jostle I saw a beautiful face, and then, turning suddenly, another and another, and then a beautiful child&#x27;s face, and then another beautiful face. All that day I tried to find words for what this made me feel. ... I could get nothing but spots of colour.&quot; A year later he reduced it to its essence in the style of a Japanese haiku.
===James Joyce, Pound&#x27;s unpopularity===

In the summer of 1913 Pound became literary editor of &quot;The Egoist&quot;, a journal founded by the suffragette Dora Marsden. At the suggestion of W. B. Yeats, Pound encouraged James Joyce in December of that year to submit his work. The previous month Yeats, whose eyesight was failing, had rented Stone Cottage in Coleman&#x27;s Hatch, Sussex, inviting Pound to accompany him as his secretary, and it was during this visit that Yeats introduced Pound to Joyce&#x27;s &quot;Chamber Music&quot; and his &quot;I hear an Army Charging Upon the Land&quot;. This was the first of three winters Pound and Yeats spent at Stone Cottage, including two with Dorothy after she and Ezra married in 1914. &quot;Canto LXXXIII&quot; records a visit: &quot;so that I recalled the noise in the chimney / as it were the wind in the chimney / but was in reality Uncle William / downstairs composing / that had made a great Peeeeacock / in the proide ov his oiye.&quot;

In his reply to Pound, Joyce gave permission to use &quot;I hear an Army&quot; and enclosed &quot;Dubliners&quot; and the first chapter of his novel &quot;A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man&quot;. Pound wrote to Joyce that the novel was &quot;damn fine stuff&quot;. Harriet Shaw Weaver accepted it for &quot;The Egoist&quot;, which serialized it from 2 February 1914, despite the printers objecting to words like &quot;fart&quot; and &quot;ballocks&quot;, and fearing prosecution over Stephen Dedalus&#x27;s thoughts about prostitutes. On the basis of the serialization, the publisher that had rejected &quot;Dubliners&quot; reconsidered. Joyce wrote to Yeats: &quot;I can never thank you enough for having brought me into relation with your friend Ezra Pound who is indeed a miracle worker.&quot;

Around this time, Pound&#x27;s articles in the &quot;New Age&quot; began to make him unpopular, to the alarm of Orage. Samuel Putnam knew Pound in Paris in the 1920s and described him as stubborn, contrary, cantankerous, bossy, touchy, and &quot;devoid of humor&quot;; he was &quot;an American small-towner&quot;, in Putnam&#x27;s view. His attitude caused him trouble in both London and Paris. English women, with their &quot;preponderantly derivative&quot; minds, were inferior to American women who had minds of their own, he wrote in the &quot;New Age&quot;. The English sense of what was right was based on respect for property, not morality. &quot;[P]erched on the rotten shell of a crumbling empire&quot;, London had lost its energy. England&#x27;s best authors—Conrad, Hudson, James, and Yeats—were not English. English writers and critics were ignorant, he wrote in 1913.

===Marriage===
Ezra and Dorothy were married on 20 April 1914 at St Mary Abbots in Kensington, the Shakespears&#x27; parish church, despite opposition from her parents, who worried about Ezra&#x27;s income. His concession to marry in church had helped. Dorothy&#x27;s annual income was £50, with another £150 from her family, and Ezra&#x27;s was £200. Her father, Henry Hope Shakespear, had him prepare a financial statement in 1911, which showed that his main source of income was his father. After the wedding the couple moved into an apartment with no bathroom at 5 Holland Place Chambers, Kensington, next door to the newly wed H.D. and Aldington. This arrangement did not last. H.D. had been alarmed to find Ezra looking for a place to live outside the apartment building the day before his wedding. Once Dorothy and Ezra had moved into the building, Ezra would arrive unannounced at H.D.&#x27;s to discuss his writing, a habit that upset her, in part because his writing touched on private aspects of their relationship. She and Aldington decided to move several miles away to Hampstead.

===&quot;Des Imagistes&quot;, dispute with Amy Lowell===
The appearance of &quot;Des Imagistes, An Anthology&quot; (1914), edited by Pound, &quot;confirmed the importance&quot; of &quot;Imagisme&quot;, according to Ira Nadel. Published in the American magazine &quot;The Glebe&quot; in February 1914 and the following month as a book, it was the first of five Imagist anthologies and the only one to contain work by Pound. It included ten poems by Richard Aldington, seven by H. D., followed by Flint, Skipwith Cannell, Lowell, Carlos Williams, James Joyce (&quot;I Hear an Army&quot;, not an example of Imagism), six by Pound, then Hueffer (as he was known as the time), Allen Upward and John Cournos.

Shortly after its publication, an advertisement for Lewis&#x27;s new magazine, &quot;Blast&quot; promised it would cover &quot;Cubism, Futurism, Imagisme and all Vital Forms of Modern Art.&quot; Described by Pound as &quot;mostly a painter&#x27;s magazine with me to do the poems,&quot; and bearing the heavy influence of Futurism, &quot;Blast&quot; was the magazine of a London art movement formed by Lewis with Pound&#x27;s collaboration. Pound named the movement Vorticism. Vorticism included all the arts, and in &quot;Blast&quot; &quot;the Imagist propaganda merged into the Vorticist.&quot;
In the end, &quot;Blast&quot; was published only twice, in 1914 and 1915. In June 1914 &quot;The Times&quot; announced Lewis&#x27;s new Rebel Arts Centre for Vorticist art at 38 Great Ormond Street.  

Lowell, who was to win the Pulitzer Prize for Poetry in 1926, was unhappy that only one of her poems had appeared in &quot;Des Imagistes&quot;. She arrived in London in July 1914 to attend two dinners at the Dieudonné restaurant in Ryder Street, the first to celebrate the publication of &quot;Blast&quot; and the second, on 17 July, the publication of &quot;Des Imagistes&quot;. At the second, Ford Madox Hueffer announced that he had been an Imagiste long before Lowell and Pound, and that he doubted their qualifications; only Aldington and H.D. could lay claim to the title, in his view. During the subsequent row, Pound left the table and returned with a tin bathtub on his head, suggesting it as a symbol of what he called &quot;Les Nagistes&quot;, a school created by Lowell&#x27;s poem &quot;In a Garden&quot;, which ends with &quot;Night, and the water, and you in your whiteness, bathing!&quot; Apparently his behavior helped Lowell win people over to her point of view, as did her offer to fund future work.

H.D. and Aldington were moving away from Pound&#x27;s understanding of &quot;Imagisme&quot; anyway, as he aligned himself with Lewis&#x27;s ideas. Lowell agreed to finance an annual anthology of &quot;Imagiste&quot; poets, but she insisted on democracy; according to Aldington, she &quot;proposed a Boston Tea Party for Ezra&quot; and an end to his despotic rule. Upset at Lowell, Pound began to call &quot;Imagisme&quot; &quot;Amygism&quot;; he declared the movement dead and asked the group not to call themselves &quot;Imagistes&quot;. Not accepting that it was Pound&#x27;s invention, they refused and Anglicized the term.

==World War I and leaving England (1914–1921)==
===Meeting Eliot, &quot;Cathay&quot;, translation===
When war was declared in August 1914, opportunities for writers were immediately reduced; poems were now expected to be patriotic. Pound&#x27;s income from October 1914 to October 1915 was £42.10.0, apparently five times less than the year before.

On 22 September 1914 T. S. Eliot traveled from Merton College, Oxford, with an introduction from Conrad Aiken, to have Pound read Eliot&#x27;s unpublished &quot;The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock&quot;. Pound wrote to Harriet Monroe, editor of &quot;Poetry&quot;, on 30 September to say that Eliot—who was at Oxford on a fellowship from Harvard—had &quot;sent in the best poem I have yet had or seen from an American ... He has actually trained himself &quot;and&quot; modernized himself &quot;on his own&quot;.&quot; Monroe did not like Prufrock&#x27;s &quot;very European world-weariness&quot;, according to Humphrey Carpenter, but she published it anyway, in June 1915.

The 1915 poem &quot;Cathay&quot; contains 25 examples of Classical Chinese poetry that Pound translated into English based on the notes of the Orientalist Ernest Fenollosa. Fenollosa&#x27;s widow, Mary McNeill Fenollosa, had given Pound her husband&#x27;s notes in 1913, after Laurence Binyon introduced them. Michael Alexander saw &quot;Cathay&quot; as the most attractive of Pound&#x27;s work. There is a debate about whether the poems should be viewed primarily as translations or as contributions to Imagism and the modernization of English poetry. English professor Steven Yao argued that &quot;Cathay&quot; shows that translation does not need a thorough knowledge of the source language.

Pound&#x27;s translations from Old English, Latin, Italian, French and Chinese were highly disputed. According to Alexander, they made him more unpopular in some circles than the treason charge. Robert Graves wrote in 1955: &quot;[Pound] knew little Latin, yet he translated Propertius; and less Greek, but he translated Alcaeus; and still less Anglo-Saxon, yet he translated &quot;The Seafarer&quot;. I once asked Arthur Waley how much Chinese Pound knew; Waley shook his head despondently.&quot;

Pound was devastated when Henri Gaudier-Brzeska, from whom he had commissioned a sculpture of himself two years earlier, was killed in the trenches in June 1915. In response, he published &quot;Gaudier-Brzeska: A Memoir&quot; (1916), writing &quot;A great spirit has been among us, and a great artist has gone.&quot; Two months before he died, Gaudier-Brzeska had written to Pound to say that he kept &quot;Cathay&quot; in his pocket &quot;to put courage in my fellows&quot;.

===&quot;Three Cantos&quot;, resignation from &quot;Poetry&quot;===
After the publication of &quot;Cathay&quot;, Pound mentioned that he was working on a long poem. He described it in September 1915 as a &quot;cryselephantine poem of immeasurable length which will occupy me for the next four decades unless it becomes a bore&quot;. In February 1916, when Pound was 30, the poet Carl Sandburg paid tribute to him in &quot;Poetry&quot; magazine. Pound &quot;stains darkly and touches softly&quot;, he wrote:

All talk on modern poetry, by people who know, ends with dragging in Ezra Pound somewhere. He may be named only to be cursed as wanton and mocker, poseur, trifler and vagrant. Or he may be classed as filling a niche today like that of Keats in a preceding epoch. The point is, he will be mentioned. ...In the cool and purple meantime, Pound goes ahead producing new poems having the slogan, &quot;Guts and Efficiency,&quot; emblazoned above his daily program of work. His genius runs to various schools and styles. He acquires traits and then throws them away. One characteristic is that he has no characteristics. He is a new roamer of the beautiful, a new fetcher of wild shapes, in each new handful of writings offered us.

In June, July and August 1917 Pound had the first three cantos published, as &quot;Three Cantos&quot;, in &quot;Poetry&quot;. He was now a regular contributor to three literary magazines. From 1917 he wrote music reviews for the &quot;New Age&quot; as William Atheling and art reviews as B. H. Dias. In May 1917 Margaret Anderson hired him as foreign editor of the &quot;Little Review&quot;. He also wrote weekly pieces for &quot;The Egoist&quot; and the &quot;Little Review&quot;; many of the latter complained about provincialism, which included the ringing of church bells. (When Pound lived near St Mary Abbots he had &quot;engaged in a fierce, guerrilla warfare of letters&quot; about the bells with the vicar, Reverend R. E. Pennefather, according to Richard Aldington.) The volume of writing exhausted him. In 1918, after a bout of illness which was presumably the Spanish flu, he decided to stop writing for the &quot;Little Review&quot;. He had asked the publisher for a raise to hire a typist, the 23-year-old Iseult Gonne, causing rumors that they were having an affair, but he was turned down.

A suspicion arose in June 1918 that Pound himself had written an article in &quot;The Egoist&quot; praising his own work, and it was clear from the response that he had acquired enemies. The poet F. S. Flint told &quot;The Egoist&quot; editor that &quot;we are all tired of Mr. Pound&quot;. British literary circles were &quot;tired of his antics&quot; and of him &quot;puffing and swelling himself and his friends&quot;, Flint wrote. &quot;His work has deteriorated from book to book; his manners have become more and more offensive; and we wish he would go back to America.&quot;

The March 1919 issue of &quot;Poetry&quot; published Pound&#x27;s &quot;Poems from the Propertius Series&quot;, which appeared to be a translation of the Latin poet Sextus Propertius. Harriet Monroe, editor of &quot;Poetry&quot;, published a letter in April 1919 from a professor of Latin, W. G. Hale, who found &quot;about three-score errors&quot; in the text; he said Pound was &quot;incredibly ignorant of Latin&quot;, that &quot;much of what he makes his author say is unintelligible&quot;, and that &quot;If Mr. Pound were a professor of Latin, there would be nothing left for him but suicide&quot; (adding &quot;I do not counsel this&quot;). Pound replied to Monroe: &quot;Cat-piss and porcupines!! The thing is no more a translation than my &#x27;Altaforte&#x27; is a translation, or than Fitzgerald&#x27;s Omar is a translation.&quot; His letter ended &quot;In final commiseration&quot;. Monroe interpreted his silence after that as his resignation from &quot;Poetry&quot; magazine.

===&quot;Hugh Selwyn Mauberley&quot;===
By 1919 Pound felt there was no reason to stay in England. He had become &quot;violently hostile&quot; to England, according to Aldington, feeling he was being &quot;frozen out of everything&quot; except the &quot;New Age&quot;, and concluding that the British were insensitive to &quot;mental agility in any and every form&quot;. He had &quot;muffed his chances of becoming literary director of London—to which he undoubtedly aspired,&quot; Aldington wrote in 1941, &quot;by his own enormous conceit, folly, and bad manners.&quot;

Published by John Rodker&#x27;s The Ovid Press in June 1920, Pound&#x27;s poem &quot;Hugh Selwyn Mauberley&quot; marked his farewell to London, and by December the Pounds were subletting their apartment and preparing to move to France. Consisting of 18 short parts, &quot;Mauberley&quot; describes a poet whose life has become sterile and meaningless. It begins with a satirical analysis of the London literary scene before turning to social criticism, economics, and the war. Here the word &quot;usury&quot; first appears in his work. Just as Eliot denied he was Prufrock, Pound denied he was Mauberley. In 1932 the critic F. R. Leavis, then director of studies in English at Downing College, Cambridge, called &quot;Mauberley&quot; &quot;great poetry, at once traditional and original. Mr. Pound&#x27;s standing as a poet rests on it, and rests securely&quot;.

On 13 January 1921 Orage wrote in the &quot;New Age&quot;: &quot;Mr. Pound has shaken the dust of London from his feet with not too emphatic a gesture of disgust, but, at least, without gratitude to this country. ... [He] has been an exhilarating influence for culture in England; he has left his mark upon more than one of the arts, upon literature, music, poetry and sculpture; and quite a number of men and movements owe their initiation to his self-sacrificing stimulus ...&quot;

With all this, however, Mr. Pound, like so many others who have striven for advancement of intelligence and culture in England, has made more enemies than friends, and far more powerful enemies than friends. Much of the Press has been deliberately closed by cabal to him; his books have for some time been ignored or written down; and he himself has been compelled to live on much less than would support a navvy. His fate, as I have said, is not unusual ... Taken by and large, England hates men of culture until they are dead.

==Paris (1921–1924)==
===Meeting Hemingway, editing &quot;The Waste Land&quot;===
The Pounds settled in Paris around April 1921 and in December moved to an inexpensive ground-floor apartment at 70 &quot;bis&quot; . Pound became friendly with Marcel Duchamp, Fernand Léger, Tristan Tzara, and others of the Dada and Surrealist movements, as well as Basil Bunting. He was introduced to the American writer Gertrude Stein, who was living in Paris. She wrote years later that she liked him but did not find him amusing; he was &quot;a village explainer, excellent if you were a village, but if you were not, not&quot;.

Pound&#x27;s collection &quot;Poems 1918–1921&quot; was published in New York by Boni and Liveright in 1921. In December that year Ernest Hemingway, then aged 22, moved to Paris with his wife, Hadley Richardson, and letters of introduction from Sherwood Anderson. In February 1922 the Hemingways visited the Pounds for tea. Although Pound was 14 years older, the men became friends; Hemingway assumed the status of pupil and asked Pound to edit his short stories. Pound introduced him to his contacts, including Lewis, Ford, John Peale Bishop, Malcolm Cowley, and Derek Patmore, while Hemingway tried to teach Pound to box. Unlike Hemingway, Pound was not a drinker and preferred to spend his time in salons or building furniture for his apartment and bookshelves for Sylvia Beach&#x27;s Shakespeare and Company bookstore.
Eliot sent Pound the manuscript of &quot;The Waste Land&quot; in 1922. Pound edited it with comments like &quot;make up yr. mind&quot;, and reduced it by about half. Eliot wrote in 1946: &quot;I should like to think that the manuscript, with the suppressed passages, had disappeared irrecoverably; yet, on the other hand, I should wish the blue pencilling on it to be preserved as irrefutable evidence of Pound&#x27;s critical genius.&quot; His dedication in &quot;The Waste Land&quot; was &quot;For Ezra Pound / &quot;il miglior fabbro&quot;&quot; (the &quot;better craftsman&quot;), from Canto 26 of Dante&#x27;s &quot;Purgatorio&quot;.

===Meeting Olga Rudge===
Pound was 36 when he met the 26-year-old American violinist Olga Rudge in Paris in the summer of 1922. They were introduced at a salon hosted by the American heiress Natalie Barney at her 300-year-old house at 20 Rue Jacob, near the Boulevard Saint-Germain. The two moved in different social circles: Rudge was the daughter of a wealthy Youngstown, Ohio, steel family, living in her mother&#x27;s Parisian apartment on the Right Bank, socializing with aristocrats, while Pound&#x27;s friends were mostly impoverished writers of the Left Bank.

===Restarting &quot;The Cantos&quot;===

Twice the length of &quot;Paradise Lost&quot; and 50 times longer than &quot;The Waste Land&quot;, Pound&#x27;s 800-page &quot;The Cantos&quot; (&quot;Canto I&quot; to &quot;Canto CXVI&quot;, c. 1917–1962) became his life&#x27;s work. His obituary in &quot;The Times&quot; described it as not a great poem, because of the lack of structure, but a great improvisation: &quot;[T]he exasperating form permits the occasional, and in the early &quot;Cantos&quot; and in &quot;The Pisan Cantos&quot; not so occasional, irruption of passages of great poetry, hot and burning lava breaking through the cracks in piles of boring scree.&quot;

The first three cantos had been published in &quot;Poetry&quot; magazine in June, July, and August 1917, but in 1922 Pound abandoned most of his work and began again. The early cantos, the &quot;Ur-Cantos&quot;, became &quot;Canto I&quot; of the new work. In letters to his father in 1924 and 1927, Pound said &quot;The Cantos&quot; was like the medley of voices you hear when you turn the radio dial, and &quot;[r]ather like or unlike subject and response and counter subject in fugue&quot;:
:A.A. Live man goes down into world of Dead.
:C.B. The &#x27;repeat in history&#x27;.
:B.C. The &#x27;magic moment&#x27; or moment of metamorphosis, bust thru from quotidien into &#x27;divine or permanent world.&#x27; Gods., etc.

Alluding to American, European and Oriental art, history and literature, the work is also autobiographical. In the view of Pound scholar Carroll F. Terrell, it is a great religious poem, describing humanity&#x27;s journey from hell to paradise, a &quot;revelation of how divinity is manifested in the universe ... the kind of intelligence that makes the cherrystone become a cherry tree.&quot; The poet Allen Tate argued in 1949 that it is &quot;about nothing at all ... a voice but no subject&quot;. Responding to &quot;A Draft of XXX Cantos&quot; (1930), F. R. Leavis criticized its &quot;lack of form, grammar, principle and direction&quot;. The lack of form became a common criticism. Pound wrote in the final complete canto, &quot;Canto CXVI&quot; (116, first published in the &quot;Paris Review&quot; in 1962), that he could not &quot;make it cohere&quot;, although a few lines later, referring to the universe: &quot;it coheres all right / even if my notes do not cohere.&quot; According to Pound scholar Walter Baumann, the demigod of &quot;Canto CXVI&quot;—&quot;And I am not a demigod&quot;—is Heracles of Sophocles&#x27; &quot;Women of Trachis&quot; (450–425 BCE), who exclaims before he dies (based on Pound&#x27;s translation): &quot;SPLENDOUR, / IT ALL COHERES&quot;. &quot;Canto CXVI&quot; ends with the lines &quot;a little light, like a rushlight / to lead back to splendour.&quot;

==Italy (1924–1939)==
===Birth of the children===
The Pounds were unhappy in Paris. Dorothy complained about the winters and Ezra&#x27;s health was poor. At one dinner in the Place de l&#x27;Odéon, a Surrealist guest high on drugs had tried to stab Pound in the back; Robert McAlmon had wrestled with the attacker, and the guests had managed to leave before the police arrived. For Pound the event underlined that their time in France was over. They decided to move to a quieter place, leaving in October 1924 for the seaside town of Rapallo in northern Italy. Hemingway wrote in a letter that Pound had &quot;indulged in a small nervous breakdown&quot; during the packing, leading to two days at the American Hospital of Paris in Neuilly. During this period the Pounds lived on Dorothy&#x27;s income, supplemented by dividends from stock she had invested in.
Pregnant by Pound, Olga Rudge followed the couple to Italy, and in July 1925 she gave birth to a daughter, Maria, in a hospital in Brixen (Italian : Bressanone). Rudge and Pound placed the baby with a German-speaking peasant woman in Gais, South Tyrol, whose own child had died and who agreed to raise Maria for 200 lire a month. Pound reportedly believed that artists ought not to have children, because in his view motherhood ruined women. According to Hadley Richardson, he took her aside before she and Hemingway left Paris for Toronto to have their child, telling her: &quot;Well, I might as well say goodbye to you here and now because [the baby] is going to change you completely.&quot;

At the end of December 1925 Dorothy went on holiday to Egypt, returning on 1 March, and in May the Pounds and Olga Rudge left Rapallo for Paris to attend a semi-private concert performance at the Salle Pleyel of &quot;Le Testament de Villon&quot;, a one-act opera Pound had composed (&quot;nearly tuneless&quot;, according to Carpenter) with the musicians Agnes Bedford and George Antheil. Pound had hired two singers for the performance; Rudge was on violin, Pound played percussion, and Joyce, Eliot and Hemingway were in the audience.

The couple stayed on in Paris after the performance; Dorothy was pregnant and wanted the baby to be born at the American hospital. Hemingway accompanied her there in a taxi for the birth of a son, Omar Pound, on 10 September 1926. (Ezra was an admirer of Fitzgerald&#x27;s translation of Omar Khayyam.) Ezra signed the birth certificate the following day at Neuilly town hall and wrote to his father, &quot;next generation (male) arrived. Both D &amp; it appear to be doing well.&quot; Ezra ended up in the American hospital himself for tests and, he told Olga, a &quot;small operation&quot;. Dorothy took Omar to England, where she stayed for a year and thereafter visited him every summer. He was sent to live at first in Felpham, Sussex, with a former superintendent of Norland College, which trains nannies, and later became a boarder at Charterhouse. When Dorothy was in England with Omar during the summers, Ezra would spend the time with Olga. Olga&#x27;s father helped her buy a house in Venice in 1928, and from 1930 she also rented the top floor of a house in Sant&#x27;Ambrogio, Caso 60, near the Pounds in Rapallo.

===&quot;The Exile&quot;, &quot;Dial&quot; poetry award===

In 1925 a new literary magazine, &quot;This Quarter&quot;, dedicated its first issue to Pound, including tributes from Hemingway and Joyce. In Hemingway&#x27;s contribution, &quot;Homage to Ezra&quot;, he wrote that Pound &quot;devotes perhaps one fifth of his working time to writing poetry and in this twenty per cent of effort writes a large and distinguished share of the really great poetry that has been written by any American living or dead—or any Englishman living or dead or any Irishman who ever wrote English.&quot;
With the rest of his time he tries to advance the fortunes, both material and artistic, of his friends. He defends them when they are attacked, he gets them into magazines and out of jail. He loans them money. He sells their pictures. He arranges concerts for them. He writes articles about them. He introduces them to wealthy women. He gets publishers to take their books. He sits up all night with them when they claim to be dying and he witnesses their wills. He advances them hospital expenses and dissuades them from suicide. And in the end a few of them refrain from knifing him at the first opportunity.

Against Hemingway&#x27;s positive view of Pound, Richard Aldington told Amy Lowell that year that Pound had been almost forgotten in England: &quot;as the rest of us go up, he goes down&quot;, he wrote. In the U.S., Pound won the $2,000 &quot;Dial&quot; poetry award in 1927 for his translation of the Confucian classic &quot;Great Learning&quot;. Using the prize money, he launched his own literary magazine, &quot;The Exile&quot;, in March, but only four issues appeared. It did well in the first year, with contributions from Hemingway, E. E. Cummings, Basil Bunting, Yeats, William Carlos Williams, and Robert McAlmon. Some of the poorest work consisted of Pound&#x27;s rambling editorials on Confucianism or in praise of Lenin, according to biographer J. J. Wilhelm. His parents visited him in Rapallo that year, seeing him for the first time since 1914. His father had retired, so they moved to Rapallo themselves, taking a small house, Villa Raggio, on a hill above the town.

===Antisemitism, social credit===
Pound&#x27;s antisemitism can be traced to at least 1910, when he wrote in &quot;Patria Mia&quot;, his essays for the &quot;New Age&quot;: &quot;The Jew alone can retain his detestable qualities, despite climatic conditions.&quot; The sentence was removed from the 1950 edition. In 1922 he apparently disliked that so many Jews were contributing to &quot;The Dial&quot;, and in 1939, when he read his poetry at Harvard, he was said to have included antisemitic poems in the program because he believed there were Jews in the audience.

A friend of Pound&#x27;s, the writer Lina Caico, wrote to him in March 1937 asking him to use his musical contacts to help a German-Jewish pianist in Berlin who did not have enough money to live on because of the Nuremberg Laws. Normally willing to help fellow artists, Pound replied (at length): &quot;You hit a nice sore spot ... Let her try Rothschild and some of the bastards who are murdering 10 million anglo saxons in England.&quot; He nevertheless denied being an antisemite; he said he liked Spinoza, Montaigne, and Alexander del Mar. &quot;What I am driving at&quot;, he wrote to Jackson Mac Low, &quot;is that some kike might manage to pin an antisem label on me IF he neglected the mass of my writing.&quot;

Pound came to believe that World War I had been caused by finance capitalism, which he called &quot;usury&quot;, and that the Jews had been to blame. He believed the solution lay in C. H. Douglas&#x27;s idea of social credit. Pound several times used the term &quot;Leihkapital&quot; (loan capital), equating it with Jews. Hitler had used the same term in &quot;Mein Kampf&quot; (1926). &quot;Your enemy is Das Leihkapital,&quot; Pound wrote in a 1942 radio script aimed at the UK, &quot;international, wandering Loan Capital. Your enemy is not Germany, your enemy is money on loan. And it would be better to be infected with typhus ... than to be infected with this blindness which prevents you from understanding HOW you are undermined ... The big Jew is so bound up with this Leihkapital that no one is able to unscramble that omelet.&quot; The argument ran that without &quot;usury&quot; and Jews, there would be no class conflict.

In addition to presenting his economic ideas in hundreds of articles and in &quot;The Cantos&quot;, Pound wrote more than 1,000 letters a year throughout the 1930s. From 1932, he wrote 180 articles for &quot;The New English Weekly&quot;, a social-credit journal founded by A. R. Orage, and 60 for &quot;Il Mare&quot;, a Rapallo newspaper. He wrote to Bill Bird that the press in Paris was controlled by the Comité des forges. He also came under the influence of Charles Maurras, who led the far-right &quot;Action Française&quot;.

===Meeting Mussolini===

In December 1932 Pound requested a meeting with Mussolini after being hired to work on a film script about Italian fascism. Pound had asked to see Mussolini previously—Olga Rudge had played privately for Mussolini on 19 February 1927—but this time he was given an audience. They met on 30 January 1933 at the Palazzo Venezia in Rome, the day Hitler was appointed Chancellor of Germany.

When Pound handed Mussolini a copy of &quot;A Draft of XXX Cantos&quot;, Mussolini reportedly said of a passage Pound highlighted that it was not English. Pound said: &quot;No, it&#x27;s my idea of the way a continental Jew would speak English&quot;, to which Mussolini replied &quot;How entertaining&quot; (&quot;divertente&quot;). Pound tried to discuss an 18-point draft of his economic theories. (Daniel Swift writes that this story has been &quot;told and retold, and in each version, the details shift&quot;.) Pound recorded the meeting in &quot;Canto XLI&quot;.

Pound wrote to C. H. Douglas that he had &quot;never met anyone who seemed to &quot;get&quot; my ideas so quickly as the boss&quot;. The meeting left him feeling that he had become a person of influence, Redman writes, someone who had been consulted by a head of state. When he returned to Rapallo, he was greeted at the station by the town band.

Immediately after the meeting Pound began writing &quot;The ABC of Economics&quot; and &quot;Jefferson and/or Mussolini: L&#x27;Idea Statale Fascism as I Have Seen It&quot; (1935). The latter was ready by the end of February, although he had trouble finding a publisher. In 1942 Pound told Italy&#x27;s Royal Finance Office that he had written the book for propaganda purposes in Italy&#x27;s interests. He wrote articles praising Mussolini and fascism for T. S. Eliot&#x27;s &quot;The Criterion&quot; in July 1933, the &quot;New York World Telegram&quot; in November 1933, the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; on 9 April 1934, and in 65 articles for the &quot;British-Italian Bulletin&quot;, published by the Italian Embassy in London.

Pound&#x27;s antisemitism deepened with the introduction in Italy of the racial laws in 1938, preceded by the publication in July that year of the Manifesto of Race. Mussolini instituted restrictions against Jews, who had to register. Foreign Jews lost their Italian citizenship, and on 18 September 1938 Mussolini declared Judaism &quot;an irreconcilable enemy of fascism&quot;.

===Visit to America===

When Olivia Shakespear died in October 1938 in London, Dorothy asked Ezra to organize the funeral, where he saw their 12-year-old son, Omar, for the first time in eight years. He visited Eliot and Wyndham Lewis, who produced a famous portrait of Pound reclining.

Believing he could stop America&#x27;s involvement in World War II, Pound sailed for New York in April 1939 on the SS &quot;Rex&quot; in a first-class suite. Giving interviews on the deck in a tweed jacket, he told reporters that Mussolini wanted peace. In Washington, D.C., he attended a session of Congress, sitting in a section of the gallery reserved for relatives (because of Thaddeus Coleman Pound). He lobbied senators and congressmen, had lunch with the Polish ambassador, warning him not to trust the English or Winston Churchill, and asked to see the President but was told it could not be done.

He took part in a poetry reading at Harvard, where he agreed to be recorded by the Department of Speech, and in July he received an honorary doctorate from Hamilton College, along with the radio commentator H. V. Kaltenborn. Kaltenborn, whom Pound referred to at the time as Kaltenstein, gave an anti-fascist speech after lunch (&quot;dictatorships shall die, but democracies shall live&quot;), which Pound interrupted loudly to the point where, according to one account, the college president had to intervene. Pound described this years later to Wyndham Lewis: &quot;That was a music hall day, with a stage set/ only at a Kawledg Komencement wd/ one git in mouth-shot at that sort of wind-bag/ that fahrt Kaltenbourne.&quot; Pound sailed back to Italy a few days later on the SS &quot;Conte di Savoia&quot;.

Between May and September 1939 Pound wrote 12 articles for the &quot;Japan Times&quot; (he became their &quot;Italian correspondent&quot;), which included the claim that &quot;Democracy is now currently defined in Europe as a &#x27;country run by Jews. He discussed the &quot;essential fairness of Hitler&#x27;s war aims&quot; and wrote that Churchill was a senile front for the Rothschilds.

==World War II and radio broadcasts (1939–1945)==
===Letter-writing campaign===

When war broke out in September 1939, Pound began a letter-writing campaign to the politicians he had petitioned months earlier. On 18 June 1940, after the fall of France, he wrote to Senator Burton K. Wheeler: &quot;I have read a regulation that only those foreigners are to be admitted to the U.S. who are deemed to be useful etc/. The dirtiest jews from Paris, Blum??&quot; He explained that they were all a pox. To his publisher, James Laughlin, he wrote that &quot;Roosevelt represents Jewry&quot; and signed off with &quot;Heil Hitler&quot;. He began calling Roosevelt &quot;Jewsfeldt&quot; or &quot;Stinky Rooosenstein&quot;. In &quot;Meridiano di Roma&quot; he compared Hitler and Mussolini to Confucius. In Oswald Mosley&#x27;s newspaper, &quot;Action&quot;, he wrote that the English were &quot;a slave race governed by the House of Rothschild since Waterloo&quot;. By May 1940, according to the historian Matthew Feldman, the British government regarded Pound as &quot;a principal supplier of information to the BUF [British Union of Fascists] from abroad&quot;. His literary agent in New York, John J. Slocum, urged him to return to writing poetry and literary criticism; instead, Pound sent Slocum political manifestos, which he declined to attempt to publish in the United States.

===Radio broadcasts===

Between 23 January 1941 and 28 March 1945, including during the Holocaust in Italy, Pound recorded or composed hundreds of broadcasts for Italian radio, mostly for EIAR (Radio Rome) and later for a radio station in the Italian Social Republic, a puppet state of Nazi Germany in northern and central Italy. Broadcast in English, and sometimes in Italian, German, and French, the EIAR program was transmitted to England, central Europe, and the United States.

Styling himself &quot;Dr Ezra Pound&quot; (his only doctorate was the honorary one from Hamilton College), he attacked the United States, Roosevelt, Roosevelt&#x27;s family, Churchill, and the Jews. He praised Hitler, recommended eugenics to &quot;conserve the best of the race&quot;, and referred to Jews as &quot;filth&quot;. The broadcasts were monitored by the United States Foreign Broadcast Monitoring Service, and on 26 July 1943 the United States District Court for the District of Columbia indicted Pound &quot;in absentia&quot; for treason. According to Feldman, the Pound archives at Yale contain receipts for 195 payments from the Italian Ministry of Popular Culture from 22 April 1941 to 26 January 1944. Over 33 months, Pound received 250,000 lire (then equivalent to $12,500; $185,000 as of 2013).
On 9–10 September 1943, the German Wehrmacht occupied northern and central Italy. Hitler appointed Mussolini head of a fascist puppet state, the Italian Social Republic or Salò Republic. Pound called it the &quot;Republic of Utopia&quot;. SS officers began concentrating Jews in transit camps before deporting them to Auschwitz-Birkenau. In Rome when the German occupation began, Pound headed north to Gais, on foot and by train, to visit his daughter, a journey of about . On or around 23 November 1943, he met Fernando Mezzasoma, the new Minister of Popular Culture, in Salò. Pound wrote to Dorothy from Salò asking if she could obtain a radio confiscated from the Jews to give to Rudge, so that Rudge could help with his work.

From 1 December 1943 Pound began writing scripts for the state&#x27;s new radio station. The following day he suggested to Alessandro Pavolini, secretary of the Republican Fascist Party, that book stores be legally obliged to showcase certain books, including &quot;The Protocols of the Elders of Zion&quot; (1903), a Okhrana hoax document purporting to be a Jewish plan to dominate the world. &quot;The arrest of Jews will create a wave of useless mercy,&quot; Pound wrote, &quot;thus the need to disseminate the Protocols. The intellectuals are capable of a passion more durable than emotional, but they need to understand the reasons for a conflict.&quot; On 26 January 1945, in a script called &quot;Corpses of Course&quot; for the program &quot;Jerry&#x27;s Front Calling&quot;, Pound wrote: &quot;Why shouldn&#x27;t there be one grand beano; wiping out Sieff and Kuhn and Loeb and Guggenheim and Stinkenfinger and the rest of the nazal bleaters?&quot;

===Arrest for treason===
In May 1944 the German military, trying to secure the coast against the Allies, forced the Pounds to evacuate their seafront apartment in Rapallo. From then until the end of the war, the couple lived with Rudge in her home above Rapallo at Sant&#x27; Ambrogio. There were food shortages, no coffee, and no newspapers, telephones, or letters. According to Rudge, Ezra and Dorothy would spend their nights listening to the BBC. In addition to the radio scripts, Pound was writing for the newspaper &quot;Il Popolo di Alessandria&quot;. He wanted to write for the more reputable &quot;Corriere della Sera&quot; in Milan, but the editor regarded his Italian as &quot;incomprehensible&quot;.
Mussolini and his mistress, Clara Petacci, were shot by Italian partisans on 28 April 1945. Their bodies were displayed in the Piazzale Loreto in Milan, abused by the crowd, then left hanging upside down. &quot;Thus Ben and la Clara &quot;a Milano&quot; / by the heels at Milano&quot;. On 3 May armed partisans arrived at Rudge&#x27;s home to find Pound alone. He picked up the Confucian text &quot;Four Books&quot; and a Chinese–English dictionary and was taken to their headquarters in Zoagli, then at his request to the U.S. Counter Intelligence Corps headquarters in Genoa, where he was interrogated by FBI agent Frank L. Amprin.

Pound asked to send a cable to Harry S. Truman to help negotiate a &quot;just peace&quot; with Japan. He wanted to make a final broadcast called &quot;Ashes of Europe Calling&quot;, in which he would recommend not only peace with Japan, but American management of Italy, the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine, and leniency toward Germany. His requests were denied and the script was forwarded to J. Edgar Hoover. A few days later Amprin removed over 7,000 letters, articles and other documents from Rudge&#x27;s home as evidence. On 8 May, the day Germany surrendered, Pound gave the Americans a further statement:

Later that day he told an American reporter, Edd Johnson, that Hitler was &quot;a Jeanne d&#x27;Arc ... Like many martyrs, he held extreme views&quot;. Mussolini was &quot;a very human, imperfect character who lost his head&quot;. On 24 May he was transferred to the United States Army Disciplinary Training Center north of Pisa, where he was placed in one of the camp&#x27;s outdoor steel cages, with tar paper covers, lit up at night by floodlights. Engineers reinforced his cage the night before he arrived in fear that fascist sympathizers might try to break him out.

Pound lived in isolation in the heat, sleeping on the concrete, denied exercise and communication, apart from daily access to the chaplain. After three weeks, he stopped eating. He recorded what seemed to be a breakdown in &quot;Canto LXXX&quot;, where Odysseus is saved from drowning by Leucothea: &quot;hast&#x27;ou swum in a sea of air strip / through an aeon of nothingness, / when the raft broke and the waters went over me&quot;. Medical staff moved him out of the cage the following week. On 14 and 15 June he was examined by psychiatrists, after which he was transferred to his own tent. He began to write, drafting what became known as &quot;The Pisan Cantos&quot;. The existence of two sheets of toilet paper showing the first ten lines of &quot;Canto LXXIV&quot; in pencil suggests he started it while in the cage.

==United States (1945–1958)==
===St. Elizabeths Hospital===

Pound arrived back in Washington, D.C., on 18 November 1945, two days before the start of the Nuremberg trials. Lt. Col. P. V. Holder, one of the escorting officers, wrote in an affidavit that Pound was &quot;an intellectual &#x27;crackpot who intended to conduct his own defense. Dorothy would not allow it; Pound wrote in a letter: &quot;Tell Omar I favour a defender who has written a life of J. Adams and translated Confucius. Otherwise how CAN he know what it is about?&quot;

He was arraigned on 27 November on charges of treason, and on 4 December he was placed in a locked room in the psychiatric ward of Gallinger Hospital. Three court-appointed psychiatrists, including Winfred Overholser, superintendent of St. Elizabeths Hospital, decided that he was mentally unfit to stand trial. They found him &quot;abnormally grandiose ... expansive and exuberant in manner, exhibiting pressure of speech, discursiveness and distractibility.&quot; A fourth psychiatrist appointed by Pound&#x27;s lawyer initially thought he was a psychopath, which would have made him fit to stand trial.

On 21 December 1945, as case no. 58,102, he was transferred to Howard Hall, St. Elizabeths&#x27; maximum security ward, where he was held in a single cell with peepholes. Visitors were admitted to the waiting room for 15 minutes at a time, while patients wandered around screaming. A hearing on 13 February 1946 concluded that he was of &quot;unsound mind&quot;; he shouted in court: &quot;I never did believe in Fascism, God damn it; I am opposed to Fascism.&quot; Pound&#x27;s lawyer, Julien Cornell, requested his release at a hearing in January 1947. As a compromise, Overholser moved him to the more comfortable Cedar Ward on the third floor of the east wing of St. Elizabeths&#x27; Center Building. In early 1948 he was moved again, this time to a larger room in Chestnut Ward.

Tytell writes that Pound was in his element in Chestnut Ward. At last provided for, he was allowed to read, write, and receive visitors, including Dorothy for several hours a day. (In October 1946 Dorothy had been placed in charge of his &quot;person and property&quot;.) His room had a typewriter, floor-to-ceiling book shelves, and bits of paper hanging on string from the ceiling with ideas for &quot;The Cantos&quot;. He had turned a small alcove on the ward into his living room, where he entertained friends and literary figures. It reached the point where he refused to discuss any attempt to have him released.

===&quot;The Pisan Cantos&quot;, Bollingen Prize===

James Laughlin of New Directions had Cantos LXXIV–LXXXIV, known as &quot;The Pisan Cantos&quot;, ready for publication in 1946 and gave Pound an advance copy, but Laughlin held back, waiting for the right time to publish. A group of Pound&#x27;s friends—T. S. Eliot, E. E. Cummings, W. H. Auden, Allen Tate, and Joseph Cornell—met Laughlin in June 1948 to discuss how to get Pound released. They planned to have him awarded the first Bollingen Prize, a new national poetry award with $1,000 prize money donated by the Mellon family.

The awards committee consisted of 15 fellows of the Library of Congress, including several of Pound&#x27;s supporters, such as Eliot, Tate, Conrad Aiken, Katherine Anne Porter, and Theodore Spencer. The idea was that the Justice Department would be in an untenable position if Pound won a major award and was not released. Laughlin published &quot;The Pisan Cantos&quot; on 20 July 1948, and the following February the prize went to Pound. There were two dissenting voices, Katherine Garrison Chapin and Karl Shapiro; the latter said he could not vote for an antisemite because he was Jewish himself. Pound had apparently prepared a statement—&quot;No comment from the Bug House&quot;—but decided instead to stay silent.

There was uproar. The &quot;Pittsburgh Post-Gazette&quot; quoted critics who said that poetry cannot &quot;convert words into maggots that eat at human dignity and still be good poetry&quot;. Robert Hillyer, a Pulitzer Prize winner and president of the Poetry Society of America, attacked the committee in &quot;The Saturday Review of Literature&quot;, telling journalists that he &quot;never saw anything to admire, not one line, in Pound&quot;. Congressman Jacob K. Javits demanded an investigation into the awards committee. It was the last time the Library of Congress administered the prize.

===Diagnosis===
During a case conference at St. Elizabeths on 28 January 1946, six psychiatrists had concluded that Pound had psychopathic personality disorder but was not psychotic. Present during the meeting, he decided to lie on the floor while the psychiatrists interviewed him. In 1952 the American Psychiatric Association published its first &quot;Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders&quot; (DSM-1), and St. Elizabeths began diagnosing patients according to its definitions. In July 1953 a psychiatrist added to Pound&#x27;s notes that he probably had narcissistic personality disorder. The main feature of Pound&#x27;s personality, he wrote, was his &quot;profound, incredible, over-weaning &quot;(sic)&quot; narcissism&quot;. A personality disorder, unlike conditions that give rise to psychosis, is not regarded as a mental illness, and the diagnosis would have made Pound fit to stand trial. On 31 May 1955, at the request of the hospital&#x27;s superintendent Winfred Overholser, the diagnosis was changed to &quot;psychotic disorder, undifferentiated&quot;, which is classified as mental illness. In 1966, after his release from St. Elizabeths, Pound was diagnosed with bipolar disorder.

===Mullins and Kasper===
While in St. Elizabeths, Pound would often decline to talk to psychiatrists with names he deemed Jewish (he called psychiatrists &quot;kikiatrists&quot;), and he apparently told Charles Olson: &quot;I was a Zionist in Italy, but now I&#x27;m for pogroms, after what I&#x27;ve experienced in here (SLiz).&quot; He advised visitors to read the &quot;Protocols of the Elders of Zion&quot;, and he referred to any visitor he happened not to like as Jewish. In November 1953 he wrote to Olivia Rossetti Agresti that Hitler was &quot;bit by dirty Jew mania for World Domination, as yu used to point out/ this WORST of German diseases was got from yr/ idiolized and filthy biblical bastards. Adolf clear on the baccilus of kikism/ that is on nearly all the other poisons.[sic] but failed to get a vaccine against that.&quot;

Pound struck up a friendship with Eustace Mullins, apparently associated with the Aryan League of America and author of the 1961 biography &quot;This Difficult Individual, Ezra Pound&quot;. Even more damaging was his friendship with John Kasper, a Ku Klux Klan member who, after &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot; (a 1954 U.S. Supreme Court decision mandating racial desegregation in public schools), set up a Citizens&#x27; Council chapter, the Seaboard White Citizens&#x27; Council in Washington. Members had to be white, supportive of racial segregation, and believers in the divinity of Jesus. Kasper wrote to Pound after admiring him at university, and the two became friends. In 1953 Kasper opened a far-right bookstore, &quot;Make it New&quot;, at 169 Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, that displayed Pound&#x27;s work in the window. With Pound&#x27;s cooperation, he and another Pound admirer, T. David Horton, set up Square Dollar Series, a publishing imprint that reprinted Pound&#x27;s books and others he approved of.

It became increasingly clear that Pound was schooling Kasper in the latter&#x27;s pro-segregation activism. In January and February 1957 the &quot;New York Herald Tribune&quot; ran a series of articles on their relationship, after which the FBI began photographing Pound&#x27;s visitors. One article alleged that some of Kasper&#x27;s pamphlets had, as John Tytell put it, &quot;a distinctly Poundian ring&quot; to them. Kasper was jailed in 1956 over a speech he made in Clinton, Tennessee, and he was questioned about the 1957 bombing of the Hattie Cotton School in Nashville. After Pound left hospital in 1958, the men kept in touch; he wrote to Kasper on 17 April 1959: &quot;Antisemitism is a card in the enemy program, don&#x27;t play it. ... They RELY ON YOUR PLAYING IT.&quot;

===&quot;New Times&quot; articles===
Between late 1955 and early 1957, Pound wrote at least 80 unsigned or pseudonymous articles—&quot;often ugly&quot;, Swift notes—for the &quot;New Times&quot; of Melbourne, a newspaper connected to the social-credit movement. Noel Stock, one of Pound&#x27;s correspondents and early biographers, worked for the paper and published Pound&#x27;s articles there. A 24-year-old radio reporter at the time, Stock first wrote to Pound in hospital after reading &quot;The Pisan Cantos&quot;.

In the &quot;New Times&quot; in April 1956, Pound wrote: &quot;Our Victorian forebears would have been greatly scandalized at the idea that one might not be free to study inherited racial characteristics,&quot; and &quot;Some races are retentive, mainly of the least desirable bits of their barbaric past.&quot; There was a &quot;Jewish-Communist plot&quot;, which he compared to syphilis. Equality was dismissed as &quot;anti-biological nonsense&quot;. &quot;There were no gas ovens in Italy&quot;, he wrote in April 1956; a month later he referred to the &quot;fuss about Hitler&quot;. On 10 August 1956: &quot;It is perfectly well known that the fuss about &#x27;de-segregation&#x27; in the United States has been started by Jews.&quot; Instead, America needed &quot;race pride&quot;. Using pseudonyms, he sent his articles directly to Stock, so that the newspaper&#x27;s editor may not have realized they had all been written by Pound. Stock sent Pound copies of the published articles, which he would distribute to his followers. He contributed similar material to other publications, including &quot;Edge&quot;, which Stock founded in October 1956. Stock called &quot;Edge&quot; the magazine of the &quot;international Poundian underground&quot;.

===Release===
Pound&#x27;s friends continued to try to get him out of St. Elizabeths. In 1948, in an effort to present his radio broadcasts as harmless, Olga Rudge self-published six of them (on cultural topics only) as &quot;If This Be Treason&quot;. She visited him twice, in 1952 and 1955, but could not convince him to be more assertive about his release. In 1950 she had written to Hemingway to complain that Pound&#x27;s friends had not done enough. Hemingway and Rudge did not like each other. He told Dorothy in 1951 that &quot;the person who makes least sense ...in all this is Olga Rudge&quot;. In what John Cohassey called a &quot;controlled, teeth-gritting response&quot;, Hemingway replied to Rudge that he would pardon Pound if he could, but that Pound had &quot;made the rather serious mistake of being a traitor to his country, and temporarily he must lie in the bed he made&quot;. He ended by saying &quot;To be even more blunt, I have always loved Dorothy, and still do.&quot;

Four years later, shortly after he won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1954, Hemingway told &quot;Time&quot; magazine &quot;I believe this would be a good year to release poets.&quot; The poet Archibald MacLeish asked him in June 1957 to write a letter on Pound&#x27;s behalf. Hemingway believed Pound would not stop making inappropriate statements and friendships, but he signed MacLeish&#x27;s letter anyway and pledged $1,500 to be handed to Pound upon his release. In an interview for the &quot;Paris Review&quot; in early 1958, Hemingway said that Pound should be released and Kasper jailed.

Several publications began campaigning in 1957. &quot;Le Figaro&quot; published an appeal titled &quot;The Lunatic at St Elizabeths&quot;. &quot;The New Republic&quot;, &quot;Esquire&quot;, and &quot;The Nation&quot; followed suit. &quot;The Nation&quot; argued that Pound was a &quot;sick and vicious old man&quot;, but that he had rights. In 1958 MacLeish hired Thurman Arnold, a prestigious lawyer who ended up charging no fee, to file a motion to dismiss the 1945 indictment. Overholser, the hospital&#x27;s superintendent, supported the application with an affidavit stating Pound was permanently and incurably insane, and that confinement served no therapeutic purpose. The motion was heard on 18 April 1958 by Chief Judge Bolitha Laws, who had committed Pound to St. Elizabeths in 1945. The Justice Department did not oppose the motion, and Pound was discharged on 7 May.

==Italy (1958–1972)==
===Depression===
Pound and Dorothy arrived in Naples on the on 9 July 1958, where Pound was photographed giving a fascist salute to the waiting press. When asked when he had been released from the mental hospital, he replied: &quot;I never was. When I left the hospital I was still in America, and all America is an insane asylum.&quot; They were accompanied by a young teacher Pound had met in hospital, Marcella Spann, ostensibly acting as his secretary. Disembarking at Genoa, the group arrived three days later at Schloss Brunnenburg, near Merano in South Tyrol, to live with his daughter Maria, where Pound met his grandchildren for the first time. Dorothy had usually ignored his affairs, but she used her legal power over his royalties to make sure Spann was seen off, sent back to the United States in October 1959.

By December 1959 Pound was mired in depression. According to the writer Michael Reck, who visited him several times at St. Elizabeths, Pound was a changed man; he said little and called his work &quot;worthless&quot;. In a 1960 interview in Rome with Donald Hall for &quot;Paris Review&quot;, he said: &quot;You—find me—in fragments.&quot; He paced up and down during the three days it took to complete the interview, never finishing a sentence, bursting with energy one minute, then sagging, and at one point seemed about to collapse. Hall said it was clear that he &quot;doubted the value of everything he had done in his life&quot;.

Those close to him thought he had dementia, and in mid-1960 he spent time in a clinic when his weight dropped. He picked up again, but by early 1961 he had a urinary tract infection. Dorothy felt unable to look after him, so he went to live with Olga Rudge, first in Rapallo then in Venice; Dorothy mostly stayed in London after that with Omar. In 1961 Pound attended a meeting in Rome in honor of Oswald Mosley, who was visiting Italy. 

In 1966 he was admitted to the Genoa School of Medicine&#x27;s psychiatric hospital for an evaluation after prostate surgery. His notes said he had psychomotor retardation, insomnia, depression, and he believed he had been &quot;contaminated by microbes&quot;. According to a psychiatrist who treated him, Pound had previously been treated with electroconvulsive therapy. This time he was given imipramine and responded well. The doctors diagnosed bipolar disorder. Two years later he attended the opening of an exhibition in New York featuring his blue-inked version of Eliot&#x27;s &quot;The Waste Land&quot;. He went on to Hamilton College and received a standing ovation.

===Meeting Ginsberg, Reck, and Russell===
Pound&#x27;s biographer, Michael Reck, claimed to have had an encounter with Pound at the restaurant of the Pensione Cici in Venice in 1967, during which Pound told Allen Ginsberg and Peter Russell that his own poems were &quot;a lot of double talk&quot; and made no sense, and that his writing was &quot;a mess&quot;, &quot;stupid and ignorant all the way through&quot;. Reck wrote about the meeting in &quot;Evergreen Review&quot; the following year. &quot;At seventy I realized that instead of being a lunatic, I was a moron,&quot; Pound reportedly said. He &quot;looked very morose&quot; and barely spoke: &quot;There is nothing harder than conversing with Pound nowadays,&quot; Reck wrote.

Pound had offered a carefully worded rejection of his antisemitism, according to Reck. When Ginsberg reassured Pound that he had &quot;shown us the way&quot;, he is said to have replied: &quot;Any good I&#x27;ve done has been spoiled by bad intentions—the preoccupation with irrelevant and stupid things.&quot; Reck continued: &quot;Then very slowly, with emphasis, surely conscious of Ginsberg&#x27;s being Jewish: &#x27;But the worst mistake I made was that stupid, suburban prejudice of anti-Semitism.

Matthias Koehl, an American neo-Nazi who claimed to have met with Pound during the latter&#x27;s incarceration at St. Elizabeths Hospital, cast doubt on these claims, writing in 1990 that:
===Death===

Shortly before his death in 1972, an American Academy of Arts and Sciences committee, which included his publisher James Laughlin, proposed that Pound be awarded the Emerson-Thoreau Medal. After a storm of protest, the academy&#x27;s council opposed it by 13 to 9. In the foreword of a Faber &amp; Faber volume of his prose, he wrote in July: &quot;In sentences referring to groups or races &#x27;they&#x27; should be used with great care. re USURY: / I was out of focus, taking a symptom for a cause. / The cause is AVARICE.&quot;

On his 87th birthday, on 30 October 1972, he was too weak to leave his bedroom. The next night he was admitted to the San Giovanni e Paolo Civil Hospital in Venice, where he died in his sleep on 1 November of &quot;sudden blockage of the intestine&quot;. Alerted by telegram, Dorothy Pound, who was living in a care home near Cambridge, England, requested a Protestant funeral in Venice. Telegrams were sent via American embassies in Rome and London, and the consulate in Milan, but Rudge would not change the plans she had already made for the morning of 3 November. Omar Pound flew to Venice as soon as he could, with Peter du Sautoy of Faber &amp; Faber, but he arrived too late. Four gondoliers dressed in black rowed Pound&#x27;s body to Venice&#x27;s municipal cemetery, the San Michele cemetery, where, after a Protestant service, he was buried in the Protestant section of the cemetery, near Diaghilev and Stravinsky who rest at the adjoining Orthodox section, with other non-Catholic Christians. According to Hugh Kenner, Pound had wanted to be buried in Idaho with his bust by Henri Gaudier-Brzeska on his grave. Dorothy Pound died in England the following year, aged 87. Olga Rudge died in 1996, aged 100, and was buried next to Pound.

==Critical reception==
===Rehabilitation efforts, scholarship===

After the Bollingen Prize in 1949, Pound&#x27;s friends sought to rehabilitate him. James Laughlin&#x27;s New Directions Publishing published his &quot;Selected Poems&quot;, with an introduction by Eliot, and a censored selection of &quot;The Cantos&quot;. Ralph Fletcher Seymour published &quot;Patria Mia&quot; (written around 1912) to show that Pound was an American patriot. In advertisements, magazine articles, and critical introductions, Pound&#x27;s friends and publishers attributed his antisemitism and fascism to mental illness.

Literary scholar Betsy Erkkila writes that no one was more important to Pound&#x27;s rehabilitation than Hugh Kenner, who was introduced to Pound by Marshall McLuhan in St. Elizabeths in May 1948, when Kenner was 25. Kenner&#x27;s &quot;The Poetry of Ezra Pound&quot; (1951) adopted a New Critical approach, where all that mattered was the work itself.

New Directions and Faber &amp; Faber published &quot;Ezra Pound: Translations&quot; in 1953, introduced by Kenner, and the following year &quot;Literary Essays of Ezra Pound&quot;, introduced by Eliot. The first PhD dissertation on Pound was completed in 1948, and by 1970 there were around ten a year. Kenner&#x27;s &quot;The Pound Era&quot; (1971), which overlooked the fascism, antisemitism, World War II, treason, and the Bollingen Award, effectively equated Pound with modernism. Pound scholar Leon Surette argued that Kenner&#x27;s approach was hagiographic. He included in this approach Caroll F. Terrell&#x27;s &quot;Paideuma: A Journal Devoted to Ezra Pound Scholarship&quot;, founded in 1972 and edited by Kenner and Eva Hesse, and Terrell&#x27;s two-volume &quot;A Companion to the Cantos of Ezra Pound&quot; (1980–1984). In 1971 Terrell founded the National Poetry Foundation to focus on Pound, and organized conferences on Pound in 1975, 1980, 1985, and 1990.

Following Eustace Mullins&#x27; biography, &quot;This Difficult Individual, Ezra Pound&quot; (1961), was &quot;Life of Ezra Pound&quot; (1970) by Noel Stock. A former reporter, Stock was one of the publishers of Pound&#x27;s newspaper articles in the 1950s, including his antisemitism. Ronald Bush&#x27;s &quot;The Genesis of Ezra Pound&#x27;s Cantos&quot; (1976) became the first critical study of &quot;The Cantos&quot;. Several significant biographies appeared in the 1980s: J. J. Wilhelm&#x27;s three-volume work (1985–1994), beginning with &quot;The American Roots of Ezra Pound&quot;; John Tytell&#x27;s &quot;Ezra Pound: The Solitary Volcano&quot; (1987); and Humphrey Carpenter&#x27;s 1005-page &quot;A Serious Character&quot; (1988). A. David Moody&#x27;s three-volume &quot;Ezra Pound: Poet&quot; (2007–2015) combines biography with literary criticism.

Studies that examine Pound&#x27;s relationships with the far right include Robert Casillo&#x27;s &quot;The Genealogy of Demons&quot; (1988); Tim Redman&#x27;s &quot;Ezra Pound and Italian Fascism&quot; (1999); Leon Surette&#x27;s &quot;Pound in Purgatory&quot; (1999); Matthew Feldman&#x27;s &quot;Ezra Pound&#x27;s Fascist Propaganda, 1935–45&quot; (2013); and Alec Marsh&#x27;s &quot;John Kasper and Ezra Pound&quot; (2015).

===Legacy===

Much of Pound&#x27;s legacy lies in his advancement of some of the best-known modernist writers of the early 20th century, particularly between 1910 and 1925. In addition to Eliot, Joyce, Lewis, Frost, Williams, Hemingway, H.D., Aldington, and Aiken, he befriended and helped Cummings, Bunting, Ford, Marianne Moore, Louis Zukofsky, Jacob Epstein, Margaret Anderson, George Oppen, and Charles Olson.

Beyond this, his legacy is mixed. He was a strong lyricist with an &quot;ear&quot; for words; his &quot;Times&quot; obituary said he had a &quot;faultless sense of cadence&quot;. According to Ira Nadel, he &quot;overturned poetic meter, literary style, and the state of the long poem&quot;. Nadel cited the importance of Pound&#x27;s editing of &quot;The Waste Land&quot;, the publication of &quot;Ulysses&quot;, and his role in developing of Imagism. Hugh Witemeyer argued that Imagism was &quot;probably the most important single movement&quot; in 20th-century English-language poetry, because it affected all the leading poets of Pound&#x27;s generation and the two generations after him. According to Hugh Kenner in 1951, although no great contemporary writer was less read than Pound, there was no one who could &quot;over and over again appeal more surely, through sheer beauty of language&quot; to people who would otherwise rather talk about poets than read them.

Against this, Robert Conquest argued in 1979 that critics were responsible for having promoted Pound despite his &quot;minimal talent&quot;, which was &quot;grossly exaggerated&quot;. &quot;This is an accusation less against the fantastic arrogance of Pound&quot;, he wrote, &quot;than against the narrow-minded obscurantism of the departments of English and the critical establishment who have set up a system of apologetics which the slyest Jesuit of the seventeenth century would have baulked at.&quot; According to Samuel Putnam, those who respected Pound&#x27;s poetry were less likely to respect his prose or work as a critic.

The outrage over his collaboration with the Axis powers was so deep that it dominated the discussion. &quot;A greater calamity cannot befall the art&quot;, Arthur Miller wrote in December 1945, &quot;than that Ezra Pound, the Mussolini mouthpiece, should be welcomed back as an arbiter of American letters ...&quot; Over the decades, according to Redman, critics argued that Pound was not really a poet or not really a fascist, or that he was a fascist but his poetry is not fascistic, or that there was an evil Pound and a good Pound. The American poet Elizabeth Bishop, 1956 Pulitzer Prize winner and one of his hospital visitors—Pound called her &quot;Liz Bish&quot;—reflected the ambivalence in her poem &quot;Visits to St. Elizabeths&quot; (1957). &quot;This is the time / of the tragic man / that lies in the house of Bedlam.&quot; As the poem progresses, the tragic man, never named, becomes the talkative man; the honored man; the old, brave man; the cranky man; the cruel man; the busy man; the tedious man; the poet, the man; and, finally, the wretched man.
==Selected works==

* (1908). &quot;A Lume Spento&quot;. Venice: A. Antonini (poems, privately printed).
* (1908). &quot;A Quinzaine for This Yule&quot;. London: Pollock (poems, privately printed); and Elkin Mathews.
* (1909). &quot;Personae&quot;. London: Elkin Mathews (poems).
* (1909). &quot;Exultations&quot;. London: Elkin Mathews (poems).
* (1910). &quot;The Spirit of Romance&quot;. London: J. M. Dent &amp; Sons (prose).
* (1910). &quot;Provenca&quot;. Boston: Small, Maynard and Company (poems).
* (1911). &quot;Canzoni&quot;. London: Elkin Mathews (poems)
* (1912). &quot;The Sonnets and Ballate of Guido Cavalcanti&quot; Boston: Small, Maynard and Company (translations; cheaper edition destroyed by fire, London: Swift &amp; Co).
* (1912). &quot;Ripostes&quot;. S. Swift, London, (poems; first mention of Imagism)
* (1915). &quot;Cathay&quot;. Elkin Mathews (poems; translations)
* (1916). &quot;Gaudier-Brzeska. A Memoir&quot;. London: John Lane (prose).
* (1916). &quot;Certain Noble Plays of Japan: From the Manuscripts of Ernest Fenollosa&quot;, chosen by Ezra Pound.
* (1916) with Ernest Fenollosa. &quot;&quot;Noh&quot;, or, Accomplishment: A Study of the Classical Stage of Japan&quot;. London: Macmillan and Co.
* (1916). &quot;Lustra&quot;. London: Elkin Mathews (poems).
* (1917). &quot;Twelve Dialogues of Fontenelle&quot; (translations).
* (1917). &quot;Lustra&quot;. New York: Alfred A. Knopf (poems, with the first &quot;Three Cantos&quot;).
* (1918). &quot;Pavannes and Divisions&quot; New York: Alfred A. Knopf (prose).
* (1918). &quot;Quia Pauper Amavi&quot; London: Egoist Press (poems).
* (1919). &quot;The Fourth Canto&quot;. London: Ovid Press (poem).
* (1920). &quot;Hugh Selwyn Mauberley&quot;. London: Ovid Press (poem).
* (1920). &quot;Umbra&quot;. London: Elkin Mathews (poems and translations).
* (1920) with Ernest Fenollosa. &quot;Instigations: Together with an Essay on the Chinese Written Character&quot;. New York: Boni &amp; Liveright (prose).
* (1921). &quot;Poems, 1918–1921&quot;. New York: Boni &amp; Liveright.
* (1922). Remy de Gourmont: &quot;The Natural Philosophy of Love&quot;. New York: Boni &amp; Liveright (translation).
* (1923). &quot;Indiscretions, or, Une revue des deux mondes&quot;. Paris: Three Mountains Press.
* (1924) as William Atheling. &quot;Antheil and the Treatise on Harmony&quot;. Paris (essays).
* (1925). &quot;A Draft of XVI Cantos&quot;. Paris: Three Mountains Press. The first collection of &quot;The Cantos&quot;.
* (1926). &quot;Personae: The Collected Poems of Ezra Pound&quot;. New York: Boni &amp; Liveright.
* (1928). &quot;A Draft of the Cantos 17–27&quot;. London: John Rodker.
* (1928). &quot;Selected Poems&quot;. Edited and with an introduction by T. S. Eliot. London: Faber &amp; Faber.
* (1928). &quot;Ta Hio: The Great Learning, newly rendered into the American language&quot;. Seattle: University of Washington Bookstore (translation).
* (1930). &quot;A Draft of XXX Cantos&quot;. Paris: Nancy Cunard&#x27;s Hours Press.
* (1930). &quot;Imaginary Letters&quot;. Paris: Black Sun Press. Eight essays from the &quot;Little Review&quot;, 1917–18.
* (1931). &quot;How to Read&quot;. Harmsworth (essays).
* (1932). &quot;Guido Cavalcanti Rime&quot;. Genoa: Edizioni Marsano (translations).
* (1933). &quot;ABC of Economics&quot;. London: Faber &amp; Faber (essays).
* (1934). &quot;Eleven New Cantos: XXXI–XLI&quot;. New York: Farrar &amp; Rinehart (poems).
* (1934). &quot;Homage to Sextus Propertius&quot;. London: Faber &amp; Faber (poems).
* (1934). &quot;ABC of Reading&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press (essays).
* (1934). &quot;Make It New&quot;. London: Faber &amp; Faber (essays).
* (1935). &quot;Alfred Venison&#x27;s Poems: Social Credit Themes by the Poet of Titchfield Street&quot;. London: Stanley Nott, Ltd. &quot;Pamphlets on the New Economics&quot;, No. 9 (essays).
* (1935). &quot;Jefferson and/or Mussolini&quot;. London: Stanley Nott. (essays).
* (1935). &quot;Social Credit: An Impact&quot;. London: Stanley Nott. (essays). Repr.: Peter Russell (1951). &quot;Money Pamphlets by Pound&quot;, no. 5, London.
* (1936) with Ernest Fenollosa. &quot;The Chinese Written Character as a Medium for Poetry&quot;. London: Stanley Nott.
* (1937). &quot;The Fifth Decade of Cantos&quot;. New York: Farrar &amp; Rinehart (poems).
* (1937). &quot;Polite Essays&quot;. London: Faber &amp; Faber (essays).
* (1937). Confucius: &quot;Digest of the Analects&quot;, edited and published by Giovanni Scheiwiller, (translations)
* (1938). &quot;Guide to Kulchur&quot;. New York: New Directions.
* (1939). &quot;What Is Money For?&quot;. Greater Britain Publications (essays). &quot;Money Pamphlets by Pound&quot;, no. 3. London: Peter Russell.
* (1940). &quot;Cantos LXII–LXXI&quot;. New Directions, New York (&quot;John Adams&quot; Cantos 62–71).
* (1942). &quot;Carta da Visita di Ezra Pound&quot;. Edizioni di lettere d&#x27;oggi. Rome. English translation by John Drummond: &quot;A Visiting Card&quot;. &quot;Money Pamphlets by Pound&quot;, no. 4. London: Peter Russell, 1952 (essays).
* (1944). &quot;L&#x27;America, Roosevelt e le cause della guerra presente&quot;. Casa editrice della edizioni popolari, Venice. English translation, by John Drummond: &quot;America, Roosevelt and the Causes of the Present War&quot;, &quot;Money Pamphlets by Pound&quot;, no. 6, Peter Russell, London 1951
* (1944). &quot;Introduzione alla Natura Economica degli S.U.A.&quot;. Casa editrice della edizioni popolari. Venice. English translation &quot;An Introduction to the Economic Nature of the United States&quot;, by Carmine Amore. Repr.: Peter Russell, &quot;Money Pamphlets by Pound&quot;, London 1950 (essay)
* (1944). &quot;Orientamenti&quot;. Casa editrice dalla edizioni popolari. Venice (prose)
* (1944). &quot;Oro et lavoro: alla memoria di Aurelio Baisi&quot;. Moderna, Rapallo. English translation: &quot;Gold and Work&quot;, &quot;Money Pamphlets by Pound&quot;, no. 2, Peter Russell, London 1952 (essays)
* (1948). &quot;If This Be Treason&quot;. Siena: privately printed for Olga Rudge by Tip Nuova (original drafts of six of Pound&#x27;s Radio Rome broadcasts)
* (1948). &quot;The Pisan Cantos&quot;. New York: New Directions Publishing (Cantos 74–84)
* (1948). &quot;The Cantos of Ezra Pound&quot; (includes &quot;The Pisan Cantos&quot;). New Directions, poems
* (1949). &quot;Elektra&quot; (started in 1949, first performed 1987), a play by Ezra Pound and Rudd Fleming
* (1950). &quot;Seventy Cantos&quot;. London: Faber &amp; Faber. 
* (1950). &quot;Patria Mia&quot;. Chicago: R. F. Seymour (reworked &quot;New Age&quot; articles, 1912–1913). 
* (1951). &quot;Confucius: The Great Digest and Unwobbling Pivot&quot;. New York: New Directions (translation). . (John) Kaspar &amp; (David) Horton, &quot;Square $ Series&quot;, New York (translation)
* (1951). Confucius: &quot;Analects&quot; (John) Kaspar &amp; (David) Horton, &quot;Square $ Series&quot;, New York (translation).
* (1954). &quot;The Classic Anthology Defined by Confucius&quot;. Harvard University Press (translations)
* (1954). &quot;Lavoro ed Usura&quot;. All&#x27;insegna del pesce d&#x27;oro. Milan (essays)
* (1955). &quot;Section: Rock-Drill, 85–95 de los Cantares&quot;. All&#x27;insegna del pesce d&#x27;oro, Milan (poems)
* (1956). &quot;Sophocles: The Women of Trachis. A Version by Ezra Pound&quot;. Neville Spearman, London (translation)
* (1957). &quot;Brancusi&quot;. Milan (essay)
* (1959). &quot;Thrones: 96–109 de los Cantares&quot;. New York: New Directions (poems).
* (1968). &quot;Drafts and Fragments: Cantos CX–CXVII&quot;. New York: New Directions (poems).
==Explanatory notes==
==Citations==
==Works cited==

* Adams, Stephen J. (2005). &quot;Hugh Selwyn Mauberley&quot;. In Demetres P. Tryphonopoulos and Stephen Adams (eds.) &quot;The Ezra Pound Encyclopedia&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood. 
* Albright, Daniel (2001) [1999]. &quot;Early Cantos: I–XLI&quot;, in Ira Nadel (ed.). &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Ezra Pound&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 59–91. 
* Aldington, Richard (1941). &quot;Life for Life&#x27;s Sake: A Book of Reminiscences&quot;. New York: The Viking Press. 
* Alexander, Michael (1979). &quot;The Poetic Achievement of Ezra Pound&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
* Alexander, Michael (1997). &quot;Ezra Pound as Translator&quot;. &quot;Translation and Literature&quot;. 6(1), 23–30. 
* Arrowsmith, Rupert Richard (2011). &quot;Modernism and the Museum: Asian, African, and Pacific Art and the London Avant-Garde&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
* Bacigalupo, Massimo (2001) [1999]. &quot;Pound as Critic&quot;. In Ira Nadel (ed.). &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Ezra Pound&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 188–203. 
* Bacigalupo, Massimo (2020). &quot;Ezra Pound, Italy, and the Cantos&quot;. Clemson, SC: Clemson University Press. 
* Baker, Carlos (1981). &quot;Ernest Hemingway Selected Letters 1917–1961&quot;. New York: Charles Scribner&#x27;s Sons. 
* Baumann, Walter (Fall &amp; Winter 1983). &quot;But to affirm the gold thread in the patten [116/797]: An examination of Canto 116&quot;. &quot;Paideuma: Modern and Contemporary Poetry and Poetics&quot;. 12(2/3), 199–221. 
* Baumann, Walter (Winter 1984). &quot;Ezra Pound&#x27;s Metamorphosis during his London Years: From Late-Romanticism to Modernism&quot;. &quot;Paideuma: Modern and Contemporary Poetry and Poetics&quot;. 13(3), 357–373. 
* Beach, Christopher (2003). &quot;The Cambridge Introduction to Twentieth-Century American Poetry&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
* Beasley, Rebecca (2010). &quot;Pound&#x27;s New Criticism&quot;. &quot;Textual Practice&quot;. 24(4), 649–668. 
* Bishop, Elizabeth (Spring 1957). &quot;Visits to St. Elizabeths&quot;. &quot;Partisan Review&quot;, 185–187. Also in Bishop, Elizabeth (1965). &quot;Questions of Travel&quot;. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 92–95. Courtesy link, Poetry Foundation.
* Bornstein, George (2001) [1999]. &quot;Pound and the making of modernism&quot;. In Ira B. Nadel (ed.) &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Ezra Pound&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 22–42. 
* Bush, Ronald (1976). &quot;The Genesis of Ezra Pound&#x27;s Cantos&quot;. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
* Carpenter, Humphrey (1988). &quot;A Serious Character: The Life of Ezra Pound&quot;. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
* Carswell, John (1978). &quot;Lives and Letters: A. R. Orage, Beatrice Hastings, Katherine Mansfield, John Middleton Murry, S. S. Koteliansky, 1906–1957&quot;. New York: New Directions Publishing. 
* Casillo, Robert (1988). &quot;The Genealogy of Demons: Anti-Semitism, Fascism, and the Myths of Ezra Pound&quot;. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. 
* Coats, Jason M. (Spring 2009). &quot;&#x27;Part of the War Waste&#x27;: Pound, Imagism, and Rhetorical Excess&quot;. &quot;Twentieth Century Literature&quot;. 55(1), 80–113. 
* Cohassey, John (2014). &quot;Hemingway and Pound: A Most Unlikely Friendship&quot;. Jefferson, NC: McFarland &amp; Company. 
* Cockram, Patricia (2005). &quot;Pound, Isabel Weston&quot;. In Demetres P. Tryphonopoulos and Stephen Adams (eds.) &quot;The Ezra Pound Encyclopedia&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 238–239. 
* Conover, Anne (2001). &quot;Olga Rudge and Ezra Pound: &quot;What Thou Lovest Well ...&quot;&quot;. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
* Conquest, Robert (1979). &quot;Ezra Pound&quot;. In &quot;The Abomination of Moab&quot;. London: Temple Smith, 236–256. 
* Corrigan, Robert A. (October 1977). &quot;Literature and Politics: The Case of Ezra Pound Reconsidered&quot;. &quot;Prospects&quot;, 2, 463–482. 
* Dennis, Helen May (2001) [1999]. &quot;Pound, Women and Gender&quot;. In Ira Nadel (ed.) &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Ezra Pound&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 264–283. 
* H.D. (1979). &quot;End to Torment&quot;. New York: New Directions Publishing. 
* Doyle, Charles (2016) {1989]. &quot;Richard Aldington: A Biography&quot;. Basingstoke and London: Macmillan. 
* Eliot, T. S. (June 1915). &quot;The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock&quot;. &quot;Poetry&quot;. VI(III), 130–135.
* Eliot, T. S. (September 1946). &quot;Ezra Pound&quot;. &quot;Poetry&quot;. LXVIII(VI), 326–338.
* Erkkila, Betsy (ed.) (2011). &quot;Ezra Pound: The Contemporary Reviews&quot;. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
* Feldman, Matthew (Winter 2012). &quot;The &#x27;Pound Case&#x27; in Historical Perspective: An Archival Overview&quot;. &quot;Journal of Modern Literature&quot;. 35(2), 83–97. 
* Feldman, Matthew (2013). &quot;Ezra Pound&#x27;s Fascist Propaganda, 1935–45&quot;. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
* Feldman, Matthew (2016). [2014]. &quot;Pound and Radio Treason: An Empirical Reassessment&quot;. In Matthew Feldman, Henry Mead, Erik Tonning (eds.). &quot;Broadcasting in the Modernist Era&quot;. London and New York: Bloomsbury, 213–244. 
* Ford, Ford Madox (1931). &quot;Return to Yesterday: Reminiscences 1894–1914&quot;. London: Victor Gollancz Ltd.
* Gery, John (2005). &quot;Exultations&quot;. In Demetres P. Tryphonopoulos and Stephen Adams (eds.). &quot;The Ezra Pound Encyclopedia&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 114–115. 
* Gill, Jonathan P. (2005). &quot;Ezra Pound Speaking: Radio Speeches on World War II&quot;. In Demetres P. Tryphonopoulos and Stephen Adams (eds.). &quot;The Ezra Pound Encyclopedia&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 115–116. 
* Gill, Jonathan P. (2005). &quot;If This Be Treason ...&quot;. In Demetres P. Tryphonopoulos and Stephen Adams (eds.). &quot;The Ezra Pound Encyclopedia&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 155. 
* Graves, Robert (1 April 1955). &quot;These Be Your Gods, O Israel!&quot; &quot;Essays in Criticism&quot;. V(2), 129–150. 
* Hale, William Gardner (April 1919). &quot;Pegasus Impounded&quot;. &quot;Poetry&quot;. XIV(I), 53–55.
* Haller, Evelyn (2005). &quot;Mosley, Sir Oswald&quot;. In Demetres P. Tryphonopoulos and Stephen Adams (eds.) &quot;The Ezra Pound Encyclopedia&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood. 
* Hemingway, Ernest (Spring 1925). &quot;Homage to Ezra&quot;. &quot;This Quarter&quot;. 1, 221–225.
* Hemingway, Ernest. Bruccoli, Matthew and Baughman, Judith (eds.) (2006). &quot;Hemingway and the Mechanism of Fame&quot;. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press. 
* Hickman, Miranda B. (2005). &quot;The Geometry of Modernism: The Vorticist Idiom in Lewis, Pound, H.D., and Yeats&quot;. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. 
* Hillyer, Robert (11 June 1949). &quot;Treason&#x27;s Strange Fruit: The Case of Ezra Pound and the Bollingen Award&quot;. &quot;The Saturday Review of Literature&quot;. xxxii/24, 9–11, 28.
* Hillyer, Robert (18 June 1949). &quot;Poetry&#x27;s New Priesthood&quot;. &quot;The Saturday Review of Literature&quot;, 7–9, 38.
* Holmes, Colin (2016) [1979]. &quot;Anti-Semitism in British Society, 1876–1939&quot;. Abingdon and New York: Routledge. 
* Houen, Alex (2010). &quot;Antisemitism&quot;. In Ira B. Nadel (ed.). &quot;Ezra Pound in Context&quot;. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
* Huang, Michelle Ling-Ying (2015). &quot;Chinese Artistic Influences on the Vorticists in London&quot;. In Anne Witchard (ed.). &quot;British Modernism and Chinoiserie&quot;. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
* Ingham, Michael (2001) [1999]. &quot;Pound and Music&quot;. In Ira Nadel (ed.). &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Ezra Pound&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 236–248. 
* Johnson, Edd (9 May 1945). &quot;Confucius and Kindred Subjects/Pound, Accused of Treason, Calls Hitler, Saint, Martyr&quot;. &quot;Chicago Sun&quot;. Also in &quot;Philadelphia Record&quot; as &quot;Poet-Prisoner Pound Calls Hitler Saint&quot;.
* Julius, Anthony (1997) [1995]. &quot;T. S. Eliot, anti-semitism, and literary form&quot;. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. 
* Karachalios, Evan R. (Spring 1995). &quot;Sacrifice and Selectivity in Ezra Pound&#x27;s First Canto&quot;. &quot;Paideuma: Modern and Contemporary Poetry and Poetics&quot;. 24(1), 95–106. 
* Kavka, Jerome (Spring &amp; Fall 1991). &quot;Ezra Pound&#x27;s Personal History: A Transcript&quot;. &quot;Paideuma: Modern and Contemporary Poetry and Poetics&quot;. 20(1/2), 143–185. 
* Kearns, George (1989). &quot;Pound: The Cantos&quot;. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. 
* Kenner, Hugh. (Winter 1949). &quot;Review: In the Caged Panther&#x27;s Eyes&quot;. &quot;The Hudson Review&quot;. 1(4), 580–586. 
* Kenner, Hugh. (1951). &quot;The Poetry of Ezra Pound&quot;. London: Faber &amp; Faber.
* Kenner, Hugh. (November 1952). &quot;Gold in the Gloom&quot;. &quot;Poetry&quot;. 81(2), 127–132.
* Kenner, Hugh (1973) [1971]. &quot;The Pound Era&quot;. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. 
* Kimpel, Ben D. and Eaves, T. C. Duncan (November 1981). &quot;More on Pound&#x27;s Prison Experience&quot;. &quot;American Literature&quot;. 53(1), 469–476. 
* Kimpel, Ben D. and Eaves, T. C. Duncan (March 1983). &quot;Ezra Pound on Hitler&#x27;s Economic Policies&quot;]. &quot;American Literature&quot;. 55(1), 48–54. 
* Knapp, James F. (1979). &quot;Ezra Pound&quot;. Boston: Twayne Publishers. 
* Kutler, Stanley I. (1983). &quot;American Inquisition: Justice and Injustice in the Cold War&quot;. New York: Hill &amp; Wang.
* Laughlin, James (Fall 1986). &quot;Ez as Wuz&quot;. &quot;San José Studies&quot;. XII(3), 6–28.
* Leavis, F. R. (1942) (1932). &quot;New Bearings in English Poetry: A Study of the Contemporary Situation&quot;. London: Chatto &amp; Windus.
* Lewis, Anthony (14 April 1958). &quot;U.S. asked to end Pound indictment&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot;.
* Lewis, Wyndham (1931). &quot;Hitler&quot;. London: Chatto &amp; Windus.
* Longenbach, James (10 January 1988). &quot;The Odd Couple: Pound and Yeats Together&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot;.
* Longenbach, James (1990) [1988]. &quot;Stone Cottage: Pound, Yeats and Modernism&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press. 
* Lowell, Amy (1955). &quot;The Complete Poetical Works of Amy Lowell&quot;. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
* Marsh, Alec (2011). &quot;Ezra Pound&quot;. London: Reaktion Books. 
* McDonald, Gail (2005). &quot;Education: Personal&quot;. In Demetres P. Tryphonopoulos and Stephen Adams (eds.) &quot;The Ezra Pound Encyclopedia&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 90–92 
* McGuire, William (2020) [1982]. &quot;Bollingen: An Adventure in Collecting the Past&quot;. Princeton and Guilford: Princeton University Press. 
* Meyers, Jeffrey (1985). &quot;Hemingway: A Biography&quot;. New York: Macmillan. 
* Moody, A. David (2007). &quot;Ezra Pound: Poet. A Portrait of the Man and His Work. I: The Young Genius 1885–1920&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
* Moody, A. David (2014). &quot;Ezra Pound: Poet. A Portrait of the Man and His Work. II: The Epic Years 1921–1939&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
* Moody, A. David (2015). &quot;Ezra Pound: Poet. A Portrait of the Man and His Work. III: The Tragic Years 1939–1972&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
* Nadel, Ira (2001) [1999]. &quot;Introduction&quot;. In Ira Nadel (ed.). &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Ezra Pound&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1–21. 
* Nadel, Ira (2005). &quot;Introduction&quot;. In Ira Nadel (ed.). &quot;Ezra Pound. Early Writings: Poems and Prose&quot;. London: Penguin Books. 
* Nadel, Ira (2007). &quot;The Cambridge Introduction to Ezra Pound&quot;. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
* Nadel, Ira (2010). &quot;The Lives of Pound&quot;. In Ira Nadel (ed.). &quot;Ezra Pound in Context&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
* Nicholls, Peter (2001) [1999]. &quot;Beyond &quot;The Cantos&quot;: Ezra Pound and recent American poetry&quot;. In Ira Nadel (ed.) &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Ezra Pound&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 139–160.
* Orage, A. R. as R.H.C. (31 January 1921). &quot;Readers and Writers&quot;. &quot;The New Age&quot;. xxviii, 126–127.
* Olson, Charles (1991) [1975]. &quot;Charles Olson &amp; Ezra Pound: An Encounter at St. Elizabeths&quot;. Edited by Catherine Seelye. New York: Paragon House. 
* Pound, Ezra (April 1909). &quot;Personae&quot;. London: Elkin Mathews.
* Pound, Ezra (1910). &quot;The Spirit of Romance&quot;. London: J. M. Dent &amp; Sons.
* Pound, Ezra (1912). &quot;Ripostes&quot;. London: Stephen Swift &amp; Co Ltd.
* Pound, Ezra (March 1913). &quot;A Few Don&#x27;ts by an Imagiste&quot;. &quot;Poetry&quot;. I(6), 200–206.
* Pound, Ezra (April 1913). &quot;In a Station of the Metro&quot;. &quot;Poetry&quot;. II(1), 40.
* Pound, Ezra (ed.) (1914). &quot;Des Imagistes&quot;. New York: Albert and Charles Boni.
* Pound, Ezra (June 1914). &quot;Vortex&quot;. &quot;BLAST&quot;, edited by Wyndham Lewis, no. 1.
* Pound, Ezra (1915). &quot;Cathay&quot;. London: Elkin Mathews.
* Pound, Ezra (1916). &quot;Gaudier-Brzeska: A Memoir&quot;. London and New York: John Lane, The Bodley Head.
* Pound, Ezra (June 1917). &quot;Three Cantos: I&quot;. &quot;Poetry&quot;. X(III), 113–121.
* Pound, Ezra (July 1917). &quot;Three Cantos: II&quot;. &quot;Poetry&quot;. X(IV), 180–188.
* Pound, Ezra (August 1917)]. &quot;Three Cantos: III&quot;. &quot;Poetry&quot;. X(V), 248–254.
* Pound, Ezra (1918). &quot;A Retrospect&quot;. &quot;Pavannes and Divisions&quot;. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 95–111.
* Pound, Ezra (1920). &quot;Hugh Selwyn Mauberley&quot;. London: The Ovid Press.
* Pound, Ezra (1934). &quot;Cavalcanti&quot;. &quot;Make It New&quot;. London: Faber &amp; Faber, 345–407.
* Pound, Ezra (Jan–Mar 1947). &quot;Canto LXXVI&quot;. &quot;The Sewanee Review&quot;. 55(1), 56–67. 
* Pound, Ezra (Summer Fall 1962). &quot;Canto 116&quot;. &quot;Paris Review&quot;. 28, 14–16.
* Pound, Ezra (1970) [1967]. &quot;Pound/Joyce: The Letters of Ezra Pound to James Joyce&quot;. Edited by Forrest Read. New York: New Directions Publishing. 
* Pound, Ezra (1974) [June 1914]. &quot;How I Began&quot;. In Grace Schulman (ed.). &quot;Ezra Pound: A Collection of Criticism&quot;. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 23–26. 
* Pound, Ezra (1990) [1926]. &quot;Personae: The Shorter Poems of Ezra Pound&quot;. Revised edition. Edited by Lea Baechler and A. Walter Litz. New York: New Directions Publishing.
* Pound, Ezra (1996) [1970]. &quot;The Cantos of Ezra Pound&quot;. New York: New Directions Publishing. 
* Pound, Ezra (2003a). &quot;Poems and Translations&quot;. New York: Library of America. 
* Pound, Ezra (2003b) [1948]. &quot;The Pisan Cantos&quot;. Edited by Richard Sieburth. New York: New Directions Books. 
* Pound, Omar and Litz, A. Walton (1984). &quot;Ezra Pound and Dorothy Shakespear. Their Letters: 1909–1914&quot;. New York: New Directions Publishing. 
* Pound, Omar and Spoo, Robert (1999). &quot;Ezra and Dorothy Pound: Letters in Captivity, 1945–1946&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
* Preda, Roxana (2005a). &quot;Economics&quot;. In Demetres P. Tryphonopoulos and Stephen Adams (eds.). &quot;The Ezra Pound Encyclopedia&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 87–89. 
* Preda, Roxana (2005b). &quot;Economics: Usury&quot;. In Demetres P. Tryphonopoulos and Stephen Adams (eds.). &quot;The Ezra Pound Encyclopedia&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 89–90. 
* &quot;Punch&quot; magazine (January–June 1909). Volume 136.
* Putnam, Samuel (1947). &quot;Paris Was Our Mistress: Memoirs of a Lost and Found Generation&quot;. New York: Viking Press. 
* Qian, Zhaoming (2000). &quot;Pound and Chinese Art in the &#x27;British Museum Era. In Dennis, Helen M. (ed). &quot;Ezra Pound and Poetic Influence&quot;. The Official Proceedings of the 17th International Ezra Pound Conference. Amsterdam and Atlanta: Rodopi, pp. 100–113. 
* Reck, Michael (June 1968). &quot;A Conversation between Ezra Pound and Allen Ginsberg&quot;. &quot;Evergreen Review&quot;. 12 (55): 27–29, 84.
* Reck, Michael (9 October 1986). &quot;An Exchange on Ezra Pound&quot;. &quot;The New York Review of Books&quot;.
* Redman, Tim (1991). &quot;Ezra Pound and Italian Fascism&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
* Redman, Tim (2001) [1999]. &quot;Pound&#x27;s politics and economics&quot;. In Ira Nadel (ed.). &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Ezra Pound&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 249–263. 
* Reynolds, Michael (2000) [1999]. &quot;Hemingway: The Final Years&quot;. New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. 
* Ricks, Christopher (1988). &quot;T. S. Eliot and Prejudice&quot;. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. 
* Rossi, Romolo (2008). &quot;A Psychiatrist&#x27;s Recollections of Ezra Pound&quot;. &quot;Quaderni di Palazzo Serra&quot;. 15, 144–149.
* Sarfatti, Michele (2006). &quot;The Jews in Mussolini&#x27;s Italy: From Equality to Persecution&quot;. Madison, WI: The University of Wisconsin Press. 
* Sandburg, Carl (February 1916). &quot;The Work of Ezra Pound&quot;. &quot;Poetry&quot;.
* Sieburth, Richard (August 1979). &quot;Review: He Do the Enemy in Different Voices&quot;. &quot;Poetry&quot;. 134(5), 292–302. 
* Sieburth, Richard (2003). &quot;Introduction&quot;. In Ezra Pound. &quot;The Pisan Cantos&quot;. New York: New Directions Books, ix–xliii. 
* Slatin, Myles (October 1955). &quot;More by Ezra Pound&quot;. &quot;The Yale University Library Gazette&quot;. 30(2), 74–80. 
* Spoo, Robert (2005). &quot;Cravens, Margaret (1881–1912)&quot;. In Demetres P. Tryphonopoulos and Stephen Adams (eds.). &quot;The Ezra Pound Encyclopedia&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 67. 
* Stein, Gertrude (1933). &quot;The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas&quot;. New York: The Literary Guild. 
* Stoicheff, Peter (Spring 1986).&quot;The Composition and Publication History of Ezra Pound&#x27;s Drafts &amp; Fragments&quot;]. &quot;Twentieth Century Literature&quot;. 32(1), 78–94. 
* Stoicheff, Peter (1995). &quot;The Hall of Mirrors: Drafts &amp; Fragments and the End of Ezra Pound&#x27;s Cantos&quot;. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press. 
* Stock, Noel (1970). &quot;The Life of Ezra Pound&quot;. New York: Pantheon Books. 
* Surette, Leon and Tryphonopoulos, Demetres (2005). &quot;&#x27;With usura hath no man a house of good stone&#x27; (Pound, Canto 45): An Interview with Leon Surette&quot;. &quot;ESC: English Studies in Canada&quot;.
* Swift, Daniel (2017). &quot;The Bughouse: The Poetry, Politics, and Madness of Ezra Pound&quot;. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
* Tate, Allen (1955). &quot;Ezra Pound and the Bollingen Prize&quot;. In Allen Tate (ed.). &quot;The Man Of Letters In The Modern World&quot;. New York: Meridian Books, 264–267.
* Terrell, Carroll F. (1993) [1980–1984]. &quot;A Companion to The Cantos of Ezra Pound&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
* Thacker, Andrew (2018) [2010]. &quot;The Imagist Poets&quot;. Tavistock: Northcote House Publishers. 
* Torrey, Edwin Fuller (1992) [1984]. &quot;The Roots of Treason and the Secret of St. Elizabeths&quot;. Bethesda, MD: Lucas Books. 
* Tremblay, Tony (Fall &amp; Winter 1998). &quot;The Literary Occult in the Letters of Marshall McLuhan and Ezra Pound&quot;]. &quot;Paideuma: Modern and Contemporary Poetry and Poetics&quot;. 27(2/3), 107–127. 
* Tryphonopoulous, Demetres and Dunton, Sara (2019). &quot;To Translate or Not To Translate? Pound&#x27;s Prosodic Provocations in &quot;Hugh Selwyn Mauberley&quot;&quot;. In Lynn Kozak, Miranda Hickman (eds.). &quot;The Classics in Modernist Translation&quot;. London and New York: Bloomsbury. 
* Tytell, John (1987). &quot;Ezra Pound: The Solitary Volcano&quot;. New York: Anchor Press/Doubleday. 
* Wallace, Emily Mitchell (2010). &quot;America&quot;. In Ira B. Nadel (ed.). &quot;Ezra Pound in Context&quot;. New York: Cambridge University Press, 202–220. 
* Webb, Clive (2011). &quot;Rabble Rousers: The American Far Right in the Civil Rights Era&quot;. Athens: University of Georgia Press.
* Wilhelm, James J. (1985a). quote=ISBN0824075005.--&gt; &quot;The American Roots of Ezra Pound&quot;. New York: Garland Publishing, 1985. 
* Wilhelm, James J. (1985b). &quot;Pounds&#x27;s four fascinating grandparents&quot;. &quot;Paideuma: Modern and Contemporary Poetry and Poetics&quot;. 14(2/3), Fall &amp; Winter, 377–384. 
* Wilhelm, James J. (1990). &quot;Ezra Pound in London and Paris, 1908–1925&quot;. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press. 
* Wilhelm, James J. (1994). &quot;Ezra Pound: The Tragic Years 1925–1972&quot;. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press. 
* Wilson, Peter (2014) [1997]. &quot;A Preface to Ezra Pound&quot;. Abingdon and New York: Routledge. 
* Witemeyer, Hugh (1981) [1969]. &quot;The Poetry of Ezra Pound: Forms and Renewal 1908–1920&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
* Witemeyer, Hugh (2001) [1999]. &quot;Early Poetry 1908–1920&quot;. In Ira Nadel (ed.). &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Ezra Pound&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 43–58. 
* Witemeyer, Hugh (2005a). &quot;A Lume Spento&quot;. In Demetres P. Tryphonopoulos and Stephen Adams (eds.) &quot;The Ezra Pound Encyclopedia&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 185–186. 
* Witemeyer, Hugh (2005b). &quot;A Quinzaine for This Yule&quot;. In Demetres P. Tryphonopoulos and Stephen Adams (eds.) &quot;The Ezra Pound Encyclopedia&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 249. 
* Yao, Steven G. (2010). &quot;Translation&quot;, Ira B. Nadel (ed.) in &quot;Ezra Pound in Context&quot;. New York: Cambridge University Press. 


==Further reading==
===Articles===

* Caldwell, Christopher (15 March 1999). &quot;The Poet as Con Artist&quot;. &quot;The Weekly Standard&quot;.
* Campbell, James (17 May 2008). &quot;Home from home&quot;. &quot;The Guardian&quot;.
* Ellison, Michael (27 October 1999). &quot;Jew-hating Ezra Pound barred from poets&#x27; corner&quot;. &quot;The Guardian&quot;.
* Feldman, Matthew (2009). &quot;Make It Crude: Ezra Pound&#x27;s Antisemitic Propaganda for the BUF and PNF&quot;. &quot;Holocaust Studies&quot;. 15(1–2), 59–77. 
* 
* Mertens, Richard (April 2001). &quot;Letter by letter&quot;. &quot;University of Chicago Magazine&quot;.
* Ormsby, Eric (7 July 2017). &quot;Bedlam salon&quot;. &quot;Times Literary Supplement&quot;.
* Orwell, George (May 1949). &quot;The Question of the Pound Award&quot;. &quot;The Partisan Review&quot;, 517.
** Also in Sonia Orwell and Ian Angus, Ian (eds.). (1968). &quot;George Orwell: In Front of Your Nose: 1945–1950&quot;. Volume IV. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc., 490–491. 
* Sokol, B. J. (December 1976). &quot;What Went Wrong between Robert Frost and Ezra Pound&quot;. &quot;The New England Quarterly&quot;. 49(4), 521–541. 
* Wertham, Fredric (Winter 2000) [1949]. &quot;The Road to Rapallo: A Psychiatric Study&quot;. &quot;American Journal of Psychotherapy&quot;. 54(1), 102–115.
* Wheatley, David (13 May 2006). &quot;The vain theories of a village explainer&quot;. &quot;The Irish Times&quot;.
===Audio and video===
* Ezra Pound recordings. PennSound. University of Pennsylvania.
* &quot;The Four Steps&quot; (recording of Pound). BBC Home Service, 21 June 1958.
* Hammer, Langdon (February 2007). Lecture on Ezra Pound. Yale University.
* Sieburth, Richard (15 March 2013). &quot;The Voice in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction&quot; (discusses recordings of Pound). Woodberry Poetry Room. Harvard University.
* Pier Paolo Pasolini interviews Ezra Pound Pasolini incontra Ezra Pound

===Books===
* Desai, Meghnad (2006). &quot;The Route of All Evil: The Political Economy of Ezra Pound&quot;. London: Faber &amp; Faber. 
* Eliot, T. S. (1917). &quot;Ezra Pound: His Metric and his Poetry&quot;. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 
* McDiarmid, Lucy (2014). &quot;Poets &amp; the Peacock Dinner: The Literary History of a Meal&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
* Russell, Peter (ed.) (1950). &quot;An Examination of Ezra Pound&quot;. New York: New Directions (essays by Eliot, Sitwell, Tate, Hemingway, and others).
* Surette, Leon (1999). &quot;Pound in Purgatory: From Economic Radicalism to Anti-Semitism&quot;. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press. 
* Witemeyer, Hugh (ed.) (1996). &quot;Pound/Williams: Selected letters of Ezra Pound and William Carlos Williams&quot;. New York: New Directions. 
==External links==

* The Ezra Pound Society
* 
* 
* Ezra Pound papers; photographs; and William Bird Ezra Pound papers. Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library. Yale University.
* &quot;Selected World War II Broadcasts&quot;. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
* &quot;Ezra Pound collection&quot;. Simon Fraser University.
* &quot;Ezra Pound collection, 1911–1920&quot;. Emory University.
* Ezra Pound papers, 1915–1959. Columbia University Libraries.
* &quot;Ezra Pound&quot;. Federal Bureau of Investigation.
* &quot;Frequently requested records: Ezra Pound&quot;. United States Department of Justice.
* Archives of the &quot;New Age&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q163366" start="0" end="24" title="Ezra Pound" label="Ezra Weston Loomis Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891671" start="122" end="138" title="modernist poetry" label="modernist poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342294" start="155" end="167" title="Collaboration with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy" label="collaborator"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="171" end="184" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="193" end="206" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Salò Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="214" end="226" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335683" start="252" end="260" title="Ripostes" label="Ripostes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932628" start="281" end="302" title="Hugh Selwyn Mauberley" label="Hugh Selwyn Mauberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="334" end="343" title="Epic poetry" label="epic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701465" start="350" end="360" title="The Cantos" label="The Cantos"/>
<link wikidata="Q746727" start="473" end="480" title="Imagism" label="Imagism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="678" end="683" title="H. D." label="H. D."/>
<link wikidata="Q168728" start="685" end="697" title="Robert Frost" label="Robert Frost"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="699" end="710" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="712" end="728" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="734" end="745" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q465360" start="815" end="854" title="A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man" label="A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="905" end="940" title="The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock" label="The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511" start="1002" end="1009" title="Ulysses (novel)" label="Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1244" end="1255" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452383" start="1281" end="1299" title="finance capitalism" label="finance capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="1323" end="1328" title="usury" label="usury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756412" start="1431" end="1444" title="social credit" label="social credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q332400" start="1502" end="1515" title="Oswald Mosley" label="Oswald Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="1526" end="1542" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="1550" end="1557" title="Italian fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1585" end="1597" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1606" end="1618" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q104861032" start="1652" end="1679" title="Ezra Pound&amp;#x27;s radio broadcasts, 1941–1945" label="radio propaganda broadcasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="1688" end="1714" title="Fascist Italy" label="fascist Italian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="1753" end="1765" title="Italian Social Republic" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="1792" end="1824" title="United States federal government" label="United States federal government"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1826" end="1847" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="1849" end="1862" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="1887" end="1903" title="arms maker" label="munitions makers"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="1905" end="1916" title="arms dealer" label="arms dealer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1919" end="1922" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="1997" end="2005" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499393" start="2014" end="2032" title="Holocaust in Italy" label="Holocaust in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485700" start="2056" end="2059" title="GIs" label="GIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q706633" start="2137" end="2155" title="Italian resistance movement" label="Italian Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="2179" end="2188" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137074" start="2196" end="2221" title="Counterintelligence Corps" label="Counterintelligence Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q210603" start="2244" end="2255" title="extradition" label="extradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310301" start="2284" end="2294" title="indictment" label="indictment"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688219" start="2299" end="2306" title="Treason in the United States" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q13375" start="2363" end="2367" title="Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236725" start="2423" end="2437" title="non compos mentis" label="mentally unfit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036593" start="2498" end="2512" title="St. Elizabeths Hospital" label="St. Elizabeths"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2537" end="2553" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1060310" start="2587" end="2597" title="Narcissistic personality disorder" label="narcissist"/>
<link wikidata="Q366886" start="2604" end="2614" title="Psychopathy" label="psychopath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701465" start="2761" end="2777" title="The Pisan Cantos" label="The Pisan Cantos"/>
<link wikidata="Q194944" start="2821" end="2847" title="Bollingen Prize" label="Bollingen Prize for Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="2863" end="2882" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q841184" start="3067" end="3081" title="Fascist salute" label="Fascist salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q382362" start="3403" end="3412" title="clapboard" label="clapboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517614" start="3422" end="3428" title="Hailey, Idaho" label="Hailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217020" start="3582" end="3615" title="United States General Land Office" label="United States General Land Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408311" start="3643" end="3665" title="Thaddeus C. Pound" label="Thaddeus Coleman Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="3669" end="3679" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544440" start="3705" end="3737" title="List of lieutenant governors of Wisconsin" label="Lieutenant Governor of Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="3984" end="3990" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675590" start="4063" end="4084" title="Loomis Homestead" label="Susan Angevine Loomis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019869" start="4170" end="4187" title="William Wadsworth (patriarch)" label="William Wadsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="4191" end="4198" title="Puritanism" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="4217" end="4223" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378653" start="4237" end="4241" title="English ship Lion (1557)" label="Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245550" start="4302" end="4332" title="Fundamental Orders of Connecticut" label="first Connecticut constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415034" start="4833" end="4840" title="Metallurgical assay" label="assayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441320" start="4848" end="4865" title="Philadelphia Mint" label="Philadelphia Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183952" start="4904" end="4928" title="Jenkintown, Pennsylvania" label="Jenkintown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184329" start="5001" end="5008" title="Wyncote, Pennsylvania" label="Wyncote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012674" start="5042" end="5053" title="dame school" label="dame school"/>
<link wikidata="Q204698" start="5434" end="5442" title="Limerick (poetry)" label="limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="5449" end="5471" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q699201" start="5495" end="5521" title="1896 United States presidential election" label="1896 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="5612" end="5636" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="6060" end="6086" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="6090" end="6102" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="6552" end="6562" title="Fraternities and sororities" label="fraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113011" start="6729" end="6745" title="Hamilton College (New York)" label="Hamilton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021657" start="6749" end="6766" title="Clinton, Oneida County, New York" label="Clinton, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633472" start="6942" end="6958" title="fraternity house" label="fraternity house"/>
<link wikidata="Q241243" start="7148" end="7165" title="Provençal dialect" label="Provençal dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="7175" end="7180" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q437112" start="7185" end="7203" title="Anglo-Saxon poetry" label="Anglo-Saxon poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="7221" end="7228" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q437112" start="7255" end="7266" title="Old English literature" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851454" start="7278" end="7290" title="The Seafarer (poem)" label="The Seafarer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838817" start="7345" end="7348" title="Bachelor of Philosophy" label="PhB"/>
<link wikidata="Q236469" start="7452" end="7456" title="H.D." label="H.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q995265" start="7491" end="7508" title="Bryn Mawr College" label="Bryn Mawr College"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="7621" end="7638" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541131" start="7691" end="7698" title="Gracioso" label="jesters"/>
<link wikidata="Q165257" start="7702" end="7714" title="Lope de Vega" label="Lope de Vega"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7906" end="7919" title="Royal Palace of Madrid#Royal Library" label="Royal Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q58425014" start="7982" end="8005" title="Morral affair" label="attempted assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q18363" start="8009" end="8021" title="Alfonso XIII of Spain" label="King Alfonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442196" start="8396" end="8411" title="Felix Emanuel Schelling" label="Felix Schelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958639" start="8768" end="8782" title="Wabash College" label="Wabash College"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="8786" end="8798" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q986629" start="8828" end="8851" title="Crawfordsville, Indiana" label="Crawfordsville, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8879" end="8899" title="Inferno (Dante)#Sixth Circle (Heresy)" label="sixth circle of hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8382" start="9139" end="9148" title="cigarillo" label="cigarillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124435" start="9435" end="9459" title="RMS Slavonia" label="RMS &amp;quot;Slavonia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="9534" end="9543" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="9724" end="9730" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198324" start="9873" end="9886" title="A Lume Spento" label="A Lume Spento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="10013" end="10018" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q605018" start="10032" end="10042" title="Purgatorio" label="Purgatorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q164889" start="10075" end="10098" title="Manfred, King of Sicily" label="Manfred, King of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031787" start="10152" end="10172" title="William Brooke Smith" label="William Brooke Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="10224" end="10236" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701465" start="10275" end="10291" title="The Pisan Cantos" label="The Pisan Cantos"/>
<link wikidata="Q309243" start="10358" end="10369" title="Grand Canal (Venice)" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q452861" start="10595" end="10603" title="Galley proof" label="le bozze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300924" start="10851" end="10866" title="Maurice Hewlett" label="Maurice Hewlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="10868" end="10883" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="10889" end="10904" title="Alfred, Lord Tennyson" label="Alfred Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="10935" end="10944" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152532" start="11275" end="11302" title="British Museum Reading Room" label="British Museum Reading Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="11383" end="11392" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q123344782" start="11405" end="11411" title="£sd" label="12s 6d"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399402" start="11419" end="11436" title="Room and board" label="board and lodging"/>
<link wikidata="Q14997202" start="11544" end="11567" title="Great Titchfield Street" label="Great Titchfield Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077351" start="11882" end="11895" title="Charles Elkin Mathews" label="Elkin Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162513" start="11899" end="11910" title="Vigo Street" label="Vigo Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q666494" start="12036" end="12052" title="Evening Standard" label="Evening Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q65071891" start="12237" end="12262" title="A Quinzaine for this Yule" label="A Quinzaine for this Yule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226134" start="12420" end="12440" title="John Churton Collins" label="John Churton Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247544" start="12578" end="12603" title="University of Westminster" label="Regent Street Polytechnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104869803" start="12690" end="12701" title="Vienna Café" label="Vienna Café"/>
<link wikidata="Q209714" start="12705" end="12718" title="Oxford Street" label="Oxford Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q780102" start="12742" end="12755" title="Wyndham Lewis" label="Wyndham Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q537112" start="12876" end="12891" title="Ford Madox Ford" label="Ford Madox Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q576342" start="13294" end="13299" title="Salon (gathering)" label="salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984705" start="13332" end="13349" title="Olivia Shakespear" label="Olivia Shakespear"/>
<link wikidata="Q751416" start="13459" end="13466" title="Dorothy Shakespear" label="Dorothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11282460" start="13517" end="13527" title="Iris Barry" label="Iris Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807972" start="13903" end="13918" title="Laurence Binyon" label="Laurence Binyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252799" start="13920" end="13936" title="Frederic Manning" label="Frederic Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393735" start="13938" end="13949" title="Ernest Rhys" label="Ernest Rhys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131497" start="13951" end="13963" title="May Sinclair" label="May Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q241966" start="13965" end="13976" title="Ellen Terry" label="Ellen Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="13978" end="13997" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q333106" start="13999" end="14013" title="Hilaire Belloc" label="Hilaire Belloc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14015" end="14026" title="T. E. Hulme" label="T. E. Hulme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14032" end="14043" title="F. S. Flint" label="F. S. Flint"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14100" end="14111" title="W. B. Yeats" label="W. B. Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q178106" start="14286" end="14309" title="William Carlos Williams" label="William Carlos Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q514998" start="14463" end="14480" title="Richard Aldington" label="Richard Aldington"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="14572" end="14577" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q233265" start="14705" end="14720" title="Robert Browning" label="Robert Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566282" start="14790" end="14804" title="Wardour Street" label="Wardour Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293865" start="15053" end="15066" title="Edward Thomas (poet)" label="Edward Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q366086" start="15184" end="15197" title="Rupert Brooke" label="Rupert Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q81438" start="15290" end="15302" title="Walt Whitman" label="Walt Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q580787" start="15543" end="15565" title="Kensington High Street" label="Kensington High Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965680" start="15632" end="15645" title="Walter Morse Rummel" label="Walter Rummel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17028845" start="16177" end="16198" title="The Spirit of Romance" label="The Spirit of Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993391" start="16388" end="16401" title="Waverly Place" label="Waverly Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q109711" start="16406" end="16423" title="Park Avenue South" label="Park Avenue South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191972" start="16432" end="16447" title="Gramercy Park" label="Gramercy Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013887" start="16637" end="16672" title="New York Public Library Main Branch" label="New York Public Library Main Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q741803" start="16943" end="16969" title="RMS Mauretania (1906)" label="RMS &amp;quot;Mauretania&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562161" start="17200" end="17219" title="Westminster Gazette" label="Westminster Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q123634" start="17464" end="17474" title="Marylebone" label="Marylebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681277" start="17524" end="17542" title="Addison Road, London" label="Addison Road North"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958518" start="17544" end="17547" title="W postcode area" label="W11"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611302" start="17561" end="17572" title="Alfred Richard Orage" label="A. R. Orage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753491" start="17616" end="17623" title="The New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q671859" start="17712" end="17718" title="Old Possum&amp;#x27;s Book of Practical Cats" label="Possum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4687954" start="17990" end="18001" title="Aerated Bread Company" label="ABC tearoom"/>
<link wikidata="Q404351" start="18005" end="18018" title="Chancery Lane" label="Chancery Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q314158" start="18055" end="18069" title="Arnold Bennett" label="Arnold Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943680" start="18071" end="18087" title="Cecil Chesterton" label="Cecil Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q444486" start="18089" end="18106" title="Beatrice Hastings" label="Beatrice Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411474" start="18108" end="18120" title="S. G. Hobson" label="S. G. Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q270632" start="18129" end="18148" title="Katherine Mansfield" label="Katherine Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18154" end="18165" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101288" start="18222" end="18235" title="C. H. Douglas" label="C. H. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756412" start="18298" end="18311" title="social credit" label="social credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q630281" start="18420" end="18429" title="Messianism" label="Messianic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145205" start="18498" end="18510" title="Colin Holmes (historian)" label="Colin Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804153" start="18634" end="18644" title="Tim Redman" label="Tim Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q49081" start="18757" end="18777" title="Christopher Hitchens" label="Christopher Hitchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q185905" start="19620" end="19627" title="ukiyo-e" label="ukiyo-e"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586150" start="20158" end="20172" title="Harriet Monroe" label="Harriet Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207482" start="20219" end="20246" title="Poetry (magazine)" label="Poetry: A Magazine of Verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335683" start="20469" end="20491" title="Ripostes" label="Ripostes of Ezra Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q746727" start="21180" end="21187" title="Imagism" label="Imagism"/>
<link wikidata="Q265841" start="21843" end="21853" title="Amy Lowell" label="Amy Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386278" start="21907" end="21932" title="In a Station of the Metro" label="In a Station of the Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q50716" start="22023" end="22040" title="Paris Métro" label="Paris Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q970075" start="22082" end="22093" title="Concorde (Paris Métro)" label="La Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22146" end="22165" title="T. P.&amp;#x27;s Weekly" label="T. P.&amp;#x27;s Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q37707" start="22541" end="22546" title="haiku" label="haiku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919056" start="22654" end="22664" title="The Egoist (periodical)" label="The Egoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q322170" start="22697" end="22708" title="suffragette" label="suffragette"/>
<link wikidata="Q460349" start="22709" end="22721" title="Dora Marsden" label="Dora Marsden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22744" end="22755" title="W. B. Yeats" label="W. B. Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="22774" end="22785" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351253" start="22913" end="22933" title="Coleman&amp;#x27;s Hatch" label="Coleman&amp;#x27;s Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q429967" start="23072" end="23085" title="Chamber Music (poetry collection)" label="Chamber Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="23441" end="23454" title="W. B. Yeats" label="Uncle William"/>
<link wikidata="Q459592" start="23647" end="23656" title="Dubliners" label="Dubliners"/>
<link wikidata="Q465360" start="23704" end="23743" title="A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man" label="A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q455830" start="23820" end="23839" title="Harriet Shaw Weaver" label="Harriet Shaw Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q543671" start="24039" end="24054" title="Stephen Dedalus" label="Stephen Dedalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q348170" start="24472" end="24485" title="Samuel Putnam" label="Samuel Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="25122" end="25128" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359140" start="25130" end="25136" title="William Henry Hudson" label="Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="25138" end="25143" title="Henry James" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594556" start="25300" end="25314" title="St Mary Abbots" label="St Mary Abbots"/>
<link wikidata="Q25610" start="26318" end="26327" title="Hampstead" label="Hampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263473" start="26411" end="26438" title="Des Imagistes" label="Des Imagistes, An Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6066171" start="26545" end="26554" title="Ira Nadel" label="Ira Nadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139711" start="26597" end="26606" title="The Glebe" label="The Glebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q514998" start="26778" end="26795" title="Richard Aldington" label="Richard Aldington"/>
<link wikidata="Q236469" start="26806" end="26811" title="H. D." label="H. D."/>
<link wikidata="Q7535871" start="26832" end="26848" title="Skipwith Cannell" label="Skipwith Cannell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="26875" end="26886" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731928" start="27002" end="27014" title="Allen Upward" label="Allen Upward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4248643" start="27019" end="27031" title="John Cournos" label="John Cournos"/>
<link wikidata="Q882025" start="27119" end="27124" title="Blast (British magazine)" label="Blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="27161" end="27167" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="27169" end="27177" title="Futurism" label="Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q915841" start="27500" end="27509" title="Vorticism" label="Vorticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349705" start="27809" end="27828" title="Great Ormond Street" label="Great Ormond Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117891" start="27860" end="27885" title="Pulitzer Prize for Poetry" label="Pulitzer Prize for Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19024" start="29152" end="29168" title="Boston Tea Party" label="Boston Tea Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="29852" end="29863" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q82513" start="29878" end="29900" title="Merton College, Oxford" label="Merton College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q380645" start="29928" end="29940" title="Conrad Aiken" label="Conrad Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247005" start="29992" end="30027" title="The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock" label="The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="30169" end="30176" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q92775" start="30442" end="30460" title="Humphrey Carpenter" label="Humphrey Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15838969" start="30526" end="30532" title="Cathay (poetry collection)" label="Cathay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19855762" start="30563" end="30587" title="Classical Chinese poetry" label="Classical Chinese poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q476294" start="30649" end="30660" title="Oriental studies" label="Orientalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q933253" start="30661" end="30677" title="Ernest Fenollosa" label="Ernest Fenollosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6003187" start="30703" end="30725" title="Sidney McCall" label="Mary McNeill Fenollosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831356" start="30816" end="30833" title="Michael J. Alexander" label="Michael Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="31397" end="31410" title="Robert Graves" label="Robert Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q711869" start="31617" end="31629" title="Arthur Waley" label="Arthur Waley"/>
<link wikidata="Q926308" start="31727" end="31748" title="Henri Gaudier-Brzeska" label="Henri Gaudier-Brzeska"/>
<link wikidata="Q27781615" start="31780" end="31802" title="Hieratic Head of Ezra Pound" label="a sculpture of himself"/>
<link wikidata="Q193608" start="32557" end="32570" title="Carl Sandburg" label="Carl Sandburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q531939" start="33725" end="33742" title="Margaret C. Anderson" label="Margaret Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="34285" end="34296" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303126" start="34433" end="34445" title="Iseult Gonne" label="Iseult Gonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424037" start="34716" end="34727" title="F. S. Flint" label="F. S. Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q8827" start="35268" end="35285" title="Sextus Propertius" label="Sextus Propertius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578938" start="35393" end="35403" title="William Gardner Hale" label="W. G. Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q532457" start="35899" end="35909" title="Edward FitzGerald (poet)" label="Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059358" start="35917" end="35921" title="Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam" label="Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701598" start="36681" end="36692" title="John Rodker" label="John Rodker"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="37165" end="37170" title="usury" label="usury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428288" start="37292" end="37304" title="F. R. Leavis" label="F. R. Leavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181461" start="37345" end="37371" title="Downing College, Cambridge" label="Downing College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912" start="38789" end="38803" title="Marcel Duchamp" label="Marcel Duchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q157183" start="38805" end="38818" title="Fernand Léger" label="Fernand Léger"/>
<link wikidata="Q16409" start="38820" end="38833" title="Tristan Tzara" label="Tristan Tzara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="38853" end="38857" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="38862" end="38872" title="Surrealism" label="Surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886803" start="38895" end="38908" title="Basil Bunting" label="Basil Bunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q188385" start="38951" end="38965" title="Gertrude Stein" label="Gertrude Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="39294" end="39310" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637985" start="39356" end="39373" title="Hadley Richardson" label="Hadley Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q233898" start="39408" end="39425" title="Sherwood Anderson" label="Sherwood Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456210" start="39603" end="39607" title="Blue pencil (editing)" label="edit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701373" start="39688" end="39705" title="John Peale Bishop" label="John Peale Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458319" start="39707" end="39721" title="Malcolm Cowley" label="Malcolm Cowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262256" start="39727" end="39740" title="Derek Patmore" label="Derek Patmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q265562" start="39931" end="39943" title="Sylvia Beach" label="Sylvia Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q108704388" start="39951" end="39974" title="Shakespeare and Company (1919–1941)" label="Shakespeare and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q581458" start="40027" end="40041" title="The Waste Land" label="The Waste Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350448" start="40711" end="40721" title="Olga Rudge" label="Olga Rudge"/>
<link wikidata="Q34782" start="40817" end="40831" title="Natalie Barney" label="Natalie Barney"/>
<link wikidata="Q533037" start="40884" end="40907" title="Boulevard Saint-Germain" label="Boulevard Saint-Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q216820" start="40988" end="41004" title="Youngstown, Ohio" label="Youngstown, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q603022" start="41074" end="41084" title="Rive Droite" label="Right Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q937773" start="41183" end="41192" title="Rive Gauche" label="Left Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q28754" start="41262" end="41275" title="Paradise Lost" label="Paradise Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133195" start="41856" end="41861" title="scree" label="scree"/>
<link wikidata="Q11022340" start="41886" end="41891" title="canto" label="canto"/>
<link wikidata="Q181014" start="42350" end="42355" title="fugue" label="fugue"/>
<link wikidata="Q975706" start="42997" end="43007" title="Allen Tate" label="Allen Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428288" start="43151" end="43163" title="F. R. Leavis" label="F. R. Leavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988628" start="43382" end="43394" title="The Paris Review" label="Paris Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q466470" start="43626" end="43633" title="demigod" label="demigod"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="43698" end="43706" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="43710" end="43719" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q945342" start="43732" end="43748" title="Women of Trachis" label="Women of Trachis"/>
<link wikidata="Q56651" start="43948" end="43957" title="rushlight" label="rushlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3451281" start="44169" end="44190" title="Rue de l&amp;#x27;Odéon" label="Place de l&amp;#x27;Odéon"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="44194" end="44204" title="Surrealist" label="Surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q281775" start="44262" end="44276" title="Robert McAlmon" label="Robert McAlmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q210098" start="44528" end="44535" title="Rapallo" label="Rapallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q470085" start="44695" end="44721" title="American Hospital of Paris" label="American Hospital of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q48958" start="44725" end="44732" title="Neuilly-sur-Seine" label="Neuilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q137683" start="44961" end="44966" title="Mary de Rachewiltz" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q185541" start="44985" end="44991" title="Brixen" label="Brixen"/>
<link wikidata="Q419157" start="45088" end="45105" title="Gais, South Tyrol" label="Gais, South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637985" start="45309" end="45326" title="Hadley Richardson" label="Hadley Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649419" start="45745" end="45757" title="Salle Pleyel" label="Salle Pleyel"/>
<link wikidata="Q137739" start="45923" end="45937" title="George Antheil" label="George Antheil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089791" start="46285" end="46295" title="Omar Pound" label="Omar Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q532457" start="46343" end="46353" title="Edward FitzGerald (poet)" label="Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q35900" start="46376" end="46388" title="Omar Khayyam" label="Omar Khayyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227185" start="46812" end="46819" title="Felpham" label="Felpham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185609" start="46861" end="46876" title="Norland College" label="Norland College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067870" start="46930" end="46942" title="Charterhouse School" label="Charterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730061" start="48659" end="48663" title="The Dial" label="Dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q576921" start="48718" end="48735" title="Confucian classic" label="Confucian classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069886" start="48742" end="48756" title="Great Learning" label="Great Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q298703" start="48956" end="48970" title="E. E. Cummings" label="E. E. Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q281775" start="49023" end="49037" title="Robert McAlmon" label="Robert McAlmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="49113" end="49125" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="49447" end="49459" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730061" start="49789" end="49797" title="The Dial" label="The Dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="49845" end="49852" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="49947" end="49951" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q27906" start="50183" end="50197" title="Nuremberg Laws" label="Nuremberg Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="50471" end="50478" title="Spinoza" label="Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q41568" start="50480" end="50489" title="Montaigne" label="Montaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720486" start="50495" end="50512" title="Alexander del Mar" label="Alexander del Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6117237" start="50560" end="50575" title="Jackson Mac Low" label="Jackson Mac Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101288" start="50873" end="50886" title="C. H. Douglas" label="C. H. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756412" start="50902" end="50915" title="social credit" label="social credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q48244" start="51053" end="51063" title="Mein Kampf" label="Mein Kampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903121" start="51979" end="51988" title="Bill Bird" label="Bill Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q962639" start="52035" end="52052" title="Comité des forges" label="Comité des forges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048" start="52090" end="52105" title="Charles Maurras" label="Charles Maurras"/>
<link wikidata="Q49629" start="52135" end="52151" title="Action Française" label="Action Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="52233" end="52242" title="Mussolini" label="Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="52292" end="52307" title="Italian fascism" label="Italian fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123879" start="52494" end="52509" title="Palazzo Venezia" label="Palazzo Venezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="52548" end="52569" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q104861215" start="53583" end="53656" title="Jefferson and/or Mussolini" label="Jefferson and/or Mussolini: L&amp;#x27;Idea Statale Fascism as I Have Seen It"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127446" start="53972" end="53985" title="The Criterion" label="The Criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014854" start="54016" end="54039" title="New York World Telegram" label="New York World Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="54074" end="54089" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q541880" start="54296" end="54307" title="Italian racial laws" label="racial laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051094" start="54370" end="54387" title="Manifesto of Race" label="Manifesto of Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="54547" end="54554" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q780102" start="54825" end="54838" title="Wyndham Lewis" label="Wyndham Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28540087" start="54853" end="54889" title="Ezra Pound (Lewis)" label="a famous portrait of Pound reclining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739279" start="55007" end="55025" title="SS Rex" label="SS &amp;quot;Rex&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408311" start="55273" end="55295" title="Thaddeus Coleman Pound" label="Thaddeus Coleman Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628619" start="55706" end="55722" title="H. V. Kaltenborn" label="H. V. Kaltenborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128588" start="56277" end="56307" title="SS Conte di Savoia" label="SS &amp;quot;Conte di Savoia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190886" start="56379" end="56390" title="The Japan Times" label="Japan Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="56940" end="56954" title="Battle of France" label="fall of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q711631" start="56976" end="56993" title="Burton K. Wheeler" label="Burton K. Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q12429201" start="57218" end="57232" title="James Laughlin" label="James Laughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28671356" start="57426" end="57443" title="Meridiano di Roma" label="Meridiano di Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="57486" end="57495" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q332400" start="57500" end="57513" title="Oswald Mosley" label="Oswald Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q21999870" start="57538" end="57544" title="Action (newspaper)" label="Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q159386" start="57618" end="57637" title="Rothschild family" label="House of Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q99576775" start="57700" end="57715" title="Matthew Feldman (historian)" label="Matthew Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57811" end="57837" title="[British Union of Fascists" label="[British Union of Fascists"/>
<link wikidata="Q76342107" start="57890" end="57904" title="John J. Slocum" label="John J. Slocum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499393" start="58168" end="58186" title="Holocaust in Italy" label="Holocaust in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726207" start="58268" end="58272" title="Ente Italiano per le Audizioni Radiofoniche" label="EIAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="58323" end="58346" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Italian Social Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="58350" end="58362" title="puppet state" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="58366" end="58378" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="58793" end="58801" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q493183" start="58942" end="58978" title="Foreign Broadcast Monitoring Service" label="Foreign Broadcast Monitoring Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889769" start="59004" end="59061" title="United States District Court for the District of Columbia" label="United States District Court for the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688219" start="59105" end="59112" title="Treason in the United States" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687444" start="59214" end="59241" title="Ministry of Popular Culture" label="Ministry of Popular Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="59411" end="59420" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="59521" end="59544" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Italian Social Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="59615" end="59617" title="Schutzstaffel" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="59694" end="59712" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz-Birkenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q419157" start="59778" end="59782" title="Gais, South Tyrol" label="Gais"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742636" start="59888" end="59906" title="Fernando Mezzasoma" label="Fernando Mezzasoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q111705" start="59948" end="59952" title="Salò" label="Salò"/>
<link wikidata="Q742284" start="60230" end="60249" title="Alessandro Pavolini" label="Alessandro Pavolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376126" start="60268" end="60292" title="Republican Fascist Party" label="Republican Fascist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q26193" start="60373" end="60408" title="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" label="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q138503" start="60425" end="60432" title="Okhrana" label="Okhrana"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="61512" end="61515" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q309135" start="61673" end="61692" title="Corriere della Sera" label="Corriere della Sera"/>
<link wikidata="Q275987" start="61806" end="61819" title="Clara Petacci" label="Clara Petacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q706633" start="61842" end="61851" title="Italian resistance movement" label="partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q525297" start="61905" end="61920" title="Piazzale Loreto" label="Piazzale Loreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377760" start="62177" end="62187" title="Four Books and Five Classics" label="Four Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q218027" start="62266" end="62272" title="Zoagli" label="Zoagli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137074" start="62306" end="62332" title="Counterintelligence Corps (United States Army)" label="Counter Intelligence Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="62349" end="62354" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="62444" end="62459" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="62820" end="62835" title="J. Edgar Hoover" label="J. Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q700983" start="62972" end="62991" title="German Instrument of Surrender" label="Germany surrendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="63866" end="63874" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821610" start="63901" end="63910" title="Leucothea" label="Leucothea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701465" start="64264" end="64280" title="The Pisan Cantos" label="The Pisan Cantos"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="64595" end="64611" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089791" start="64846" end="64850" title="Omar Pound" label="Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="64897" end="64905" title="John Adams" label="J. Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="64921" end="64930" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283418" start="65114" end="65132" title="Gallinger Hospital" label="Gallinger Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025045" start="65181" end="65199" title="Winfred Overholser" label="Winfred Overholser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036593" start="65219" end="65242" title="St. Elizabeths Hospital" label="St. Elizabeths Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q14490720" start="65327" end="65336" title="Grandiosity" label="grandiose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241734" start="65387" end="65405" title="pressure of speech" label="pressure of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274479" start="65407" end="65421" title="Repetition (rhetorical device)" label="discursiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030775" start="65426" end="65441" title="Distraction" label="distractibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q366886" start="65531" end="65541" title="Psychopathy" label="psychopath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811124" start="66077" end="66091" title="Julien Cornell" label="Julien Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12429201" start="67048" end="67062" title="James Laughlin" label="James Laughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27474" start="67066" end="67080" title="New Directions Publishing" label="New Directions"/>
<link wikidata="Q178698" start="67331" end="67342" title="W. H. Auden" label="W. H. Auden"/>
<link wikidata="Q694774" start="67360" end="67374" title="Joseph Cornell" label="Joseph Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q194944" start="67482" end="67497" title="Bollingen Prize" label="Bollingen Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149451" start="67566" end="67579" title="Mellon family" label="Mellon family"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="67634" end="67653" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q236958" start="67736" end="67757" title="Katherine Anne Porter" label="Katherine Anne Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782050" start="67763" end="67779" title="Theodore Spencer" label="Theodore Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736241" start="68056" end="68081" title="Katherine Garrison Chapin" label="Katherine Garrison Chapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906282" start="68086" end="68098" title="Karl Shapiro" label="Karl Shapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157568" start="68496" end="68510" title="Robert Hillyer" label="Robert Hillyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629872" start="68557" end="68582" title="Poetry Society of America" label="Poetry Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875906" start="68763" end="68778" title="Jacob K. Javits" label="Jacob K. Javits"/>
<link wikidata="Q366886" start="69028" end="69061" title="psychopathic personality disorder" label="psychopathic personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="69074" end="69083" title="Psychosis" label="psychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="69256" end="69309" title="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders" label="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060310" start="69477" end="69510" title="narcissistic personality disorder" label="narcissistic personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q270673" start="69655" end="69675" title="personality disorder" label="personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="69745" end="69759" title="mental illness" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="70101" end="70117" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q922978" start="70323" end="70336" title="Charles Olson" label="Charles Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26193" start="70493" end="70524" title="Protocols of the Elders of Zion" label="Protocols of the Elders of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088095" start="70627" end="70650" title="Olivia Rossetti Agresti" label="Olivia Rossetti Agresti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360344" start="70998" end="71013" title="Eustace Mullins" label="Eustace Mullins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242508" start="71197" end="71208" title="John Kasper" label="John Kasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="71212" end="71224" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="71249" end="71276" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994541" start="71379" end="71401" title="Citizens&amp;#x27; Council" label="Citizens&amp;#x27; Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724557" start="71728" end="71743" title="Bleecker Street" label="Bleecker Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="71745" end="71762" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q532494" start="72149" end="72172" title="New York Herald Tribune" label="New York Herald Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261535" start="72355" end="72366" title="John Tytell" label="John Tytell"/>
<link wikidata="Q29075517" start="72526" end="72566" title="Hattie Cotton Elementary School bombing" label="1957 bombing of the Hattie Cotton School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301389" start="73026" end="73039" title="Douglas Credit Party" label="social-credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q104864219" start="74790" end="74808" title="If This Be Treason" label="If This Be Treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461210" start="75603" end="75628" title="List of Nobel laureates in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="75653" end="75678" title="Time magazine" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q633354" start="75754" end="75772" title="Archibald MacLeish" label="Archibald MacLeish"/>
<link wikidata="Q216047" start="76213" end="76222" title="Le Figaro" label="Le Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799336" start="76523" end="76537" title="Thurman Arnold" label="Thurman Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939478" start="76888" end="76900" title="Bolitha Laws" label="Bolitha Laws"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77175" end="77189" title="Roman salute#Italy" label="fascist salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q371071" start="77579" end="77598" title="Schloss Brunnenburg" label="Schloss Brunnenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131605" start="77605" end="77611" title="Merano" label="Merano"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="77615" end="77626" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q976924" start="78137" end="78148" title="Donald Hall" label="Donald Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q332400" start="78921" end="78934" title="Oswald Mosley" label="Oswald Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q593321" start="78993" end="79017" title="University of Genoa" label="Genoa School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064951" start="79110" end="79133" title="psychomotor retardation" label="psychomotor retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131543" start="79307" end="79332" title="electroconvulsive therapy" label="electroconvulsive therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q58396" start="79357" end="79367" title="imipramine" label="imipramine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="79410" end="79426" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="79846" end="79860" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176714" start="79865" end="79878" title="Peter Russell (poet)" label="Peter Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q734233" start="80091" end="80107" title="Evergreen Review" label="Evergreen Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246080" start="80883" end="80897" title="Matthias Koehl" label="Matthias Koehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="81122" end="81159" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370843" start="81251" end="81272" title="Emerson-Thoreau Medal" label="Emerson-Thoreau Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q898097" start="81371" end="81388" title="Faber &amp;amp; Faber" label="Faber &amp;amp; Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244733" start="81840" end="81865" title="intestinal blockage" label="blockage of the intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182916" start="82306" end="82315" title="gondolier" label="gondolier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676942" start="82399" end="82419" title="San Michele Cemetery, Venice" label="San Michele cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q211513" start="82518" end="82527" title="Sergei Diaghilev" label="Diaghilev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="82532" end="82542" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334954" start="82636" end="82647" title="Hugh Kenner" label="Hugh Kenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q926308" start="82705" end="82726" title="Henri Gaudier-Brzeska" label="Henri Gaudier-Brzeska"/>
<link wikidata="Q27474" start="83038" end="83063" title="New Directions Publishing" label="New Directions Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287491" start="83189" end="83211" title="Ralph Fletcher Seymour" label="Ralph Fletcher Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334954" start="83578" end="83589" title="Hugh Kenner" label="Hugh Kenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q193871" start="83622" end="83638" title="Marshall McLuhan" label="Marshall McLuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q742302" start="83758" end="83770" title="New Criticism" label="New Critical"/>
<link wikidata="Q898097" start="83846" end="83863" title="Faber &amp;amp; Faber" label="Faber &amp;amp; Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757903" start="84150" end="84163" title="The Pound Era" label="The Pound Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q208628" start="84378" end="84390" title="Hagiography" label="hagiographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215457" start="84554" end="84563" title="Eva Hesse" label="Eva Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974943" start="84688" end="84714" title="National Poetry Foundation" label="National Poetry Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360344" start="84811" end="84826" title="Eustace Mullins" label="Eustace Mullins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261535" start="85392" end="85403" title="John Tytell" label="John Tytell"/>
<link wikidata="Q92775" start="85468" end="85486" title="Humphrey Carpenter" label="Humphrey Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="85722" end="85731" title="Far-right politics" label="far right"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804153" start="85806" end="85816" title="Tim Redman" label="Tim Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q99576775" start="85934" end="85949" title="Matthew Feldman (historian)" label="Matthew Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q278495" start="86408" end="86422" title="Marianne Moore" label="Marianne Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q975481" start="86424" end="86438" title="Louis Zukofsky" label="Louis Zukofsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q354779" start="86440" end="86453" title="Jacob Epstein" label="Jacob Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q531939" start="86455" end="86472" title="Margaret C. Anderson" label="Margaret Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101810" start="86474" end="86486" title="George Oppen" label="George Oppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q922978" start="86492" end="86505" title="Charles Olson" label="Charles Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14088448" start="86672" end="86679" title="cadence" label="cadence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6066171" start="86700" end="86709" title="Ira Nadel" label="Ira Nadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334954" start="87213" end="87224" title="Hugh Kenner" label="Hugh Kenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q379628" start="87495" end="87510" title="Robert Conquest" label="Robert Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q348170" start="88000" end="88013" title="Samuel Putnam" label="Samuel Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="88159" end="88170" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="88271" end="88284" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q235946" start="88669" end="88685" title="Elizabeth Bishop" label="Elizabeth Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117891" start="88692" end="88706" title="Pulitzer Prize in Poetry" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936348" start="88829" end="88853" title="Visits to St. Elizabeths" label="Visits to St. Elizabeths"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198324" start="89219" end="89232" title="A Lume Spento" label="A Lume Spento"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077351" start="89385" end="89398" title="Elkin Mathews" label="Elkin Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q17028845" start="89545" end="89566" title="The Spirit of Romance" label="The Spirit of Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106398" start="89582" end="89603" title="J. M. Dent" label="J. M. Dent &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335683" start="89942" end="89950" title="Ripostes" label="Ripostes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15838969" start="90026" end="90032" title="Cathay (poetry collection)" label="Cathay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243946" start="90133" end="90142" title="John Lane (publisher)" label="John Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q933253" start="90282" end="90298" title="Ernest Fenollosa" label="Ernest Fenollosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932628" start="90885" end="90906" title="Hugh Selwyn Mauberley" label="Hugh Selwyn Mauberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q353876" start="91255" end="91271" title="Remy de Gourmont" label="Remy de Gourmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650281" start="92734" end="92748" title="ABC of Reading" label="ABC of Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176714" start="93232" end="93245" title="Peter Russell (poet)" label="Peter Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q104864219" start="95206" end="95224" title="If This Be Treason" label="If This Be Treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242508" start="95948" end="95961" title="John Kasper" label="(John) Kaspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242508" start="96078" end="96091" title="John Kasper" label="(John) Kaspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216380" start="97074" end="97090" title="Daniel Albright" label="Albright, Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q514998" start="97259" end="97277" title="Richard Aldington" label="Aldington, Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q405044" start="97793" end="97812" title="Massimo Bacigalupo" label="Bacigalupo, Massimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041809" start="98096" end="98109" title="Carlos Baker" label="Baker, Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q235946" start="98924" end="98941" title="Elizabeth Bishop" label="Bishop, Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q92775" start="99501" end="99520" title="Humphrey Carpenter" label="Carpenter, Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106658" start="99615" end="99629" title="J. P. Carswell" label="Carswell, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q379628" start="100610" end="100626" title="Robert Conquest" label="Conquest, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341216" start="100733" end="100752" title="Robert A. Corrigan" label="Corrigan, Robert A."/>
<link wikidata="Q236469" start="101072" end="101076" title="H.D." label="H.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="101265" end="101277" title="T. S. Eliot" label="Eliot, T. S."/>
<link wikidata="Q6790488" start="101598" end="101614" title="Matthew Feldman" label="Feldman, Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q537112" start="102136" end="102152" title="Ford Madox Ford" label="Ford, Ford Madox"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="102845" end="102859" title="Robert Graves" label="Graves, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578938" start="102969" end="102990" title="William Gardner Hale" label="Hale, William Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="103252" end="103269" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Hemingway, Ernest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790716" start="103372" end="103389" title="Matthew J. Bruccoli" label="Bruccoli, Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157568" start="103691" end="103706" title="Robert Hillyer" label="Hillyer, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145205" start="104014" end="104027" title="Colin Holmes (historian)" label="Holmes, Colin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772862" start="104928" end="104943" title="Anthony Julius" label="Julius, Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334954" start="105563" end="105575" title="Hugh Kenner" label="Kenner, Hugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757903" start="105918" end="105931" title="The Pound Era" label="The Pound Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q12429201" start="106530" end="106545" title="James Laughlin" label="Laughlin, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428288" start="106628" end="106641" title="F. R. Leavis" label="Leavis, F. R."/>
<link wikidata="Q780102" start="106885" end="106899" title="Wyndham Lewis" label="Lewis, Wyndham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138205" start="106959" end="106976" title="James Longenbach" label="Longenbach, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q265841" start="107210" end="107221" title="Amy Lowell" label="Lowell, Amy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6066171" start="108281" end="108291" title="Ira Nadel" label="Nadel, Ira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611302" start="109095" end="109107" title="A. R. Orage" label="Orage, A. R."/>
<link wikidata="Q922978" start="109214" end="109228" title="Charles Olson" label="Olson, Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17028845" start="109475" end="109496" title="The Spirit of Romance" label="The Spirit of Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q780102" start="109988" end="110001" title="Wyndham Lewis" label="Wyndham Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329043" start="111753" end="111769" title="Richard Sieburth" label="Richard Sieburth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089791" start="111806" end="111817" title="Omar Pound" label="Pound, Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q110016215" start="111975" end="111987" title="Robert Spoo" label="Spoo, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q348170" start="112526" end="112540" title="Samuel Putnam" label="Putnam, Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q734233" start="113027" end="113043" title="Evergreen Review" label="Evergreen Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804153" start="113188" end="113199" title="Tim Redman" label="Redman, Tim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675876" start="113606" end="113624" title="Christopher Ricks" label="Ricks, Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329043" start="114117" end="114134" title="Richard Sieburth" label="Sieburth, Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q188385" start="114710" end="114725" title="Gertrude Stein" label="Stein, Gertrude"/>
<link wikidata="Q20902401" start="114817" end="114833" title="Peter Stoicheff" label="Stoicheff, Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q975706" start="115614" end="115625" title="Allen Tate" label="Tate, Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493344" start="116034" end="116054" title="E. Fuller Torrey" label="Torrey, Edwin Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261535" start="116675" end="116687" title="John Tytell" label="Tytell, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q472569" start="118681" end="118702" title="Christopher Caldwell (journalist)" label="Caldwell, Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130940" start="118791" end="118806" title="James Campbell (author)" label="Campbell, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q99576775" start="119008" end="119024" title="Matthew Feldman (historian)" label="Feldman, Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="119377" end="119391" title="George Orwell" label="Orwell, George"/>
<link wikidata="Q529939" start="119826" end="119842" title="Fredric Wertham" label="Wertham, Fredric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241006" start="119984" end="119999" title="David Wheatley (poet)" label="Wheatley, David"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329043" start="120344" end="120361" title="Richard Sieburth" label="Sieburth, Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q25120" start="120517" end="120536" title="Pier Paolo Pasolini" label="Pier Paolo Pasolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q335848" start="120603" end="120617" title="Meghnad Desai, Baron Desai" label="Desai, Meghnad"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="120728" end="120740" title="T. S. Eliot" label="Eliot, T. S."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44205" wikidata="Q272929" url="?curid=44205" title="Rosie O'Donnell">
<text>Roseann O&#x27;Donnell (born March 21, 1962) is an American comedian, television producer, actress, author, and television personality. She began her comedy career as a teenager and received her breakthrough on the television series &quot;Star Search&quot; in 1984. After a series of television and film roles that introduced her to a larger national audience, O&#x27;Donnell hosted her own syndicated daytime talk show, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot;, between 1996 and 2002, which won several Daytime Emmy Awards. During this period, she developed the nickname &quot;Queen of Nice&quot;, as well as a reputation for philanthropic efforts.

From 2006 to 2007, O&#x27;Donnell endured a controversial run as the moderator on the daytime talk show &quot;The View&quot;, which included a public feud with Donald Trump and on-air disputes regarding the Bush administration&#x27;s policies with the Iraq War. She hosted &quot;Rosie Radio&quot; on Sirius XM Radio between 2009 and 2011, and from 2011 to 2012 hosted a second, short-lived talk show on OWN, &quot;The Rosie Show&quot;. O&#x27;Donnell returned to &quot;The View&quot; in 2014, leaving after a brief five-month run due to personal issues. From 2017 to 2019, she starred on the Showtime comedy series &quot;SMILF&quot;.

In addition to comedy, film, and television, O&#x27;Donnell has also been a magazine editor, celebrity blogger, and author of several memoirs, including &quot;Find Me&quot; (2002) and &quot;Celebrity Detox&quot; (2007). She used the &quot;Find Me&quot; $3 million advance to establish her For All foundation and promote other charity projects, encouraging celebrities on her show to take part.

She has also been an outspoken advocate for lesbian rights and gay adoption issues. O&#x27;Donnell is a foster and adoptive mother. She was named &quot;The Advocate&quot; 2002 Person of the Year; in May 2003, she became a regular contributor to the magazine. O&#x27;Donnell also continues to be a television producer and a collaborative partner in the LGBT family vacation company R Family Vacations.

==Early life==
O&#x27;Donnell, the third of five children, was born and raised in Commack, New York. Her parents were homemaker Roseann Teresa (née Murtha; 1934–1973) and Edward Joseph O&#x27;Donnell (1933–2015), an electrical engineer who worked in the defense industry. Edward had emigrated from County Donegal, Ireland during his childhood, and her mother was Irish American. O&#x27;Donnell was raised Roman Catholic. Her older brother is Daniel J. O&#x27;Donnell, now a member of the New York State Assembly. On March 17, 1973, four days before O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s 11th birthday, her mother died from breast cancer. While she attended Commack High School, O&#x27;Donnell was voted homecoming queen, prom queen, senior class president, and class clown. During high school, she began exploring her interest in comedy, beginning with a skit performed in front of the school in which she imitated Gilda Radner&#x27;s character Roseanne Roseannadanna. After graduating in 1980, O&#x27;Donnell briefly attended Dickinson College, later transferring to Boston University before ultimately dropping out of college.

==Career==
===1979–1995: Stand-up and early work===
O&#x27;Donnell toured as a stand-up comedian in clubs from 1979 to 1984. She got her first big break on &quot;Star Search&quot;, explaining on &quot;Larry King Live&quot;:


After this success, she moved on to television sitcoms, making her series debut as Nell Harper&#x27;s neighbor on &quot;Gimme a Break!&quot; in 1986. In 1988, she joined music video station VH1&#x27;s lineup of veejays. She started hosting a series for VH1, &quot;Stand-up Spotlight&quot;, a showcase for up-and-coming comedians. In 1992, she starred in &quot;Stand By Your Man&quot;, a Fox Network sitcom co-starring Melissa Gilbert. The show bombed, just as O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s film career took off. O&#x27;Donnell made her feature film debut in &quot;A League of Their Own&quot; (1992) alongside Tom Hanks, Geena Davis, and Madonna, the latter of whom became a lifelong friend. She was originally considered for the role of Mary Sanderson in Disney&#x27;s &quot;Hocus Pocus&quot;, but it was ultimately given to Kathy Najimy. O&#x27;Donnell claimed on her blog that she turned down the offer to work with Bette Midler because she refused to portray a frightening evil witch. Throughout her career, she has taken on an eclectic range of roles: she appeared in &quot;Sleepless in Seattle&quot; as Meg Ryan&#x27;s character&#x27;s best friend; as Betty Rubble in the live-action film adaptation of &quot;The Flintstones&quot; with John Goodman, Elizabeth Perkins, and Rick Moranis; as one of Timothy Hutton&#x27;s co-stars in &quot;Beautiful Girls&quot;; as a federal agent comedically paired with Dan Aykroyd in &quot;Exit to Eden&quot;; as the voice of a tomboyish female gorilla named Terk in Disney&#x27;s &quot;Tarzan&quot;; and as a baseball-loving nun in M. Night Shyamalan&#x27;s &quot;Wide Awake&quot;.

O&#x27;Donnell was considered for the role of Elaine Benes on &quot;Seinfeld&quot;.

===1996–2002: &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot;===
In 1996, she began hosting a daytime talk show, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot;, for her production company KidRo Productions. The show proved very successful, winning multiple Emmy Awards, and earning O&#x27;Donnell the title of &quot;The Queen of Nice&quot; for her style of light-hearted banter with her guests and interactions with the audience. As part of her playful banter with her studio audience, O&#x27;Donnell often launched koosh balls at the crowd and camera. She also professed an infatuation with Tom Cruise.

With New York City as the show&#x27;s home base, O&#x27;Donnell displayed her love of Broadway musicals and plays by having cast members as guests, encouraging the audience to see shows, premiering production numbers as well as promoting shows with ticket giveaways.

After the Columbine shootings, O&#x27;Donnell became an outspoken supporter of gun control and a major figure in the Million Mom March. During the April 19, 1999, broadcast of her talk show, she stated, &quot;You are not allowed to own a gun, and if you do own a gun, I think you should go to prison.&quot; O&#x27;Donnell previously had remarked, &quot;I don&#x27;t personally own a gun, but if you are qualified, licensed and registered, I have no problem.&quot; In May 1999, a month after the Columbine shootings, O&#x27;Donnell interviewed Tom Selleck, who was promoting &quot;The Love Letter&quot;. O&#x27;Donnell interrogated him about his recent unpaid commercial for the National Rifle Association of America (NRA) and questioned him about the NRA&#x27;s position on the use of &quot;assault weapons&quot;. She said at the end of the segment the conversation had &quot;not gone the way I had hoped&quot; and added &quot;if you feel insulted by my questions, I apologize because it was not a personal attack. It was meant to bring up the subject as it is in the consciousness of so many today.&quot; Ironically, O&#x27;Donnell at that time was a multi-million dollar paid spokesperson for 5 years for Kmart, which was the largest volume firearms retailer in the United States. Around the same time, the cast from &quot;Annie Get Your Gun&quot; was to appear on the show but refused O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s request to remove the line &quot;I can shoot a partridge with a single cartridge&quot; from the song &quot;Anything You Can Do&quot; and agreed to perform &quot;My Defenses Are Down&quot; instead.

Later in 1999, O&#x27;Donnell discontinued her contract with Kmart as their spokeswoman, as gun enthusiasts complained that she should not be the spokesperson for the largest gun retailer. O&#x27;Donnell countered that Kmart sells hunting rifles, not handguns or assault weapons and does so legally, which she supports. Both Kmart and O&#x27;Donnell denied publicly that Kmart had terminated the contract. In May 2000, O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s bodyguard applied for a concealed firearm permit. O&#x27;Donnell stated that the security firm contracted by Warner Bros. requested the gun. O&#x27;Donnell stated that because of threats, she and her family need protection.

After the September 11, 2001 attacks, Broadway and tourism in New York City was down and many shows were in danger of closing. O&#x27;Donnell was among many in the entertainment field who encouraged viewers to visit and support the performing arts. She announced that she would donate 1 million dollars for aid in the rescue efforts and encouraged other celebrities and citizens alike to &quot;give till it hurts&quot;.

In 2002, she left her talk show. The show was replaced by &quot;The Caroline Rhea Show&quot;, with comedian Caroline Rhea, which ran for one additional season.

O&#x27;Donnell was a guest star on an episode of HBO show &quot;Curb Your Enthusiasm&quot; entitled &quot;The Bowtie&quot;.

===2006–2007: &quot;The View&quot;===

In September 2006, O&#x27;Donnell replaced Meredith Vieira as a co-host and moderator of &quot;The View&quot;, a daytime women-oriented talk show. Star Jones, a co-host on the show, quit, with some speculating Jones&#x27;s conservative views would be in constant tension with O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s more liberal counterpoint. O&#x27;Donnell had also disputed Jones&#x27;s route of rapid weight loss, alluding that it must have been through gastric bypass surgery, rather than dieting and exercise alone as Jones had insisted, which also fed speculation about certain tension between the two. (Jones later confirmed that surgery was involved.) O&#x27;Donnell is credited with keeping the show&#x27;s &quot;buzz factor up&quot;. She is also credited with making it more news-focused, though it still embraced the &quot;fluff&quot; of daytime TV talk shows (celebrities, fashion, and food). Despite an overall downward trend for most daytime broadcast shows, ratings rose by 27% during O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s first year on &quot;The View&quot;. The show was the fourth-most-watched in all of daytime in the key demographic of women ages 18–49 and scored record ratings in the total viewer category with an average of 3.4 million viewers—up 15% versus the same time in 2005. O&#x27;Donnell moderated the opening &quot;Hot Topics&quot; portion of the show, where news items were discussed. O&#x27;Donnell gave the show a more political slant, and she and fellow comic Joy Behar often gave strong opinions against former President Bush&#x27;s domestic and foreign policies, including the Iraq War. As a conservative counterpoint, Elisabeth Hasselbeck would usually support the Bush administration&#x27;s policies and the two would get into an adversarial give-and-take.

In November 2006, Rosie commented on Kelly Ripa&#x27;s complaints to Regis Philbin about guest co-host Clay Aiken on Live with Regis and Kelly. Kelly said she was angry at Aiken for jokingly putting his hand over her mouth during an interview segment. Rosie told the other panelist on The View that Kelly made a homophobic comment about Clay. Kelly was watching the segment and quickly called into the live segment to tell Rosie that Kelly&#x27;s complaint about Aiken was not about homophobia; the issue was it is flu season.
Kelly has in the past placed her hand over Regis&#x27; mouth as a joke during non-flu season.

Encouraged by the show to be outspoken, O&#x27;Donnell sometimes provoked debate, at one time stating &quot;radical Christianity is just as threatening as radical Islam.&quot; On the February 24, 2003, episode of Phil Donahue&#x27;s talk show, O&#x27;Donnell referred to the sexual abuse scandal in the Catholic archdiocese of Boston resulting in $157 million awarded to 983 claimants, stating &quot;I hope the Catholic Church gets sued until the end of time. Maybe, you know, we can melt down some of the gold toilets in the Pope&#x27;s Vatican and pay off some of the lawsuits because, the whole tenet of living a Christ-like life, has been lost in Catholicism.&quot;

O&#x27;Donnell joked about communion rituals alongside co-host Behar&#x27;s drunk priest comments. On April 19, 2007, the panel discussed the Supreme Court of the United States&#x27;s ruling in &quot;Gonzales v. Carhart&quot;, a decision upholding the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act. O&#x27;Donnell cited a Florynce Kennedy quote, &quot;If men could get pregnant abortion would be a sacrament&quot; and asked rhetorically &quot;How many Supreme Court judges are Catholic?&quot; and &quot;How about separation of church and state?&quot; Some conservative commentators deemed her statements &quot;anti-Catholic bigotry&quot; and suggested that such statements against other religions would not be tolerated. O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s outspokenness and spontaneousness sometimes led to her views being recirculated by other media outlets, often surprising &quot;The View&quot; co-hosts including O&#x27;Donnell. Frequently portrayed unfavorably by conservative media outlets and what she deemed as Republican pundits, O&#x27;Donnell lamented that they were focusing on her comments instead of more important national and world issues.

On December 5, 2006, O&#x27;Donnell used a series of ching chongs to imitate newscasters in China. Vanessa Hua of the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; expressed disappointment in O&#x27;Donnell, given the comedian&#x27;s championing of LGBT rights. On December 14, O&#x27;Donnell apologized to those she offended, explaining that &quot;Some people have told me it&#x27;s as bad as the n-word. I was like, really? I didn&#x27;t know that.&quot; O&#x27;Donnell warned that &quot;there&#x27;s a good chance I&#x27;ll do something like that again, probably in the next week, not on purpose. Only &#x27;cause it&#x27;s how my brain works.&quot; &quot;Time&quot; called it a &quot;pseudo-apology&quot;. O&#x27;Donnell later wrote in &quot;Celebrity Detox&quot; that &quot;I wish I had been a bit more pure in my public apology.&quot;

In December 2006, O&#x27;Donnell criticized Donald Trump for holding a press conference to reinstate Miss USA Tara Conner, who had violated pageant guidelines, accusing him of using her scandal to &quot;generate publicity for the Miss USA Pageant&quot; (to which he owns the rights) by announcing he was giving her a second chance. O&#x27;Donnell commented that due to Trump&#x27;s multiple marital affairs and questionable business bankruptcies, he was not a moral authority for young people in America. She stated, &quot;Left the first wife, had an affair. Left the second wife, had an affair – but he&#x27;s the moral compass for 20-year-olds in America.&quot; In response, Trump began a &quot;vicious&quot; mass media blitz in which he appeared on various television shows, either in person or by phone, threatening to sue O&#x27;Donnell (he never did). He called her names, threatened to take away her partner Kelli, and claimed that Barbara Walters regretted hiring her. Walters was stuck in the middle as a social acquaintance of Trump&#x27;s, and said O&#x27;Donnell did not feel like Walters defended her enough, which led to what both women agreed was an unfortunate confrontation in one of the dressing rooms. &quot;I had pain and hurt and rejection,&quot; O&#x27;Donnell said, &quot;sometimes [my emotions] overwhelm me. Sometimes I get flooded.&quot; Walters denied that she was unhappy with O&#x27;Donnell, saying, &quot;I have never regretted, nor do I now, the hiring of Rosie O&#x27;Donnell.&quot;

On April 25, 2007, ABC announced that O&#x27;Donnell would be leaving the show before the end of the year because of a failure to reach agreement on a new contract.

O&#x27;Donnell condemned many of the Bush administration&#x27;s policies, especially the war in Iraq and the resulting occupation. She also questioned the official explanation for the destruction of the World Trade Center, and stating in one episode, &quot;I do believe that it&#x27;s the first time in history that fire has ever melted steel&quot;. She consistently mentioned recent military deaths and news about the war and criticized the U.S. media for its lack of attention to these issues compared to media coverage throughout the world. This led to a series of heated exchanges with co-host Hasselbeck, as well as &quot;the most-discussed moment of her professional life.&quot; On May 17, 2007, O&#x27;Donnell rhetorically asked, &quot;655,000 Iraqi civilians dead. Who are the terrorists? ... if you were in Iraq and another country, the United States, the richest in the world, invaded your country and killed 655,000 of your citizens, what would you call us?&quot; Conservative commentators criticized O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s statements, saying that she was comparing American soldiers to terrorists. On May 23, 2007, a heated discussion ensued, in part, because of what O&#x27;Donnell perceived as Elisabeth Hasselbeck&#x27;s unwillingness to defend O&#x27;Donnell from the criticisms; O&#x27;Donnell asked Hasselbeck, &quot;Do you believe I think our troops are terrorists?&quot; Hasselbeck answered in the negative but also stated &quot;Defend your own insinuations.&quot; O&#x27;Donnell was hurt and felt Hasselbeck had betrayed her friendship: &quot;there&#x27;s something about somebody being different on TV toward you than they are in the dressing room. It didn&#x27;t really ring true for me.&quot; O&#x27;Donnell stated that Republican pundits were mischaracterising her statements and the right-wing media would portray her as a bully, attacking &quot;innocent pure Christian Elisabeth&quot; whenever they disagreed. O&#x27;Donnell decided to leave the show that day, but afterwards stated that the reason was not the argument itself, but rather the fact that she saw on the studio monitor that the camera had shown a split screen, with her and Hasselbeck on either side. O&#x27;Donnell felt that the show&#x27;s director and producer &quot;had to prepare that in advance ... I felt there was setup egging me into that position. The executive producer and I did not gel.&quot; O&#x27;Donnell and ABC agreed to cut short her contract agreement on May 25, 2007. ABC News reported that her arguments with Hasselbeck brought the show its best ratings ever. O&#x27;Donnell was replaced by Whoopi Goldberg as the moderator of &quot;The View&quot;.

In May 2007, &quot;Time&quot; magazine included O&#x27;Donnell in their annual list of the 100 most influential people. O&#x27;Donnell was named &quot;The Most Annoying Celebrity of 2007&quot; by a &quot;PARADE&quot; reader&#x27;s poll, in response she said, &quot;Frankly, most celebrities are annoying ... and I suppose I am the most annoying, but, whatever.&quot;

In 2008, &quot;The View&quot; won an Emmy for &quot;Outstanding Special Class Writing&quot; for a specially themed Autism episode that O&#x27;Donnell helped create. Janette Barber, O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s longtime friend and producer/writer of &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot;, accepted the award on behalf of herself and the other two winners, Christian McKiernan and Andrew Smith.

===2007–2012: &quot;The Rosie Show&quot; and blog ===
In March 2007, O&#x27;Donnell started a video blog, &quot;Jahero&quot;, on her website Rosie.com answering fans questions, giving behind the scenes information and serving as a video diary. Originally featuring only O&#x27;Donnell and her hair and make-up artist Helene Macaulay they were soon joined by her writer from &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot;, Janette Barber. Called &quot;Jahero&quot;, a name composed of the first two letters of each of their first names, they occasionally had short cameo appearances by &quot;View&quot; co-hosts Joy Behar, Elisabeth Hasselbeck, and Barbara Walters. Jenny McCarthy appeared once briefly, as has Hasselbeck&#x27;s mother-in-law and O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s mother-in-law, her (now) ex-wife Kelli&#x27;s mother. Kathy Griffin also appeared, where she read some of the questions. It became so popular that O&#x27;Donnell and her creative team considered an &quot;on the road&quot; version of the video blog using fan-submitted suggestions. O&#x27;Donnell was the front runner for the &quot;best celebrity blogger&quot; category in the 2007 Blogger&#x27;s Choice Awards which she won.

O&#x27;Donnell expressed interest in replacing long-time host Bob Barker when he retired from CBS&#x27;s game show &quot;The Price Is Right&quot;. Barker was a frequent guest on her talk show and told reporters that she &quot;would make a fine host.&quot; Although it was reported he had &quot;endorsed&quot; her as a &quot;possible successor&quot;, Barker said that he had no role in choosing his replacement. In June 2007, she announced on her blog it was not going to happen and noted she was reluctant to uproot her family to move to California.

In 2008, O&#x27;Donnell starred in and executive produced &quot;America&quot;, a Lifetime channel film in which she plays the therapist of the title character, a 16-year-old boy aging out of the foster care system. The film is based on the E.R. Frank book of the same name. In October 2009, she appeared in the original cast of &quot;Love, Loss, and What I Wore&quot;.

In November 2009, &quot;Rosie Radio&quot;, a daily two-hour show with O&#x27;Donnell discussing news and events on Sirius XM Radio, premiered. O&#x27;Donnell said she was approached by the company after she appeared on Howard Stern&#x27;s Sirius XM show. The radio show ended in June 2011. In 2009, O&#x27;Donnell made another guest appearance on &quot;Curb Your Enthusiasm&quot;, where she beat up Larry twice, in an episode titled Denise Handicapped.

In 2011, O&#x27;Donnell began producing material for the Oprah Winfrey Network (OWN). In May 2011, &quot;The Doc Club with Rosie O&#x27;Donnell&quot; premiered, a show where O&#x27;Donnell moderated live panel discussions following premieres of OWN Documentaries. She has hosted specials for &quot;Becoming Chaz&quot; in May 2011 and &quot;Miss Representation&quot; in October 2011. In fall 2011, O&#x27;Donnell began full-time work on her new show, &quot;The Rosie Show&quot;, for OWN. The show taped at the Chicago studio formerly home to &quot;The Oprah Winfrey Show&quot;. The show debuted on October 10, 2011, to generally positive reviews. OWN canceled &quot;The Rosie Show&quot; on March 16, 2012, with the last show taped March 20, on the eve of O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s 50th birthday. The final show aired on OWN on March 29, 2012. In a statement, Oprah Winfrey said: 

O&#x27;Donnell responded to the cancellation by thanking her viewers and the host city of Chicago: 
In 2011, O&#x27;Donnell made another guest appearance on Curb Your Enthusiasm, competing for the affection of a bisexual woman with Larry in an episode called &quot;The Bi-Sexual&quot;.

===2013–2016: &quot;The Fosters&quot; and return to &quot;The View&quot;===
In 2013, O&#x27;Donnell appeared in a number of television shows. First, she played &quot;brash but astute&quot; reporter Dottie Shannon in an episode of &quot;Bomb Girls&quot;, followed by playing the voice of the Bouncing Bumble Queen in &quot;Jake and the Never Land Pirates&quot;. After that, also in 2013, she appeared in two episodes of &quot;Smash&quot; as herself. That same year she also appeared as herself in an episode of &quot;Impractical Jokers&quot; called &quot;Everything&#x27;s Rosie&quot;.

In 2014, O&#x27;Donnell landed a reoccurring role as Rita Hendricks on &quot;The Fosters&quot;, &quot;a tough yet compassionate woman who works for the foster care system and becomes a mentor to a member of the Foster family.&quot; The character lasted through their 2016 season.

In the fall of 2014, O&#x27;Donnell returned to &quot;The View&quot; as a co-host, with a newly re-vamped version of the show, along with Whoopi Goldberg returning as moderator and new co-hosts Rosie Perez and Nicolle Wallace. On February 6, 2015, representatives for O&#x27;Donnell confirmed she would once again exit the panel. In a statement, made to &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot;, O&#x27;Donnell said, &quot;[My health] got a little bit worse right before the holidays — [my doctor] was kind of concerned. ... I can&#x27;t really fix [my personal life] right away, but I can fix [my job].&quot;

In 2015, O&#x27;Donnell made a cameo in &quot;Pitch Perfect 2&quot;, playing a co-host on &quot;The View&quot;. Deadline called the cameo &quot;a bit that already seems dated.&quot; That same year, she appeared in an episode of &quot;Empire&quot;, playing Pepper O&#x27;Leary, &quot;a tough criminal who shared a cell for years with Cookie Lyon.&quot; In preparation for the role, she hired an acting coach and stated, &quot;I prepared for this like I&#x27;ve never prepared for anything in my career, because I didn&#x27;t want to disappoint and I understood the pace at which they work.&quot; O&#x27;Donnell also appeared as herself in two documentaries that same year. In April 2015, &quot;Roseanne For President!&quot; was released, a film about Roseanne Barr&#x27;s presidential bid in 2012. O&#x27;Donnell appeared in the film alongside Michael Moore and Sandra Bernhard. In September 2015, the documentary &quot;Everything Is Copy&quot; was released, a film by Jacob Bernstein about his mother Nora Ephron. O&#x27;Donnell appeared in the documentary to help &quot;bring his mother into focus&quot; along with a number of other celebrities.

In 2016, O&#x27;Donnell made a two-episode appearance in the CBS series &quot;Mom&quot;, playing Jeanine, &quot;the ex-girlfriend of Bonnie (Allison Janney)&quot;. That same year, she was also a regular panelist on &quot;Match Game&quot; and appeared in one episode of &quot;The $100,000 Pyramid&quot;, where she competed against Kathy Najimy. Later that year, O&#x27;Donnell also played the role of the gym teacher in &quot;Hairspray Live!&quot;

=== 2017–present: Return to acting ===
In November 2016, Showtime announced she had joined the cast of the comedy pilot &quot;SMILF&quot;. The series aired from November 5, 2017, until March 31, 2019, and O&#x27;Donnell received critical acclaim for her portrayal of Tutu. On April 3, 2019, it was announced that O&#x27;Donnell would play the role of Lisa Sheffer in the HBO series &quot;I Know This Much Is True&quot;.

In 2021, O&#x27;Donnell guest starred on the series &quot;Run the World&quot; and &quot;The L Word: Generation Q&quot;. On June 15, 2021, it was announced that she would star as Detective Sunday, alongside Jon Bernthal, in a series reboot of &quot;American Gigolo&quot; on Showtime, premiering in 2022. In 2022 she voiced the role of the MTA subway announcements in the second season of Netflix series &quot;Russian Doll&quot; starring Natasha Lyonne. That same year she appeared as Vi in the Amazon Prime Video series &quot;A League of Their Own&quot; (2022).

==Other ventures==

===&quot;Rosie&quot; magazine===

In 2000, O&#x27;Donnell partnered with the publishers of &quot;McCall&#x27;s&quot; to revamp the magazine as &quot;Rosie&#x27;s McCall&#x27;s&quot; (or, more commonly, &quot;Rosie&quot;). The magazine was launched as a competitor to fellow talk show hostess Oprah Winfrey&#x27;s monthly magazine &quot;O&quot;. &quot;Rosie&quot; covered issues including breast cancer, foster care, and other matters of concern to O&#x27;Donnell. In the September 2000 issue, she shared that &quot;she has struggled with depression her entire life&quot; and decided to start medications when she realized her fears were affecting her family. With a strong start and a circulation close to 3.5 million, things looked promising, but the magazine stumbled as conflicts emerged between O&#x27;Donnell and the editors. The contract gave O&#x27;Donnell control over editorial process and editorial staff but veto power remained with publisher Gruner+Jahr USA. O&#x27;Donnell quit the magazine in September 2002, following a dispute over editorial control. &quot;If I&#x27;m going to have my name and my brand on the corner of a magazine, it has to be my vision&quot; she told &quot;People&quot;.

&quot;Rosie&quot; magazine folded in 2003. In late 2003, O&#x27;Donnell and the publishers each sued the other for breach of contract. The publishers said that, by removing herself from the magazine&#x27;s publication, she was in breach of contract. The trial received considerable press coverage. O&#x27;Donnell would often give brief press interviews outside of the courtroom responding to various allegations. Of note was a former magazine colleague and breast cancer survivor who testified that O&#x27;Donnell said to her on the phone that people who lie &quot;get sick and they get cancer. If they keep lying, they get it again&quot;. O&#x27;Donnell apologized the next day and stated, &quot;I&#x27;m sorry I hurt her the way I did, that was not my intention.&quot; The judge, Ira Gammerman of the New York Supreme Court in Manhattan, dismissed the case, ruling that neither side should receive damages.

===Books===
In 1997, Rosie released the children&#x27;s book &quot;Kids are Punny: Jokes Sent by Kids to the Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot;, which contained jokes she had received from children. A sequel titled &quot;Kids are Punny 2: More Jokes Sent by Kids to the Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; was released a year later in 1998, and an HBO special was made based on the books. In April 2002, O&#x27;Donnell released &quot;Find Me,&quot; a combination of memoir, mystery and detective story with an underlying interest in reuniting birth mothers with their children. In addition to cataloging her childhood and early adulthood, the book delved into O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s relationship with a woman with dissociative identity disorder who posed as an under-aged teen who had become pregnant by rape. The book reached number two on &quot;The New York Times&quot; bestseller list.

In October 2007, she released &quot;Celebrity Detox&quot;, her second memoir which focuses on the struggles with leaving fame behind, noting her exits from &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; and &quot;The View&quot;.

===R Family Vacations===
In 2003, O&#x27;Donnell and Carpenter partnered with travel entrepreneur Gregg Kaminsky to launch R Family Vacations catering to LGBT families, &quot;the very first all gay and lesbian family vacation packages&quot; where &quot;gays and lesbians can bring their kids, their friends, and their parents.&quot; Although O&#x27;Donnell is not involved on a day-to-day basis, she does contribute to the creative aspects of &quot;advertising and marketing materials&quot; and initiated the idea for the company when she filled in as a last-minute replacement headliner on one of Kaminsky&#x27;s Atlantis Events gay cruises and also came up with the name &quot;R Family Vacations&quot;. On July 11, 2004, the first cruise was held with 1600 passengers including 600 children. In addition to traditional entertainment and recreational activities, the company partnered with Provincetown&#x27;s Family Pride, a 25-year-old Washington, D.C.–based organization that advocates for LGBT families to host discussions on &quot;adoption, insemination, surrogacy, and everything else that would be helpful to gay parenting.&quot; &quot;All Aboard! Rosie&#x27;s Family Cruise&quot;, a documentary film about the trip debuted on HBO on April 6, 2006, and was nominated for three Emmy Awards. Of the experience, O&#x27;Donnell stated &quot;we didn&#x27;t really realize the magic that was going to take place. People who had never met another gay family met other families and it was powerful.&quot;

=== &quot;Taboo&quot; ===
In late 2003, O&#x27;Donnell brought the musical &quot;Taboo&quot; to Broadway. She hired Charles Busch to re-write the book, and the story became &quot;bitchier&quot; and more focused on the rise to fame of the character based on Boy George. It closed on February 8, 2004, after about 100 performances and &quot;mostly bad&quot; reviews. O&#x27;Donnell described the show&#x27;s production as &quot;by far the most fulfilling experience of my career&quot;. She has stated that she intends to bring the show back to Broadway, although Scott Miller writes that people are hesitant to get involved after the &quot;train wreck&quot; of the original production.

==Charitable work==
Over her career, O&#x27;Donnell has developed a reputation for raising funds and her own philanthropy to charitable causes. In May 1996, Warner Books advanced O&#x27;Donnell $3 million to write a memoir. She used the money to seed her For All Kids Foundation to help institute national standards for day care across the country.

Since 1997, Rosie&#x27;s For All Kids Foundation, overseen by Elizabeth Birch, has awarded more than $22 million in Early Childhood Care and Education program grants to over 900 nonprofit organizations. On October 30, 2006, she was honored by the New York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children. &quot;It&#x27;s our privilege to be honoring and hosting Rosie,&quot; said NYSPCC president David Stack in a statement. &quot;Her Rosie&#x27;s for All Kids Foundation has awarded more than $22 million in grants to over 1,400 child-related organizations, and that&#x27;s just one of her many impressive activities on behalf of children.&quot; In November 2006, &quot;Nightline&quot; aired a video report about the opening of The Children&#x27;s Plaza and Family Center in Renaissance Village, a FEMA trailer park in Louisiana. This was an emergency response initiative of Rosie&#x27;s For All Kids Foundation with the help of many local nonprofit organizations and for-profit businesses, all efforts were to assist the families displaced by Hurricane Katrina.

San Francisco public relations firm Fineman Associates awarded top prize to Procter &amp; Gamble&#x27;s designation of O&#x27;Donnell as &quot;unkissable&quot; in a promotion for Scope mouthwash on the 1997 annual list of the nation&#x27;s worst public relations blunders. In response to the promotion, O&#x27;Donnell partnered with Warner–Lambert&#x27;s competitor Listerine, who donated bottles of mouthwash to the studio audience and donated $1,000 to charity every time a hosted guest would kiss her in exchange for O&#x27;Donnell promoting their product. On occasion, the guests would offer multiple kisses, and &quot;People&quot; reported O&#x27;Donnell &quot;smooched her way to more than $350,000.&quot;

In 2003, O&#x27;Donnell and Kelli O&#x27;Donnell collaborated with Artistic Director Lori Klinger to create Rosie&#x27;s Broadway Kids, dedicated to providing free instruction in music and dance to New York City public schools or students. Rosie&#x27;s Broadway Kids serves more than 4,500 teachers, students, and their family members at 21 schools. Currently, programs are in Harlem, Midtown West, Chelsea, Lower East Side, East Village, and Chinatown. All net profits from O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s 2007 book &quot;Celebrity Detox&quot; are also being donated to Rosie&#x27;s Broadway Kids.

In December 2006, at a one-night charity event on the Norwegian Pearl cruise ship, Elizabeth Birch, executive director for the Rosie&#x27;s For All Kids Foundation, confirmed that $50 million from O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s five-year contract were donated in an irrevocable trust to charity. She is also reported to have contributed several hundred thousand dollars for rehabilitation therapies for war veterans who have lost limbs in Iraq and Afghanistan wars. On &quot;The Tyra Banks Show&quot;, Banks brought up to O&#x27;Donnell that people don&#x27;t realize that O&#x27;Donnell has given more than $100 million to charity. In May 2007, O&#x27;Donnell and Pogo.com announced a joint effort to raise money for Rosie&#x27;s All Kids Foundation. EA, which owns Pogo.com, committed $30,000 and more money can be raised based on the amount of playing time people spend on certain games. They also held a sweepstakes in which winners get to fly to New York and meet O&#x27;Donnell and attend a charity function as her guest.

During the summer of 2007, O&#x27;Donnell was a guest on the multi-artist True Colors Tour, which traveled through 15 cities in the United States and Canada. The tour, sponsored by the gay cable channel Logo, began on June 8, 2007. Hosted by comedian Margaret Cho and headlined by Cyndi Lauper, the tour also included Debbie Harry, Erasure, The Gossip, Rufus Wainwright, The Dresden Dolls, The MisShapes, Indigo Girls, The Cliks, and other special guests. Profits from the tour helped to benefit the Human Rights Campaign as well as P-FLAG and The Matthew Shepard Foundation. She appeared again on True Colors Tour 2008.

==Personal life==
O&#x27;Donnell was a resident of Nyack, New York, after the purchase in 1996 of &quot;Pretty Penny&quot;, a Victorian river home that had previously served as the home of Helen Hayes. O&#x27;Donnell sold the home to businessman Edward M. Kopko in 2000. She has lived in South Nyack, New York, and owns a home in West Palm Beach, Florida. O’Donnell relocated to the West Coast in the early 2020s.

O&#x27;Donnell is a Democrat. She has contributed funds to multiple political campaigns, including to the campaign to elect Senator Doug Jones of Alabama.

On numerous occasions, O&#x27;Donnell has been outspoken about controversial topics. In 2007, she announced her opinion concerning the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center on September 11, 2001, in which she questioned the NIST conclusions, and alleged the U.S. government&#x27;s involvement in the event.

===Sexual orientation===
In her January 31, 2002, appearance on the sitcom &quot;Will &amp; Grace&quot;, she played a lesbian mother. A month later as part of her act at the Ovarian Cancer Research benefit at Caroline&#x27;s Comedy Club O&#x27;Donnell came out as a lesbian, announcing &quot;I&#x27;m a dyke! ... I don&#x27;t know why people make such a big deal about the gay thing. ... People are confused, they&#x27;re shocked, like this is a big revelation to somebody.&quot; The announcement came two months before the end of her talk show. Although she also cited the need to put a face to gays and lesbians, her primary reason was to bring attention to LGBTQ adoption issues. O&#x27;Donnell is a foster and adoptive mother. She protested against adoption agencies, particularly in Florida, that refused adoptive rights to gay and lesbian parents.

Diane Sawyer interviewed O&#x27;Donnell in a March 14, 2002, episode of &quot;PrimeTime Thursday&quot;. O&#x27;Donnell told &quot;USA Today&quot; that she chose to talk to Sawyer because she wanted an investigative piece on Florida&#x27;s ban on gay adoption. She told Sawyer if that was done, &quot;I would like to talk about my life and how (the case) pertains to me.&quot; She spoke about two gay men in Florida who faced having a foster child they raised removed from their home. State law wouldn&#x27;t let them adopt because Florida banned gay or bisexual couples from adopting. O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s coming out drew criticism from some LGBTQ activists who cited her repeated references to being enamored of Tom Cruise on &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; as deceptive. She responded in her act stating, &quot;I said I wanted him to mow my lawn and bring me a lemonade. I never said I wanted to blow him.&quot; After leaving her show and coming out, O&#x27;Donnell returned to stand-up comedy and cut her hair. O&#x27;Donnell told the press that her haircut was meant to mimic the haircut of former Culture Club backup singer Helen Terry.

O&#x27;Donnell was named 2002&#x27;s Person of the Year by &quot;The Advocate&quot;, and in May 2003 she became a regular columnist for the magazine. The magazine&#x27;s editor-in-chief, Judy Wieder, stated, &quot;Today, Rosie&#x27;s long and brave journey has led her not only to the cover of &quot;The Advocate&quot; – Rosie was honored with the magazine&#x27;s Person of the Year Award for 2002 – but now to its chorus of voices, as a columnist.&quot;

===Marriages and children===
O&#x27;Donnell adopted her first child, Parker Jaren O&#x27;Donnell, as an infant in 1995. Later, Kelli Carpenter also adopted Parker. Parker is an aficionado of military history and in 2011 successfully lobbied his mother to send him to Valley Forge Military Academy.

On February 26, 2004, O&#x27;Donnell married Carpenter, a former Nickelodeon marketing executive, in San Francisco two weeks after Mayor Gavin Newsom authorized the granting of marriage licenses to same-sex couples. Her decision to go to San Francisco to marry Carpenter was seen as a show of defiance against then-President George W. Bush over his support for the Federal Marriage Amendment. She said in 2004, &quot;We were both inspired to come here after the sitting President made the vile and hateful comments he made ... [O]ne thought ran through my mind on the plane out here – with Liberty and Social justice for all.&quot; The couple was married by San Francisco Treasurer Susan Leal, one of the city&#x27;s highest ranking lesbian officials, and serenaded by the San Francisco Gay Men&#x27;s Chorus. O&#x27;Donnell said during the trial over &quot;Rosie&quot; magazine she had decided to marry Carpenter, in part because even though they acted as spouses they legally were no closer than friends: &quot;We applied for spousal privilege and were denied it by the state. As a result, everything that I said to Kelli, every letter that I wrote her, every e-mail, every correspondence and conversation was entered into the record ... I am now and will forever be a total proponent of gay marriage.&quot;

Carpenter and O&#x27;Donnell have four children together. In 2000, the family took in a foster child Mia (born in 1997), and announced intentions to adopt her. In 2001, the state of Florida removed Mia from their home, and O&#x27;Donnell has since worked extensively to bring an end to the Florida law prohibiting same-sex family adoption.

In mid-November 2009, O&#x27;Donnell disclosed that Carpenter had moved out of their home in 2007. Their marriage had ended in August 2004 when it was among the thousands voided by the California Supreme Court.

O&#x27;Donnell began dating 40-year-old executive-search consultant Michelle Rounds in mid-2011. On December 5, 2011, during a break in the taping of &quot;The Rosie Show&quot;, O&#x27;Donnell announced to her studio audience that she and Rounds were engaged. The two married in a private ceremony in New York on June 9, 2012. On January 9, 2013, the couple announced they had adopted a baby girl. In February 2015, O&#x27;Donnell filed for divorce from Rounds after two years of marriage. Their divorce was settled in October 2015. O&#x27;Donnell was awarded full custody of the child. Rounds died by suicide on September 15, 2017.

In August 2015, O&#x27;Donnell tweeted that her 17-year-old daughter, Chelsea, had gone missing from their Nyack, New York, home along with her therapy dog. Chelsea was found a week later in Barnegat, New Jersey.

In September 2024 Chelsea was arrested in Marinette County, Wisconsin on charges involving child neglect, domestic abuse, maintaining a drug trafficking facility, possession of methamphetamine, illegally obtaining prescriptions and drug paraphernalia, and misdemeanor possession of THC after her 11 month old child was found in a house filled with crack pipes, feces and garbage. In October 2024, Chelsea was again arrested, this time in Oconto County, and soon afterwards charged with bail jumping, felony possession of methamphetamine and narcotic drugs, and misdemeanor counts involving possession of drug paraphernalia and resisting or obstructing an officer. In November 2024, Chelsea was arrested for a third time in Wisconsin, this time in Marinette County, on two felony counts of bail jumping, two felony counts of possession of methamphetamine, and a felony count of possession of narcotic drugs.

===Health===
In the summer of 2000, O&#x27;Donnell suffered a staph infection after she accidentally cut the middle finger of her left hand with a knife while cutting a price tag off a fishing pole. The infection incapacitated her for weeks and nearly resulted in doctors amputating her hand. She later quipped that George W. Bush was to blame for the infection, saying that she was preparing to go on a fishing trip at the time to avoid seeing Bush on television during the then-ongoing 2000 Republican National Convention. O&#x27;Donnell has acknowledged her struggles with recurrent major depressive episodes during the fall and winter months consistent with seasonal affective disorder.

O&#x27;Donnell suffered a heart attack in mid-August 2012. She said an artery was 99 percent blocked and a stent was inserted. She later revealed on Twitter that to reverse her heart disease, she would espouse the whole-foods, plant-based diet promoted by Caldwell Esselstyn.

==Awards and nominations==
;Daytime Emmy Awards
* 1997 Outstanding Talk Show, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; nominated
* 1997 Outstanding Talk/Service Show Host, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; won
* 1998 Outstanding Talk Show, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; won
* 1998 Outstanding Talk/Service Show Host, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; won (tied with Oprah Winfrey)
* 1998 Outstanding Writing – Special Class, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; nominated
* 1999 Outstanding Talk Show, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; won
* 1999 Outstanding Talk Show Host, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; won
* 1999 Outstanding Writing – Special Class, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; nominated
* 2000 Outstanding Talk Show, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; won
* 2000 Outstanding Talk Show Host, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; won
* 2001 Outstanding Talk Show, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; won
* 2001 Outstanding Talk Show Host, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; won (tied with Regis Philbin)
* 2002 Outstanding Talk Show, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; won
* 2002 Outstanding Talk Show Host, &quot;The Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; won
* 2007 Outstanding Talk Show Host, Rosie O&#x27;Donnell, Barbara Walters, Joy Behar and Elisabeth Hasselbeck, &quot;The View&quot; nominated

;Emmy Awards
* 1995 Outstanding Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program, &quot;Rosie O&#x27;Donnell (stand-up comedy special)&quot; nominated
* 1996 Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series, &quot;The Larry Sanders Show&quot; nominated
* 1999 Outstanding Children&#x27;s Program, &quot;Kids Are Punny&quot; nominated
* 1999 Outstanding Variety, Music or Comedy Special, &quot;52nd Annual Tony Awards&quot; won
* 2006 Outstanding Nonfiction Special, &quot;All Aboard! Rosie&#x27;s Family Cruise&quot; nominated

;Kids&#x27; Choice Awards
* 1995 Favorite Movie Actress, &quot;The Flintstones&quot; won
* 2000 Hall of Fame Award

;Tony Award
* 2014 Isabelle Stevenson Award &quot;for her commitment to arts education for New York City&#x27;s public school children.&quot;

;Women in Film Crystal + Lucy Awards
* 2002 Lucy Award in recognition of her excellence and innovation in her creative works that have enhanced the perception of women through the medium of television.

;Queerty Awards
* 2024 Icon Award in recognition of her work.

==Filmography==

===Television===
===Film===
===Web series===

===Award ceremonies===
* &quot;Nickelodeon Kids&#x27; Choice Awards&quot; (Host) (1996–2003)
* &quot;54th Annual Tony Awards&quot; (Host) (2000)
* &quot;41st Annual Grammy Awards&quot; (Host) (1999)
* &quot;42nd Annual Grammy Awards&quot; (Host) (2000)

===Radio===
* &quot;Rosie Radio&quot; SIRIUS XM (2009–11)

===Theater===
* &quot;Grease&quot; (1994) as Betty Rizzo at the Eugene O&#x27;Neill Theater
* &quot;Seussical&quot; (2001) as the Cat in the Hat (replacement for David Shiner) 
* &quot;Pippin&quot; (2004) (World AIDS Day benefit concert)
* &quot;Fiddler on the Roof&quot; (2004) (replacement for Andrea Martin in 2005) as Golde
* &quot;No, No, Nanette&quot; (2008) (for Encores!)
* &quot;Love, Loss, and What I Wore&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Good for Otto&quot; by David Rabe (Off-Broadway, 2018), left production prior to opening due to illness
* &quot;The Music Man&quot; (the Kennedy Center, 2019) as Mrs. Paroo

==Bibliography==
* &quot;Find Me&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Celebrity Detox&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Rosie O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s Crafty U: 100 Easy Projects the Whole Family Can Enjoy All Year Long&quot; (2008)

=== Children&#x27;s books ===
* &quot;Kids are Punny: Jokes Sent by Kids to the Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Kids are Punny 2: More Jokes Sent by Kids to the Rosie O&#x27;Donnell Show&quot; (1998)

==Discography==


==See also==
* LGBT culture in New York City
* List of LGBT people from New York City
* NYC Pride March

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q272929" start="0" end="22" title="Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Roseann O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q687284" start="239" end="250" title="Star Search" label="Star Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q622812" start="410" end="419" title="talk show" label="talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047206" start="427" end="456" title="The Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell Show" label="The Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="505" end="524" title="Daytime Emmy Awards" label="Daytime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197928" start="762" end="770" title="The View (talk show)" label="The View"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="812" end="824" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="859" end="878" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="904" end="912" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277465" start="952" end="967" title="Sirius XM Radio" label="Sirius XM Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573619" start="1055" end="1058" title="Oprah Winfrey Network (U.S. TV channel)" label="OWN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761582" start="1066" end="1080" title="The Rosie Show" label="The Rosie Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="1244" end="1252" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741727" start="1273" end="1278" title="SMILF" label="SMILF"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="1390" end="1397" title="blogger" label="blogger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057720" start="1477" end="1492" title="Celebrity Detox" label="Celebrity Detox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612907" start="1726" end="1740" title="LGBT social movements" label="lesbian rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457816" start="1745" end="1757" title="LGBT adoption in the United States" label="gay adoption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430789" start="1786" end="1792" title="foster care" label="foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q180472" start="1797" end="1805" title="adoption" label="adoptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q752361" start="1834" end="1846" title="The Advocate (LGBT magazine)" label="The Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="2034" end="2038" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278193" start="2063" end="2081" title="R Family Vacations" label="R Family Vacations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459193" start="2166" end="2183" title="Commack, New York" label="Commack, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q179424" start="2382" end="2396" title="County Donegal" label="County Donegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161215" start="2526" end="2550" title="Daniel J. O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Daniel J. O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="2572" end="2595" title="New York State Assembly" label="New York State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152068" start="2725" end="2744" title="Commack High School" label="Commack High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q750053" start="2771" end="2781" title="homecoming" label="homecoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150737" start="2789" end="2793" title="prom" label="prom"/>
<link wikidata="Q266808" start="2983" end="2995" title="Gilda Radner" label="Gilda Radner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368045" start="3013" end="3035" title="Roseanne Roseannadanna" label="Roseanne Roseannadanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210045" start="3095" end="3112" title="Dickinson College" label="Dickinson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="3136" end="3153" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q687284" start="3360" end="3371" title="Star Search" label="Star Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423559" start="3399" end="3414" title="Larry King Live" label="Larry King Live"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3507" end="3518" title="Gimme a Break#Main characters" label="Nell Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056556" start="3544" end="3558" title="Gimme a Break!" label="Gimme a Break!"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="3614" end="3617" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6399436" start="3635" end="3642" title="VJ (media personality)" label="veejays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598069" start="3784" end="3801" title="Stand By Your Man (TV series)" label="Stand By Your Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="3811" end="3822" title="Fox Network" label="Fox Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q230929" start="3842" end="3857" title="Melissa Gilbert" label="Melissa Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306472" start="3980" end="4001" title="A League of Their Own" label="A League of Their Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="4025" end="4034" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q280098" start="4036" end="4047" title="Geena Davis" label="Geena Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="4053" end="4060" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q431140" start="4191" end="4202" title="Hocus Pocus (1993 film)" label="Hocus Pocus"/>
<link wikidata="Q235460" start="4241" end="4253" title="Kathy Najimy" label="Kathy Najimy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190631" start="4334" end="4346" title="Bette Midler" label="Bette Midler"/>
<link wikidata="Q107167" start="4494" end="4514" title="Sleepless in Seattle" label="Sleepless in Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q167498" start="4524" end="4532" title="Meg Ryan" label="Meg Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q614768" start="4573" end="4585" title="Betty Rubble" label="Betty Rubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q602094" start="4593" end="4620" title="The Flintstones (film)" label="live-action film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q201358" start="4630" end="4645" title="The Flintstones" label="The Flintstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q215072" start="4657" end="4669" title="John Goodman" label="John Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q232047" start="4671" end="4688" title="Elizabeth Perkins" label="Elizabeth Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q336282" start="4694" end="4706" title="Rick Moranis" label="Rick Moranis"/>
<link wikidata="Q310324" start="4718" end="4732" title="Timothy Hutton" label="Timothy Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q813451" start="4758" end="4773" title="Beautiful Girls (film)" label="Beautiful Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q105221" start="4824" end="4835" title="Dan Aykroyd" label="Dan Aykroyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q642925" start="4845" end="4857" title="Exit to Eden (film)" label="Exit to Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="4922" end="4928" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q208696" start="4942" end="4948" title="Tarzan (1999 film)" label="Tarzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q51489" start="4988" end="5006" title="M. Night Shyamalan" label="M. Night Shyamalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061070" start="5020" end="5030" title="Wide Awake (1998 film)" label="Wide Awake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777020" start="5085" end="5097" title="Elaine Benes" label="Elaine Benes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243465" start="5212" end="5219" title="Daytime television" label="daytime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047206" start="5237" end="5266" title="The Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell Show" label="The Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="5370" end="5381" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567192" start="5629" end="5639" title="koosh ball" label="koosh ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="5705" end="5715" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="5804" end="5821" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway musicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q473845" start="5996" end="6015" title="Columbine High School massacre" label="Columbine shootings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328508" start="6065" end="6076" title="gun control" label="gun control"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859797" start="6103" end="6120" title="Million Mom March" label="Million Mom March"/>
<link wikidata="Q213706" start="6529" end="6540" title="Tom Selleck" label="Tom Selleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q949305" start="6566" end="6581" title="The Love Letter (1999 film)" label="The Love Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q327018" start="6604" end="6616" title="Interrogation" label="interrogated"/>
<link wikidata="Q863259" start="6664" end="6701" title="National Rifle Association of America" label="National Rifle Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808602" start="6777" end="6792" title="assault weapons" label="assault weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753080" start="7193" end="7198" title="Kmart (United States)" label="Kmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q566949" start="7311" end="7329" title="Annie Get Your Gun (musical)" label="Annie Get Your Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778342" start="7503" end="7522" title="Anything You Can Do (song)" label="Anything You Can Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158280" start="8059" end="8083" title="Carrying concealed weapon" label="concealed firearm permit"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="8144" end="8156" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="8270" end="8296" title="September 11, 2001 attacks" label="September 11, 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721417" start="8745" end="8767" title="The Caroline Rhea Show" label="The Caroline Rhea Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q237648" start="8789" end="8802" title="Caroline Rhea" label="Caroline Rhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="8891" end="8894" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q23722" start="8906" end="8926" title="Curb Your Enthusiasm" label="Curb Your Enthusiasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568190" start="8948" end="8958" title="The Bowtie" label="The Bowtie"/>
<link wikidata="Q434497" start="9049" end="9064" title="Meredith Vieira" label="Meredith Vieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197928" start="9101" end="9109" title="The View (U.S. TV series)" label="The View"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968304" start="9153" end="9163" title="Star Jones" label="Star Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813603" start="9445" end="9467" title="gastric bypass surgery" label="gastric bypass surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q15737157" start="9710" end="9721" title="word of mouth" label="buzz factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636981" start="10467" end="10476" title="Joy Behar" label="Joy Behar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290198" start="10541" end="10549" title="Domestic policy of the George W. Bush administration" label="domestic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468443" start="10554" end="10561" title="Foreign policy of the George W. Bush administration" label="foreign"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="10586" end="10594" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q449837" start="10628" end="10648" title="Elisabeth Hasselbeck" label="Elisabeth Hasselbeck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10675" end="10694" title="Presidency of George W. Bush#Major issues of presidency" label="Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148035" start="10806" end="10816" title="Kelly Ripa" label="Kelly Ripa"/>
<link wikidata="Q463673" start="10838" end="10851" title="Regis Philbin" label="Regis Philbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q347128" start="10872" end="10882" title="Clay Aiken" label="Clay Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q166888" start="10886" end="10911" title="Live with Regis and Kelly" label="Live with Regis and Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11604" end="11633" title="Phil Donahue#MSNBC program" label="Phil Donahue&amp;#x27;s talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458730" start="11666" end="11724" title="sexual abuse scandal in the Catholic archdiocese of Boston" label="sexual abuse scandal in the Catholic archdiocese of Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q145093" start="11929" end="11936" title="Apostolic Palace" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="12204" end="12238" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582158" start="12262" end="12281" title="Gonzales v. Carhart" label="Gonzales v. Carhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054483" start="12314" end="12344" title="Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act" label="Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564015" start="12369" end="12385" title="Florynce Kennedy" label="Florynce Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="12445" end="12454" title="sacrament" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q316694" start="12471" end="12483" title="rhetorical question" label="rhetorically"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="12560" end="12590" title="separation of church and state" label="separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="13053" end="13063" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642960" start="13064" end="13071" title="Pundit (expert)" label="pundits"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111307" start="13244" end="13255" title="ching chong" label="ching chong"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="13315" end="13338" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="13430" end="13441" title="LGBT rights" label="LGBT rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455718" start="13579" end="13585" title="Nigger" label="n-word"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="13840" end="13844" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="14067" end="14079" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q23997" start="14133" end="14144" title="Tara Conner" label="Tara Conner"/>
<link wikidata="Q746813" start="14253" end="14269" title="Miss USA Pageant" label="Miss USA Pageant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909090" start="14483" end="14498" title="moral authority" label="moral authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644969" start="15794" end="15805" title="war in Iraq" label="war in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q188686" start="15824" end="15834" title="military occupation" label="occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489697" start="15994" end="16047" title="World Trade Center controlled demolition conspiracy theories" label="first time in history that fire has ever melted steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483685" start="16448" end="16476" title="Lancet surveys of Iraq War casualties" label="655,000 Iraqi civilians dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="16521" end="16525" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q20819854" start="17842" end="17854" title="split screen (filmmaking)" label="split screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="18120" end="18123" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="18184" end="18192" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001" start="18308" end="18323" title="Whoopi Goldberg" label="Whoopi Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="18458" end="18485" title="Time 100" label="100 most influential people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189399" start="18571" end="18577" title="Parade (magazine)" label="PARADE"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="18850" end="18856" title="Autism" label="Autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153681" start="18900" end="18914" title="Janette Barber" label="Janette Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123235" start="19238" end="19244" title="Jahero" label="Jahero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5703890" start="19443" end="19458" title="Helene Macaulay" label="Helene Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153681" start="19543" end="19557" title="Janette Barber" label="Janette Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q230993" start="19786" end="19800" title="Jenny McCarthy" label="Jenny McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q432437" start="19943" end="19956" title="Kathy Griffin" label="Kathy Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q381178" start="20377" end="20387" title="Bob Barker" label="Bob Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="20409" end="20412" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231565" start="20436" end="20454" title="The Price Is Right (U.S. game show)" label="The Price Is Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742707" start="20930" end="20937" title="America (2009 film)" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="20947" end="20963" title="Lifetime (TV network)" label="Lifetime channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692583" start="21044" end="21053" title="aging out" label="aging out"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321651" start="21106" end="21116" title="E.R. Frank" label="E.R. Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690084" start="21200" end="21227" title="Love, Loss, and What I Wore" label="Love, Loss, and What I Wore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277465" start="21351" end="21366" title="Sirius XM Radio" label="Sirius XM Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q348603" start="21455" end="21467" title="Howard Stern" label="Howard Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q23722" start="21589" end="21609" title="Curb Your Enthusiasm" label="Curb Your Enthusiasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573619" start="21747" end="21768" title="Oprah Winfrey Network (U.S. TV channel)" label="Oprah Winfrey Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877356" start="22030" end="22049" title="Miss Representation" label="Miss Representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761582" start="22146" end="22160" title="The Rosie Show" label="The Rosie Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q23722" start="22723" end="22743" title="Curb Your Enthusiasm" label="Curb Your Enthusiasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568190" start="22831" end="22844" title="The Bi-Sexual" label="The Bi-Sexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909583" start="23089" end="23099" title="Bomb Girls" label="Bomb Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q726784" start="23175" end="23206" title="Jake and the Never Land Pirates" label="Jake and the Never Land Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q133683" start="23278" end="23283" title="Smash (TV series)" label="Smash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029180" start="23369" end="23387" title="Impractical Jokers" label="Impractical Jokers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734937" start="23516" end="23527" title="The Fosters (2013 TV series)" label="The Fosters"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001" start="23858" end="23873" title="Whoopi Goldberg" label="Whoopi Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q234076" start="23914" end="23925" title="Rosie Perez" label="Rosie Perez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030302" start="23930" end="23945" title="Nicolle Wallace" label="Nicolle Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="24080" end="24102" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16619265" start="24371" end="24386" title="Pitch Perfect 2" label="Pitch Perfect 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992512" start="24559" end="24565" title="Empire (2015 TV series)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q232301" start="25075" end="25088" title="Roseanne Barr" label="Roseanne Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q174908" start="25168" end="25181" title="Michael Moore" label="Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q236181" start="25186" end="25201" title="Sandra Bernhard" label="Sandra Bernhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q214677" start="25326" end="25337" title="Nora Ephron" label="Nora Ephron"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417213" start="25551" end="25554" title="Mom (TV series)" label="Mom"/>
<link wikidata="Q229487" start="25614" end="25628" title="Allison Janney" label="Allison Janney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786214" start="25694" end="25704" title="Match Game" label="Match Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q567018" start="25748" end="25768" title="The $100,000 Pyramid" label="The $100,000 Pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q235460" start="25803" end="25815" title="Kathy Najimy" label="Kathy Najimy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908803" start="25898" end="25913" title="Hairspray Live!" label="Hairspray Live!"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="25978" end="25986" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741727" start="26047" end="26052" title="SMILF" label="SMILF"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749344" start="26309" end="26333" title="I Know This Much Is True (miniseries)" label="I Know This Much Is True"/>
<link wikidata="Q104877792" start="26400" end="26413" title="Run the World (TV series)" label="Run the World"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26430" end="26454" title="The L Word: Generation Q" label="The L Word: Generation Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q107377563" start="26590" end="26605" title="American Gigolo (TV series)" label="American Gigolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="26729" end="26736" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632122" start="26750" end="26762" title="Russian Doll (TV series)" label="Russian Doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q234207" start="26778" end="26792" title="Natasha Lyonne" label="Natasha Lyonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="26835" end="26853" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843026" start="26867" end="26888" title="A League of Their Own (2022 TV series)" label="A League of Their Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q838254" start="27021" end="27034" title="McCall&amp;#x27;s" label="McCall&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327863" start="27260" end="27261" title="O, The Oprah Magazine" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q562566" start="28247" end="28265" title="breach of contract" label="breach of contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q128836347" start="28914" end="28927" title="Ira Gammerman (judge)" label="Ira Gammerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001111" start="28935" end="28970" title="New York Supreme Court" label="New York Supreme Court in Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="29032" end="29039" title="damages" label="damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="29383" end="29386" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q18657" start="29748" end="29778" title="dissociative identity disorder" label="dissociative identity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057720" start="29960" end="29975" title="Celebrity Detox" label="Celebrity Detox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278193" start="30272" end="30290" title="R Family Vacations" label="R Family Vacations"/>
<link wikidata="Q107637411" start="30763" end="30778" title="Atlantis Events" label="Atlantis Events"/>
<link wikidata="Q49154" start="31040" end="31052" title="Provincetown" label="Provincetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433107" start="31060" end="31072" title="Family Equality Council" label="Family Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715252" start="31143" end="31156" title="LGBT parenting" label="LGBT families"/>
<link wikidata="Q180472" start="31186" end="31194" title="adoption" label="adoption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379223" start="31196" end="31208" title="insemination" label="insemination"/>
<link wikidata="Q334645" start="31210" end="31219" title="surrogacy" label="surrogacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715252" start="31266" end="31279" title="gay parenting" label="gay parenting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728489" start="31293" end="31331" title="All Aboard! Rosie&amp;#x27;s Family Cruise" label="All Aboard! Rosie&amp;#x27;s Family Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919770" start="31736" end="31741" title="Taboo (musical)" label="Taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063851" start="31771" end="31784" title="Charles Busch" label="Charles Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="31801" end="31805" title="Book (musical theatre)" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q312883" start="31912" end="31922" title="Boy George" label="Boy George"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150392" start="32497" end="32509" title="Warner Books" label="Warner Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q539039" start="32752" end="32767" title="Elizabeth Birch" label="Elizabeth Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013994" start="32937" end="32995" title="New York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children" label="New York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768706" start="33363" end="33372" title="Nightline" label="Nightline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425355" start="33491" end="33503" title="FEMA trailer" label="FEMA trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="33512" end="33521" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="33737" end="33754" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="33771" end="33787" title="public relations" label="public relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q212405" start="33833" end="33853" title="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble" label="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434439" start="33936" end="33941" title="Scope (mouthwash)" label="Scope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969801" start="34090" end="34104" title="Warner–Lambert" label="Warner–Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q944073" start="34123" end="34132" title="Listerine" label="Listerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="34380" end="34386" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368873" start="34578" end="34604" title="Rosie&amp;#x27;s Broadway Kids" label="Rosie&amp;#x27;s Broadway Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="34847" end="34853" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="34855" end="34867" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="Midtown West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069129" start="34869" end="34876" title="Chelsea, Manhattan" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511813" start="34878" end="34893" title="Lower East Side" label="Lower East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043326" start="34895" end="34907" title="East Village, Manhattan" label="East Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q866332" start="34913" end="34922" title="Chinatown, Manhattan" label="Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464959" start="35114" end="35129" title="Norwegian Pearl" label="Norwegian Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q539039" start="35143" end="35158" title="Elizabeth Birch" label="Elizabeth Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074440" start="35329" end="35334" title="Charitable trust" label="trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369397" start="35526" end="35545" title="The Tyra Banks Show" label="The Tyra Banks Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q937098" start="35716" end="35724" title="Pogo.com" label="Pogo.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q25215448" start="36154" end="36170" title="True Colors Tour" label="True Colors Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812233" start="36283" end="36287" title="Logo TV" label="Logo"/>
<link wikidata="Q257243" start="36331" end="36343" title="Margaret Cho" label="Margaret Cho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545" start="36361" end="36373" title="Cyndi Lauper" label="Cyndi Lauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q215026" start="36398" end="36410" title="Debbie Harry" label="Debbie Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q484885" start="36412" end="36419" title="Erasure (duo)" label="Erasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12831" start="36421" end="36431" title="The Gossip" label="The Gossip"/>
<link wikidata="Q192402" start="36433" end="36449" title="Rufus Wainwright" label="Rufus Wainwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123938" start="36451" end="36468" title="The Dresden Dolls" label="The Dresden Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751719" start="36470" end="36483" title="The MisShapes" label="The MisShapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q772035" start="36485" end="36497" title="Indigo Girls" label="Indigo Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q966860" start="36499" end="36508" title="The Cliks" label="The Cliks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253380" start="36580" end="36601" title="Human Rights Campaign" label="Human Rights Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706440" start="36613" end="36619" title="PFLAG" label="P-FLAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791219" start="36624" end="36654" title="The Matthew Shepard Foundation" label="The Matthew Shepard Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295443" start="36678" end="36699" title="True Colors Tour 2008" label="True Colors Tour 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816652" start="36753" end="36768" title="Nyack, New York" label="Nyack, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q213302" start="36891" end="36902" title="Helen Hayes" label="Helen Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344273" start="36948" end="36963" title="Edward M. Kopko" label="Edward M. Kopko"/>
<link wikidata="Q947688" start="36990" end="37011" title="South Nyack, New York" label="South Nyack, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q163749" start="37032" end="37056" title="West Palm Beach, Florida" label="West Palm Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="37137" end="37145" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454722" start="37216" end="37270" title="United States Senate special election in Alabama, 2017" label="to the campaign to elect Senator Doug Jones of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="37503" end="37507" title="NIST" label="NIST"/>
<link wikidata="Q212135" start="37668" end="37684" title="Will &amp;amp; Grace" label="Will &amp;amp; Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045272" start="37796" end="37823" title="Caroline&amp;#x27;s Comedy Club" label="Caroline&amp;#x27;s Comedy Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="37839" end="37847" title="coming out" label="came out"/>
<link wikidata="Q17900" start="38247" end="38261" title="gay adoption" label="LGBTQ adoption"/>
<link wikidata="Q236402" start="38442" end="38454" title="Diane Sawyer" label="Diane Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022169" start="38520" end="38538" title="Primetime (U.S. TV program)" label="PrimeTime Thursday"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="38572" end="38581" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q50037" start="39555" end="39567" title="Culture Club" label="Culture Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784514" start="39582" end="39593" title="Helen Terry" label="Helen Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q752361" start="39661" end="39673" title="The Advocate (LGBT magazine)" label="The Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4008225" start="40319" end="40348" title="Valley Forge Military Academy" label="Valley Forge Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="40416" end="40427" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q461391" start="40488" end="40500" title="Gavin Newsom" label="Gavin Newsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="40676" end="40690" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110619" start="40716" end="40742" title="Federal Marriage Amendment" label="Federal Marriage Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648106" start="41033" end="41043" title="Susan Leal" label="Susan Leal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414039" start="41124" end="41159" title="San Francisco Gay Men&amp;#x27;s Chorus" label="San Francisco Gay Men&amp;#x27;s Chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39442" start="42993" end="43004" title="therapy dog" label="therapy dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088201" start="43040" end="43060" title="Barnegat, New Jersey" label="Barnegat, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130480" start="43105" end="43132" title="Marinette County, Wisconsin" label="Marinette County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q490477" start="43501" end="43514" title="Oconto County" label="Oconto County"/>
<link wikidata="Q199695" start="44033" end="44038" title="staph" label="staph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597789" start="44459" end="44494" title="2000 Republican National Convention" label="2000 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738337" start="44557" end="44581" title="major depressive episode" label="major depressive episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051223" start="44633" end="44660" title="seasonal affective disorder" label="seasonal affective disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325542" start="44770" end="44775" title="stent" label="stent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201457" start="44890" end="44906" title="plant-based diet" label="plant-based diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026509" start="44919" end="44937" title="Caldwell Esselstyn" label="Caldwell Esselstyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="44968" end="44987" title="Daytime Emmy Awards" label="Daytime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047206" start="45119" end="45148" title="The Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell Show" label="The Rosie O&amp;#x27;Donnell Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="45335" end="45348" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q463673" start="46024" end="46037" title="Regis Philbin" label="Regis Philbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q231417" start="46253" end="46268" title="Barbara Walters" label="Barbara Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636981" start="46270" end="46279" title="Joy Behar" label="Joy Behar"/>
<link wikidata="Q449837" start="46284" end="46304" title="Elisabeth Hasselbeck" label="Elisabeth Hasselbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197928" start="46312" end="46320" title="The View (U.S. TV series)" label="The View"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="46339" end="46350" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="46743" end="46754" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728489" start="46810" end="46848" title="All Aboard! Rosie&amp;#x27;s Family Cruise" label="All Aboard! Rosie&amp;#x27;s Family Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q163569" start="46867" end="46891" title="Kids&amp;#x27; Choice Awards" label="Kids&amp;#x27; Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q602094" start="46929" end="46944" title="The Flintstones (film)" label="The Flintstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="46983" end="46993" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031439" start="47126" end="47161" title="Women in Film Crystal + Lucy Awards" label="Women in Film Crystal + Lucy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47169" end="47179" title="Women in Film Crystal + Lucy Awards#THE LUCY AWARD" label="Lucy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271169" start="47329" end="47343" title="Queerty Awards" label="Queerty Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q163569" start="47485" end="47521" title="Nickelodeon Kids&amp;#x27; Choice Awards" label="Nickelodeon Kids&amp;#x27; Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="47567" end="47577" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q990545" start="47607" end="47632" title="41st Annual Grammy Awards" label="41st Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542319" start="47661" end="47686" title="42nd Annual Grammy Awards" label="42nd Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q611626" start="47789" end="47795" title="Grease (musical)" label="Grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457059" start="47867" end="47876" title="Seussical" label="Seussical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239745" start="47929" end="47941" title="David Shiner (clown)" label="David Shiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q688711" start="47952" end="47958" title="Pippin (musical)" label="Pippin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192373" start="47973" end="47987" title="World AIDS Day" label="World AIDS Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q487330" start="48013" end="48032" title="Fiddler on the Roof" label="Fiddler on the Roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q442309" start="48063" end="48076" title="Andrea Martin" label="Andrea Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994415" start="48103" end="48118" title="No, No, Nanette" label="No, No, Nanette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375560" start="48137" end="48145" title="Encores!" label="Encores!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690084" start="48155" end="48182" title="Love, Loss, and What I Wore" label="Love, Loss, and What I Wore"/>
<link wikidata="Q497375" start="48227" end="48237" title="David Rabe" label="David Rabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457220" start="48316" end="48329" title="The Music Man" label="The Music Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057720" start="48432" end="48447" title="Celebrity Detox" label="Celebrity Detox"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148561" start="48829" end="48858" title="LGBT culture in New York City" label="LGBT culture in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q85777920" start="48861" end="48899" title="List of LGBT people from New York City" label="List of LGBT people from New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457810" start="48902" end="48917" title="NYC Pride March" label="NYC Pride March"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44207" wikidata="Q849" url="?curid=44207" title="François Villon">
<text>François Villon (; ; ; – after 1463) is the best known French poet of the Late Middle Ages. He was involved in criminal behavior and had multiple encounters with law enforcement authorities. Villon wrote about some of these experiences in his poems.

== Biography ==

=== Birth ===
Villon was born in Paris in 1431. One source gives the date as .

=== Early life ===
Villon&#x27;s real name may have been François de Montcorbier or François des Loges: both of these names appear in official documents drawn up in Villon&#x27;s lifetime. In his own work, however, Villon is the only name the poet used, and he mentions it frequently in his work. His two collections of poems, especially &quot;Le Testament&quot; (also known as &quot;Le grand testament&quot;), have traditionally been read as if they were autobiographical. Other details of his life are known from court or other civil documents.

From what the sources tell us, it appears that Villon was born in poverty and raised by a foster father, but that his mother was still living when her son was thirty years old. The surname &quot;Villon,&quot; the poet tells us, is the name he adopted from his foster father, Guillaume de Villon, chaplain in the collegiate church of Saint-Benoît-le-Bétourné and a professor of canon law, who took Villon into his house. François describes Guillaume de Villon as &quot;more than a father to me&quot;.

=== Student life ===
Villon became a student in arts, perhaps at about twelve years of age. He received a bachelor&#x27;s degree from the University of Paris in 1449 and a master&#x27;s degree in 1452. Between this year and 1455, nothing is known of his activities. The &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; Eleventh Edition (1910–1911) says &quot;Attempts have been made, in the usual fashion of conjectural biography, to fill up the gap with what a young graduate of Bohemian tendencies would, could, or might have done, but they are mainly futile.&quot; 

=== Alleged criminal activities ===

On 5 June 1455, the first major recorded incident of his life occurred. While in the Rue Saint-Jacques in the company of a priest named Giles and a girl named Isabeau, he met a Breton named Jean le Hardi, a Master of Arts, who was also with a priest, Philippe Chermoye (or Sermoise or Sermaise). A scuffle broke out and daggers were drawn. Sermaise, who is accused of having threatened and attacked Villon and drawn the first blood, not only received a dagger-thrust in return, but a blow from a stone, which struck him down. He died of his wounds. Villon fled, and was sentenced to banishment – a sentence which was remitted in January 1456 by a pardon from King Charles VII after he received the second of two petitions which made the claim that Sermaise had forgiven Villon before he died. Two different versions of the formal pardon exist; in one, the culprit is identified as &quot;François des Loges, autrement dit Villon&quot; (&quot;François des Loges, otherwise called Villon&quot;), in the other as &quot;François de Montcorbier.&quot; He is also said to have named himself to the barber-surgeon who dressed his wounds as &quot;Michel Mouton.&quot; The documents of this affair at least confirm the date of his birth, by presenting him as twenty-six years old or thereabouts.

Around Christmas 1456, the chapel of the Collège de Navarre was broken open and five hundred gold crowns stolen. Villon was involved in the robbery. Many scholars believe that he fled from Paris soon afterward and that this is when he composed what is now known as the &quot;Le Petit Testament&quot; (&quot;The Smaller Testament&quot;) or &quot;Le Lais&quot; (&quot;Legacy&quot; or &quot;Bequests&quot;). The robbery was not discovered until March of the next year, and it was not until May that the police came on the track of a gang of student-robbers, owing to the indiscretion of one of them, Guy Tabarie. A year more passed, when Tabarie, after being arrested, turned king&#x27;s evidence and accused the absent Villon of being the ringleader, and of having gone to Angers, partly at least, to arrange similar burglaries there. Villon, for either this or another crime, was sentenced to banishment; he did not attempt to return to Paris. For four years, he was a wanderer. He may have been, as his friends Regnier de Montigny and Colin des Cayeux were, a member of a wandering gang of thieves.

=== &quot;Le Testament&quot;, 1461 ===
The next date for which there are recorded whereabouts for Villon is the summer of 1461; Villon wrote that he spent that summer in the bishop&#x27;s prison at Meung-sur-Loire. His crime is not known, but in &quot;Le Testament&quot; (&quot;The Testament&quot;) dated that year he inveighs bitterly against Bishop Thibault d&#x27;Aussigny, who held the See of Orléans. Villon may have been released as part of a general jail-delivery at the accession of King Louis XI and became a free man again on 2 October 1461.

In 1461, he wrote his most famous work, &quot;Le Testament&quot; (or &quot;Le Grand Testament,&quot; as it is also known).

In the autumn of 1462, he was once more living in the cloisters of Saint-Benoît.

=== Banishment and disappearance ===
In November 1462, Villon was imprisoned for theft. He was taken to the Grand Châtelet fortress that stood at what is now Place du Châtelet in Paris. In default of evidence, the old charge of burgling the College of Navarre was revived. No royal pardon arrived to counter the demand for restitution, but bail was accepted and Villon was released. However, he fell promptly into a street quarrel. He was arrested, tortured and condemned to be hanged (&quot;pendu et étranglé&quot;), although the sentence was commuted to banishment by the parlement on 5 January 1463.

Villon&#x27;s fate after January 1463 is unknown. Rabelais retells two stories about him which are usually dismissed as without any basis in fact. Anthony Bonner speculated that the poet, as he left Paris, was &quot;broken in health and spirit.&quot; Bonner writes further:

==Works==

&quot;Le Petit Testament&quot;, also known as &quot;Le Lais&quot;, was written in late 1456. The work is an ironic, comic poem that serves as Villon&#x27;s will, listing bequests to his friends and acquaintances.

In 1461, at the age of thirty, Villon composed the longer work which came to be known as &quot;Le grand testament&quot; (1461–1462). This has generally been judged Villon&#x27;s greatest work, and there is evidence in the work itself that Villon felt the same.

Besides &quot;Le Lais&quot; and &quot;Le grand testament&quot;, Villon&#x27;s surviving works include multiple poems. Sixteen of these shorter poems vary from the serious to the light-hearted. An additional eleven poems in thieves&#x27; jargon were attributed to Villon from a very early time, but many scholars now believe them to be the work of other poets imitating Villon.

=== Discussion ===
Villon was a great innovator in terms of the themes of poetry and, through these themes, a great renovator of the forms. He understood perfectly the medieval courtly ideal, but he often chose to write against the grain, reversing the values and celebrating the lowlifes destined for the gallows, falling happily into parody or lewd jokes, and constantly innovating in his diction and vocabulary; a few minor poems make extensive use of Parisian thieves&#x27; slang. Still Villon&#x27;s verse is mostly about his own life, a record of poverty, trouble, and trial which was certainly shared by his poems&#x27; intended audience.

Villon&#x27;s poems are sprinkled with mysteries and hidden jokes. They are peppered with the slang of the time and the underworld subculture in which Villon moved. His works are also replete with private jokes and full of the names of real people – rich men, royal officials, lawyers, prostitutes, and policemen – from medieval Paris.

== English translation ==

=== Complete works ===

George Heyer (1869–1925; father of novelist Georgette Heyer) published a translation in 1924. Oxford University Press brought out The Retrospect of Francois Villon: being a Rendering into English Verse of huitains I TO XLI. Of Le Testament and of the three Ballades to which they lead, transl. George Heyer (London, 1924). On 25 December 1924 it was reviewed in &quot;The Times Literary Supplement&quot;, p. 886 and the review began &quot;It is a little unfortunate that this translation of Villon should appear only a few months after the excellent rendering made by Mr. J. Heron Lepper. Mr. Heyer&#x27;s work is very nearly as good, however: he makes happy use of quaint words and archaic idioms, and preserves with admirable skill the lyrical vigour of Villon&#x27;s huitains. It is interesting to compare his version with Mr. Lepper&#x27;s: both maintain a scholarly fidelity to the original, but one notes with a certain degree of surprise the extraordinary difference which they yet show.&quot; George Heyer was a fluent and idiomatic French speaker and the French and English are printed on opposite pages. The book also contains a number of historical and literary notes.

 published a translation in 1924. Another translation is one by Anthony Bonner, published in 1960. One drawback common to these English older translations is that they are all based on old editions of Villon&#x27;s texts: that is, the French text that they translate (the Longnon-Foulet edition of 1932) is a text established by scholars some 80 years ago.

A translation by the American poet Galway Kinnell (1965) contains most of Villon&#x27;s works but lacks six shorter poems of disputed provenance. Peter Dale&#x27;s verse translation (1974) follows the poet&#x27;s rhyme scheme.

Barbara Sargent-Baur&#x27;s complete works translation (1994) includes 11 poems long attributed to Villon but possibly the work of a medieval imitator.

A new English translation by David Georgi came out in 2013. The book also includes Villon&#x27;s French, printed across from the English. Notes in the back provide a wealth of information about the poems and about medieval Paris. &quot;More than any translation, Georgi&#x27;s emphasizes Villon&#x27;s famous gallows humor...his word play, jokes, and puns&quot;.

=== Selections ===

Translations of three Villon poems were made in 1867 by Dante Gabriel Rossetti. These three poems were &quot;central texts&quot; to Rossetti&#x27;s 1870 book of &quot;Poems&quot;, which explored themes from the far past, mid-past, and modern time. Rossetti used &quot;The Ballad of Dead Ladies&quot;; &quot;To Death, of his Lady&quot;; and &quot;His Mother&#x27;s Service to Our Lady&quot;.

W.E. Henley, while editing &quot;&quot; translated two ballades into English criminal slang as &quot;Villon&#x27;s Straight Tip to All Cross Coves&quot; and &quot;Villon’s Good-Night&quot;.

American poet Richard Wilbur, whose translations from French poetry and plays were widely acclaimed, also translated many of Villon&#x27;s most famous ballades in &quot;Collected Poems: 1943–2004&quot;.

=== Where are the snows of yesteryear? ===
The phrase &quot;Where are the snows of ?&quot; is one of the most famous lines of translated poetry in the English-speaking world. It is the refrain in &quot;The Ballad of Dead Ladies&quot;, Dante Gabriel Rossetti&#x27;s translation of Villon&#x27;s 1461 &quot;Ballade des dames du temps jadis&quot;. In the original the line is: &quot;Mais où sont les neiges d&#x27;antan?&quot; [&quot;But where are the snows of yesteryear?&quot;].

Richard Wilbur published his translation of the same poem, which he titled &quot;Ballade of the Ladies of Time Past&quot;, in his &quot;Collected Poems: 1943–2004&quot;. In his translation, the refrain is rendered as: &quot;But where shall last year&#x27;s snow be found?&quot;

==Critical views==
Villon&#x27;s poems enjoyed substantial popularity in the decades after they were written. In 1489, a printed volume of his poems was published by Pierre Levet. This edition was almost immediately followed by several others. In 1533, poet and humanist scholar Clément Marot published an important edition, in which he recognized Villon as one of the most significant poets in French literature and sought to correct mistakes that had been introduced to the poetry by earlier and less careful printers.

==In popular culture==

===Stage===
*Justin Huntly McCarthy&#x27;s 1901 play and novel, &quot;If I Were King,&quot; presented a romanticized view of Villon, using the “King for a Day” theme and giving the poet a happy ending with a beautiful noblewoman. 
*&quot;The Vagabond King&quot; is a 1925 operetta by Rudolf Friml. Based on McCarthy&#x27;s play, it was eventually made into two films. (See below.)
*&quot;Die Dreigroschenoper (The Threepenny Opera)&quot;, from 1928, by Kurt Weill and Bertold Brecht, contains several songs that are loosely based on poems by Villon. These poems include &quot;Les Contredits de Franc Gontier&quot;, &quot;La Ballade de la Grosse Margot&quot;, and &quot;L&#x27;Epitaphe Villon&quot;. Brecht used German translations of Villon&#x27;s poems that had been prepared by (), although Klammer was uncredited.
* wrote a play in Czech that focused on Villon&#x27;s trial called &quot;Hodina mezi psem a vlkem&quot;—which translates to &quot;Dog and Wolf&quot; but literally translates as &quot;The Hour Between Dog and Wolf&quot;. The Juilliard School in New York City mounted a 1994 production of the play, directed by Michael Mayer with music by Michael Philip Ward.

===Film and television===
*McCarthy&#x27;s play served as the basis for &quot;If I Were King, a&quot; 1920 silent film starring William Farnum, and for the 1938 version, adapted by Preston Sturges, directed by Frank Lloyd, and starring Ronald Colman as François Villon, Basil Rathbone as Louis XI and Frances Dee as Katherine.
*Rudolf Friml&#x27;s operetta, &quot;The Vagabond King,&quot; was adapted to film in 1930 in a two-strip Technicolor film starring Dennis King and Jeanette MacDonald, and in 1956, to a film starring Oreste Kirkop and Kathryn Grayson.
*McCarthy&#x27;s play was adapted again in 1945 for &quot;François Villon&quot;, a French historical drama film directed by André Zwoboda and starring Serge Reggiani, Jean-Roger Caussimon, and Henri Crémieux. 
*The television biography &quot;François Villon&quot; was made in 1981 in West Germany, with Jörg Pleva in the title role.
*On the big screen there was a large co-production France-Germany-Romania made in 1987, a 195 minutes movie Francois Villon - poetul vagabond, directed by renowned Romanian director Sergiu Nicolaescu.
*&quot;The Beloved Rogue&quot; is a 1927 American silent romantic adventure film starring John Barrymore, Conrad Veidt and Marceline Day, loosely based on Villon&#x27;s life.
*Villon&#x27;s work figures in the 1936 movie &quot;The Petrified Forest&quot;. The main character, Gabby, a roadside diner waitress played by Bette Davis, longs for expanded horizons; she reads Villon and also recites one of his poems to a wandering hobo &quot;intellectual&quot; played by Leslie Howard.

===Publications===
*Villon&#x27;s poem &quot;Tout aux tavernes et aux filles&quot; was translated into English by 19th-century poet William Ernest Henley as &quot;Villon’s Straight Tip To All Cross Coves&quot;. Another of Henley&#x27;s attributed poems – written in thieves&#x27; slang – is &quot;Villon’s Good-Night&quot;.
*The &quot;Archy and Mehitabel&quot; poems of Don Marquis include a poem by a cat who is Villon reincarnated.
*In Ursula K. Le Guin&#x27;s short story “April in Paris” (published in 1962), an American professor of medieval French is in Paris researching the unsolved question of how Villon died when he unexpectedly travels in time back to the late 1400s and gets his answer.
*The author Doris Leslie wrote an historical novel, &quot;I Return: The Story of François Villon&quot; published in 1962.
*In Antonio Skármeta&#x27;s novel, &quot;El cartero de Neruda&quot;, Villon is mentioned as having been hanged for crimes much less serious than seducing the daughter of the local bar owner.
*&#x27;s poem &quot;The night in the city of cherries or Waiting for François&quot; reflects François Villon&#x27;s life. It takes the form of a person&#x27;s memories who knew the poet and whose name one can find in the lines of &quot;The Testament&quot;.
*Italian author wrote and illustrated a graphic novel based on Villon&#x27;s life and works. The 2017 book was entitled &quot;Je, François Villon&quot; [&quot;I, François Villon&quot;].
*Robert Louis Stevenson&#x27;s short story &quot;A Lodging for the Night: A Story of Francis Villon&quot; follows the poet into a web of crime and desperation on a snowy November night.
*Hunter Thompson&#x27;s book on American motorcycle gangs, &quot;Hell&#x27;s Angels&quot; (1966) starts with a quote: &quot;I am strong but have no power. I win all yet remain a loser. At break of day I say goodnight. When I lie down I have great fear of falling,&quot; which he attributes to Villon.

===Music===
*His poem Der Erdbeermund was a 1989 single for Culture Beat
*The Belgian violinist Eugène Ysaÿe composed &quot;Poème No. 5, &quot;Les neiges d&#x27;antan&quot;&quot;, Op.23, for violin and orchestra, in 1911.
*Claude Debussy set three of Villon&#x27;s poems to music for solo voice and piano
*French singer Georges Brassens included his own setting of &quot;Ballade des dames du temps jadis&quot; in his album &quot;Le Mauvaise Reputation&quot;. 
*The Swiss composer Frank Martin&#x27;s &quot;Poèmes de la Mort&quot; [&quot;Poems of Death&quot;] (1969–71) is based on three Villon poems. The work is for the unusual combination of three tenors and three electric guitars.
*Villon was an influence on American musician Bob Dylan.
*Russian singer and songwriter Bulat Okudzhava, composed Prayer for Francois Villon, a very popular song.
*Bulgarian metal band Epizod were inspired by Francois Villon, and based their lyrics on his poems during their early career.

===Art===
Gaston Duchamp, a Cubist painter and brother of Marcel Duchamp, sought to differentiate himself from his more famous sibling, by adopting Jacques Villon as his pseudonym, as an homage to François Villon.

==See also==

*&quot;Le Testament&quot;
*List of people who disappeared

==References==
* This includes a detailed critical review of the work.
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Villon.org
* 
* &quot;Société François Villon&quot;
* Biography, Bibliography, Analysis, Plot overview (in French)
* Oeuvres complètes de François Villon; Suivies d&#x27;un choix des poésies de ses disciples, par La Monnoye et Pierre Janet (in French; complete works, 1867)
* Index entry at Poet&#x27;s Corner for François Villon
* Illustrations by Lilija Dinere to the book of François Villon &quot;Poetry&quot;, 1987, &quot;«Liesma»&quot;, Rīga.
* &quot;Epitafio de Villon&quot; o &quot;Balada de los ahorcados&quot; traducido al castellano en Descontexto</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q849" start="0" end="15" title="François Villon" label="François Villon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="74" end="90" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227637" start="692" end="704" title="Le Testament" label="Le Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461874" start="1229" end="1253" title="Saint-Benoît-le-Bétourné" label="Saint-Benoît-le-Bétourné"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="1273" end="1282" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1503" end="1525" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="1535" end="1554" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q867541" start="1667" end="1719" title="Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition" label="&amp;quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&amp;quot; Eleventh Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="1864" end="1872" title="Bohemianism" label="Bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356926" start="2076" end="2093" title="Rue Saint-Jacques, Paris" label="Rue Saint-Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q133372" start="2650" end="2666" title="Charles VII of France" label="King Charles VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q781850" start="3082" end="3096" title="barber-surgeon" label="barber-surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q38380" start="4049" end="4055" title="Angers" label="Angers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969882" start="4552" end="4591" title="Château de Meung-sur-Loire" label="bishop&amp;#x27;s prison at Meung-sur-Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227637" start="4630" end="4642" title="Le Testament" label="Le Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885764" start="4768" end="4782" title="See of Orléans" label="See of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058" start="4869" end="4882" title="Louis XI of France" label="King Louis XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227637" start="4977" end="4989" title="Le Testament" label="Le Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430154" start="5109" end="5117" title="cloister" label="cloister"/>
<link wikidata="Q673526" start="5245" end="5259" title="Grand Châtelet" label="Grand Châtelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422975" start="5295" end="5312" title="Place du Châtelet" label="Place du Châtelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936090" start="5711" end="5720" title="parlement" label="parlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q131018" start="5791" end="5799" title="Rabelais" label="Rabelais"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="6183" end="6187" title="Will and testament" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q211557" start="6197" end="6205" title="bequests" label="bequests"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="7049" end="7057" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q272706" start="7960" end="7975" title="Georgette Heyer" label="Georgette Heyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="8010" end="8033" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768060" start="8284" end="8313" title="The Times Literary Supplement" label="The Times Literary Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425705" start="9490" end="9504" title="Galway Kinnell" label="Galway Kinnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q186748" start="10276" end="10298" title="Dante Gabriel Rossetti" label="Dante Gabriel Rossetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q552617" start="10612" end="10623" title="William Ernest Henley" label="W.E. Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333582" start="10817" end="10831" title="Richard Wilbur" label="Richard Wilbur"/>
<link wikidata="Q186748" start="11242" end="11264" title="Dante Gabriel Rossetti" label="Dante Gabriel Rossetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q805129" start="11312" end="11344" title="Ballade des dames du temps jadis" label="Ballade des dames du temps jadis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11931" end="11943" title="Pierre Levet" label="Pierre Levet"/>
<link wikidata="Q108926" start="12044" end="12057" title="Clément Marot" label="Clément Marot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317720" start="12324" end="12346" title="Justin Huntly McCarthy" label="Justin Huntly McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990538" start="12381" end="12395" title="If I Were King (1920 film)" label="If I Were King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771892" start="12549" end="12566" title="The Vagabond King" label="The Vagabond King"/>
<link wikidata="Q48363" start="12595" end="12607" title="Rudolf Friml" label="Rudolf Friml"/>
<link wikidata="Q212495" start="12699" end="12742" title="The Threepenny Opera" label="Die Dreigroschenoper (The Threepenny Opera)"/>
<link wikidata="Q503246" start="13352" end="13368" title="Juilliard School" label="Juilliard School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990538" start="13565" end="13579" title="If I Were King (1920 film)" label="If I Were King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251599" start="13615" end="13629" title="William Farnum" label="William Farnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581493" start="13643" end="13655" title="If I Were King" label="1938 version"/>
<link wikidata="Q546204" start="13668" end="13683" title="Preston Sturges" label="Preston Sturges"/>
<link wikidata="Q28941" start="13697" end="13708" title="Frank Lloyd" label="Frank Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q181786" start="13723" end="13736" title="Ronald Colman" label="Ronald Colman"/>
<link wikidata="Q336865" start="13757" end="13771" title="Basil Rathbone" label="Basil Rathbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q265391" start="13788" end="13799" title="Frances Dee" label="Frances Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143603" start="13876" end="13935" title="The Vagabond King (1930 film)" label="was adapted to film in 1930 in a two-strip Technicolor film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079861" start="13945" end="13956" title="Dennis King (actor)" label="Dennis King"/>
<link wikidata="Q237030" start="13961" end="13979" title="Jeanette MacDonald" label="Jeanette MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795502" start="13985" end="14003" title="The Vagabond King (1956 film)" label="in 1956, to a film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101645" start="14013" end="14026" title="Oreste Kirkop" label="Oreste Kirkop"/>
<link wikidata="Q234117" start="14031" end="14046" title="Kathryn Grayson" label="Kathryn Grayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086019" start="14106" end="14121" title="François Villon (film)" label="François Villon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848825" start="14172" end="14185" title="André Zwoboda" label="André Zwoboda"/>
<link wikidata="Q461111" start="14199" end="14213" title="Serge Reggiani" label="Serge Reggiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169977" start="14215" end="14235" title="Jean-Roger Caussimon" label="Jean-Roger Caussimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130902" start="14241" end="14255" title="Henri Crémieux" label="Henri Crémieux"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14351" end="14361" title="Jörg Pleva" label="Jörg Pleva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192504" start="14589" end="14606" title="The Beloved Rogue" label="The Beloved Rogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="14632" end="14638" title="silent film" label="silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054574" start="14639" end="14647" title="Romance film" label="romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q319221" start="14648" end="14662" title="adventure film" label="adventure film"/>
<link wikidata="Q95034" start="14672" end="14686" title="John Barrymore" label="John Barrymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q58801" start="14688" end="14700" title="Conrad Veidt" label="Conrad Veidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q782604" start="14705" end="14718" title="Marceline Day" label="Marceline Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q953939" start="14809" end="14829" title="The Petrified Forest" label="The Petrified Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q71206" start="14900" end="14911" title="Bette Davis" label="Bette Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q156178" start="15048" end="15061" title="Leslie Howard" label="Leslie Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q552617" start="15196" end="15217" title="William Ernest Henley" label="William Ernest Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q310545" start="15399" end="15418" title="Archy and Mehitabel" label="Archy and Mehitabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q321378" start="15434" end="15445" title="Don Marquis" label="Don Marquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245232" start="15776" end="15788" title="Doris Leslie" label="Doris Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q605194" start="15890" end="15906" title="Antonio Skármeta" label="Antonio Skármeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="16521" end="16543" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q219780" start="16707" end="16722" title="Hunter S. Thompson" label="Hunter Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858577" start="17030" end="17045" title="Der Erdbeermund" label="Der Erdbeermund"/>
<link wikidata="Q594748" start="17068" end="17080" title="Culture Beat" label="Culture Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q312857" start="17104" end="17116" title="Eugène Ysaÿe" label="Eugène Ysaÿe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="17231" end="17245" title="Claude Debussy" label="Claude Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q449" start="17328" end="17344" title="Georges Brassens" label="Georges Brassens"/>
<link wikidata="Q123910" start="17488" end="17500" title="Frank Martin (composer)" label="Frank Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="17739" end="17748" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q239652" start="17781" end="17796" title="Bulat Okudzhava" label="Bulat Okudzhava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615766" start="17878" end="17884" title="Epizod" label="Epizod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912" start="18041" end="18055" title="Marcel Duchamp" label="Marcel Duchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q452254" start="18131" end="18145" title="Jacques Villon" label="Jacques Villon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227637" start="18219" end="18231" title="Le Testament" label="Le Testament"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18239" end="18269" title="List of people who disappeared mysteriously: pre-1910" label="List of people who disappeared"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44210" wikidata="Q738552" url="?curid=44210" title="The Life of Emile Zola">
<text>The Life of Emile Zola is a 1937 American biographical film about the 19th-century French author Émile Zola starring Paul Muni and directed by William Dieterle.

It premiered at the Los Angeles Carthay Circle Theatre to great critical and financial success. Contemporary reviews ranked it as the greatest biographical film made up to that time.

In 2000, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.&quot;

Produced during the Great Depression and after the Nazi Party had taken power in Germany, the film failed to explore the key issue of antisemitic injustice in France in the late 19th century, when Zola became involved in the Dreyfus affair and worked to gain the officer&#x27;s release. Some recent studies have noted the film as an example of Hollywood&#x27;s timidity at the time: antisemitism was not mentioned in the film, nor was &quot;Jew&quot; said in dialogue. Some explicitly anti-Nazi films were canceled in this period, and other content was modified. This was also the period when Hollywood had established the Production Code, establishing an internal censor, in response to perceived threats of external censorship.

&quot;The Life of Emile Zola&quot; became the second biographical film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture.

==Plot==
Set in the mid through late 19th century, the film depicts Émile Zola&#x27;s early friendship with Post-Impressionist painter Paul Cézanne and his rise to fame through his prolific writing. It also explores his involvement late in the Dreyfus affair.

In 1862 Paris, struggling writer Zola shares a drafty Paris attic with Cézanne. His fiancée Alexandrine procures him a desk clerk job at a bookshop, but he is soon fired after he arouses the ire of his employer and an agent of police with his provocative novel &quot;The Confessions of Claude&quot;. He then witnesses many injustices in French society, such as a crowded river slum, unlawful mining conditions and corruption in the army and government. Finally, a chance encounter with a street prostitute hiding from a police raid inspires his first bestseller, &quot;Nana&quot;, an exposé of the steamy underside of Parisian life.

Despite the chief censor&#x27;s pleading, Zola writes other successful books such as &quot;The Downfall&quot;, a scathing denunciation of the French commanders&#x27; blunders and disunity that led to a disastrous defeat in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870. He becomes rich and famous, marries Alexandrine and settles down to a comfortable life in his mansion. One day, his old friend Cézanne, still poor and unknown, visits him before leaving the city. He accuses Zola of having become complacent because of his success and terminates their friendship.

An intercepted letter for the German embassy confirms that there is a spy within the French general staff. With little thought, the army commanders decide that Captain Alfred Dreyfus, a Jew, is the traitor. He is court-martialed, publicly degraded and imprisoned on Devil&#x27;s Island in French Guiana.

Later, Colonel Picquart, the new chief of intelligence, discovers evidence implicating Major Walsin-Esterhazy, an infantry officer of Hungarian descent, as the actual spy. However, Picquart is ordered by his superiors to remain silent to avert official embarrassment, and is quickly reassigned to a remote post.

Four years have passed since Dreyfus&#x27;s degradation. His loyal wife Lucie pleads with Zola to take up her husband&#x27;s cause. Zola is reluctant to surrender his comfortable life, but Lucie brings forth new evidence to pique his curiosity. He publishes an open letter known as &quot;J&#x27;accuse&quot; in the newspaper &quot;L&#x27;Aurore&quot; accusing the high command of covering up the monstrous injustice, and it causes a firestorm throughout Paris. Zola barely escapes from an angry mob incited by military agents provocateurs as riots erupt in the city streets.

As expected, Zola is charged with libel. His attorney Maitre Labori does his best against the presiding judge&#x27;s refusal to allow him to introduce evidence about the Dreyfus affair and the perjury and biased testimony committed by all the military witnesses, except for Picquart. Zola is found guilty and sentenced to a year in prison and a 3,000-franc fine. He reluctantly accepts his friends&#x27; advice flee to London in order to continue the campaign on behalf of Dreyfus.

With the demand for justice reaching a worldwide level, a new French administration finally proclaims that Dreyfus is innocent, and those responsible for the coverup are dismissed or commit suicide. Walsin-Esterhazy flees the country in disgrace. After his return to Paris, Zola dies of accidental carbon monoxide poisoning caused by a faulty stove the night before the public ceremony in which Dreyfus is exonerated and inducted into the Legion of Honor. His body is buried in the Panthéon in Paris and he is given the farewell of a hero and warrior.

==Cast==

* Paul Muni as Émile Zola 
* Gloria Holden as Alexandrine Zola 
* Gale Sondergaard as Lucie Dreyfus
* Joseph Schildkraut as Captain Alfred Dreyfus 
* Donald Crisp as Maitre Labori 
* Erin O&#x27;Brien-Moore as Nana 
* John Litel as Charpentier 
* Henry O&#x27;Neill as Colonel Picquart 
* Morris Carnovsky as Anatole France, Zola&#x27;s friend and supporter 
* Louis Calhern as Major Dort 
* Ralph Morgan as Commander of Paris 
* Robert Barrat as Major Walsin-Esterhazy 
* Vladimir Sokoloff as Paul Cézanne 
* Grant Mitchell as Georges Clemenceau 
* Harry Davenport as Chief of Staff 
* Robert Warwick as Major Henry 
* Charles Richman as M. Delagorgue 
* Gilbert Emery as Minister of War 
* Walter Kingsford as Colonel Sandherr 
* Paul Everton as Assistant Chief of Staff 
* Montagu Love as M. Cavaignac 
* Frank Sheridan as M. Van Cassell 
* Lumsden Hare as Mr. Richards 
* Marcia Mae Jones as Helen Richards 
* Florence Roberts as Madame Zola, Zola&#x27;s mother 
* Dickie Moore as Pierre Dreyfus, Captain Dreyfus&#x27;s son 
* Rolla Gourvitch as Jeanne Dreyfus, Dreyfus&#x27;s daughter
== Production ==
In 1936, literary agent Heinz Herald first proposed the story to producer Henry Blanke, and Hal B. Wallis, Warner Bros.&#x27; executive producer for biographical pictures, assigned Herald and Geza Herczeg to develop the script. Their first treatment, titled &quot;Emile Zola: The Conscience of Humanity&quot;, centered around the Dreyfus affair, with Zola&#x27;s literary career merely a background plot. Herald and Herczeg saw Zola&#x27;s struggles to be similar to those faced by Louis Pasteur in &quot;The Story of Louis Pasteur&quot;, and their script ended with Zola triumphantly speaking out as a voice of truth as a parallel for the incipient turmoil taking place in Europe. Their 200-page script draft was submitted in November 1936, which staff writer Norman Reilly Raine was assigned to revise. Blanke supervised the creation of the final script, which included further contributions by Herald, Herczeg and Raine but also those from star Paul Muni, director William Dieterle and Wallis. The final script was ready by February 1937, and an initial budget of $699,000 was allocated to the production of the film.

Wallis and Blanke&#x27;s relationship during production of the film was contentious; while Wallis wished to follow the successful formula established by &quot;The Story of Louis Pasteur&quot;, Blanke fought for the integrity of the project. The two men clashed over nearly every aspect of production, including the casting of the female lead; Wallis wished to cast Josephine Hutchinson, who had played Pasteur&#x27;s wife, but Blanke disagreed and a compromise was reached in the casting of Gloria Holden. Blanke was determined to imbue the picture with authenticity and argued that Muni&#x27;s appearance should differ starkly from that of the Pasteur picture, but Wallis, concerned with Muni&#x27;s box-office appeal, overruled Blanke and instructed the makeup artist to maintain Muni&#x27;s recognizable features above all else. Blanke threatened to leave the project following a bitter dispute over the hiring of a costumer, but Wallis relented.

Filming began in March 1937 and was scheduled for 42 days. Muni&#x27;s climactic courtroom speech was filmed in one six-minute take, but Wallis requested that Blanke and Dieterle intersperse the scene with crowd shots. At the time, it was the longest continuous courtroom scene. Wallis and Blanke also argued over the quality of actor Ben Welden&#x27;s performance as Paul Cézanne, and actor Vladimir Sokoloff was brought in to reshoot Welden&#x27;s scenes. The reshoots caused the production of the film to extend ten days over schedule, and filming was completed on May 10.

Wallis and Blanke also fought over the film&#x27;s title. While Wallis favored &quot;The Story of Emile Zola&quot;, Blanke suggested alternatives such as &quot;The Truth Is on the March&quot;, &quot;I Accuse&quot; and &quot;Destiny&quot; before &quot;The Life of Emile Zola&quot; was chosen, though the film does not actually depict much of Zola&#x27;s life.

Muni was paid $50,000 for his performance.

==Reception and interpretation==
Following a successful preview screening excluding Max Steiner&#x27;s musical score, &quot;The Life of Emile Zola&quot; premiered on August 11, 1937, and became an immediate sensation. Soon after, Warner Bros. placed full-page advertisements in several Los Angeles newspapers congratulating the cast and crew.

Contemporary reviews were nearly unanimous in their praise. Frank S. Nugent of &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote: 
&quot;Rich, dignified, honest, and strong, it is at once the finest historical film ever made and the greatest screen biography, greater even than &quot;The Story of Louis Pasteur&quot; with which the Warners squared their conscience last year ... Paul Muni&#x27;s portrayal of Zola is, without doubt, the best thing he has done.&quot;

&quot;Variety&quot; wrote that the film was &quot;a vibrant, tense and emotional story ... It is finely made and merits high rating as cinema art and significant recognition as major showmanship.&quot; &quot;Harrison&#x27;s Reports&quot; described it as &quot;A dignified, powerful, and at times stirring historical drama, brilliantly directed, and superbly acted by Paul Muni, as Zola, the great French writer.&quot;

John Mosher of &quot;The New Yorker&quot; praised the film as &quot;a picture of considerable distinction&quot; with &quot;no nonsense.&quot;

Writing for &quot;Night and Day&quot;, Graham Greene offered a neutral review, noting that despite its inaccuracies, &quot;truth to the film mind is the word you see on news-posters.&quot; Greene commented that appearances from seemingly significant characters such as Cézanne were largely irrelevant to the plot and that all of the events in the film happen suddenly.

&quot;The Life of Emile Zola&quot; topped &quot;Film Daily&quot;&#x27;s year-end poll of 531 critics as the best film of 1937.

Certain scenes were interpreted at the time as &quot;indirect attacks on Nazi Germany.&quot; As David Denby writes about the movie in 2013, &quot;At the end, in an outpouring of the progressive rhetoric that was typical of the thirties, Zola makes a grandiloquent speech on behalf of justice and truth and against nationalist war frenzy.&quot; However, the film is silent about the fact that Dreyfus was Jewish and the victim of French antisemitism.

The French government allegedly banned the film in 1939, possibly because of the sensitivity of the Dreyfus affair.

On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a score of 92% from 72 reviews, with an average rating of 7.5/10. The website&#x27;s critics consensus reads, &quot;Urgently relevant in an era of escalating bigotry and fascism, &quot;The Life of Emile Zola&quot; is a respectful and staid tribute to the French novelist, enlivened by Paul Muni&#x27;s chameleonic prowess.&quot;
The film is mentioned in the children&#x27;s novel &quot;The Saturdays&quot;, relating a coal gas leak incident.

==Academy Award wins and nominations==
At the 10th Academy Awards, the film received ten nominations (and thereby became the first film in Academy Award history to reach double digits for nominations) and won three awards.
==Controversy==
In his 2013 book titled &quot;The Collaboration: Hollywood&#x27;s Pact with Hitler&quot;, Ben Urwand wrote that Hollywood producers made a pact to avoid antagonizing Adolf Hitler and aided the Nazis by suppressing films that portrayed the Nazis&#x27; brutality: &quot;The studios cancelled several explicitly anti-Nazi films planned for production, and deleted from several other movies anything that could be construed as critical of the Nazis, along with anything that might be seen as favorable to the Jews—or even a simple acknowledgment that they existed.&quot;

Urwand wrote that Jewish studio head Jack L. Warner ordered the word &quot;Jew&quot; to be excised from the script and that Georg Gyssling, the Nazi consul to the United States in Los Angeles, was occasionally allowed to review and provide recommendations on films before they were released, with changes sometimes made based on his comments. However, Urwand&#x27;s thesis that Warner was collaborating with the Nazis has been strongly disputed by Warner&#x27;s family members, especially Alicia Meyer.

In his study &quot;Hollywood and Hitler, 1933–1939,&quot; Thomas Doherty also analyzed the topic. David Denby, who wrote a long overview article about the issue in &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, points out that while Doherty supports some of Urwand&#x27;s thesis, Doherty provides more context for the studios&#x27; behavior, setting it against the political culture of the period. The studios were under social pressure during the Great Depression to produce films that helped the United States weather the crisis. There were fears of political radicalism in the U.S. while European movements, from the Nazis to communism in the Soviet Union, were considered threats. Denby believes that the predominantly Jewish studio heads were timid and overly cautious, appearing to be fearful of their place in American society.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* &quot;The Life of Emile Zola&quot; essay by Daniel Eagan in America&#x27;s Film Legacy: The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry, Bloomsbury Academic, 2010 , pages 261–262 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q504" start="97" end="107" title="Émile Zola" label="Émile Zola"/>
<link wikidata="Q182292" start="117" end="126" title="Paul Muni" label="Paul Muni"/>
<link wikidata="Q55413" start="143" end="159" title="William Dieterle" label="William Dieterle"/>
<link wikidata="Q204854" start="165" end="173" title="premiere" label="premiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940590" start="194" end="216" title="Carthay Circle Theatre" label="Carthay Circle Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="409" end="431" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="439" end="458" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="557" end="573" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="588" end="598" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="671" end="682" title="Antisemitism" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173457" start="762" end="776" title="Dreyfus affair" label="Dreyfus affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q610292" start="1160" end="1175" title="Production Code" label="Production Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="1350" end="1380" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q166713" start="1491" end="1509" title="Post-Impressionism" label="Post-Impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="1518" end="1530" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Paul Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q173457" start="1627" end="1641" title="Dreyfus affair" label="Dreyfus affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138346" start="2213" end="2217" title="Nana (novel)" label="Nana"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="2505" end="2524" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q220385" start="3097" end="3116" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q379463" start="3229" end="3245" title="Ferdinand Walsin Esterhazy" label="Walsin-Esterhazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q741304" start="3710" end="3721" title="J&amp;#x27;accuse (letter)" label="open letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q392752" start="3968" end="3987" title="Agent provocateur" label="agents provocateurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="4059" end="4064" title="libel" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q184172" start="4376" end="4381" title="French franc" label="franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q125367" start="4806" end="4831" title="carbon monoxide poisoning" label="carbon monoxide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="4947" end="4962" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188856" start="4990" end="4998" title="Panthéon" label="Panthéon"/>
<link wikidata="Q182292" start="5073" end="5082" title="Paul Muni" label="Paul Muni"/>
<link wikidata="Q504" start="5086" end="5096" title="Émile Zola" label="Émile Zola"/>
<link wikidata="Q263215" start="5100" end="5113" title="Gloria Holden" label="Gloria Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q233845" start="5137" end="5153" title="Gale Sondergaard" label="Gale Sondergaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873332" start="5157" end="5170" title="Lucie Dreyfus" label="Lucie Dreyfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q93632" start="5173" end="5191" title="Joseph Schildkraut" label="Joseph Schildkraut"/>
<link wikidata="Q171826" start="5203" end="5217" title="Alfred Dreyfus" label="Alfred Dreyfus"/>
<link wikidata="Q367073" start="5221" end="5233" title="Donald Crisp" label="Donald Crisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q922807" start="5244" end="5250" title="Fernand Labori" label="Labori"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056625" start="5254" end="5277" title="Erin O&amp;#x27;Brien-Moore" label="Erin O&amp;#x27;Brien-Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181945" start="5289" end="5299" title="John Litel" label="John Litel"/>
<link wikidata="Q461949" start="5318" end="5336" title="Henry O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Henry O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q717539" start="5348" end="5356" title="Georges Picquart" label="Picquart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324402" start="5360" end="5376" title="Morris Carnovsky" label="Morris Carnovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q42443" start="5380" end="5394" title="Anatole France" label="Anatole France"/>
<link wikidata="Q573399" start="5432" end="5445" title="Louis Calhern" label="Louis Calhern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392358" start="5463" end="5475" title="Ralph Morgan" label="Ralph Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q556990" start="5501" end="5514" title="Robert Barrat" label="Robert Barrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q379463" start="5524" end="5540" title="Ferdinand Walsin Esterhazy" label="Walsin-Esterhazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855635" start="5544" end="5561" title="Vladimir Sokoloff" label="Vladimir Sokoloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="5565" end="5577" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Paul Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115403" start="5581" end="5595" title="Grant Mitchell (actor)" label="Grant Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q171730" start="5599" end="5617" title="Georges Clemenceau" label="Georges Clemenceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q744955" start="5621" end="5636" title="Harry Davenport (actor)" label="Harry Davenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q555672" start="5658" end="5672" title="Robert Warwick" label="Robert Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q981772" start="5676" end="5687" title="Hubert-Joseph Henry" label="Major Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960117" start="5691" end="5706" title="Charles Richman (actor)" label="Charles Richman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105707" start="5727" end="5740" title="Gilbert Emery" label="Gilbert Emery"/>
<link wikidata="Q766801" start="5744" end="5759" title="Auguste Mercier" label="Minister of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280243" start="5763" end="5779" title="Walter Kingsford" label="Walter Kingsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174542" start="5783" end="5799" title="Jean Sandherr" label="Colonel Sandherr"/>
<link wikidata="Q960510" start="5847" end="5859" title="Montagu Love" label="Montagu Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q573739" start="5863" end="5875" title="Jacques Marie Eugène Godefroy Cavaignac" label="M. Cavaignac"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356179" start="5879" end="5893" title="Frank Sheridan (actor)" label="Frank Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267394" start="5915" end="5927" title="Lumsden Hare" label="Lumsden Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490055" start="5947" end="5963" title="Marcia Mae Jones" label="Marcia Mae Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460763" start="5985" end="6001" title="Florence Roberts" label="Florence Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210022" start="6040" end="6052" title="Dickie Moore (actor)" label="Dickie Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q97511" start="6252" end="6264" title="Henry Blanke" label="Henry Blanke"/>
<link wikidata="Q472520" start="6270" end="6283" title="Hal B. Wallis" label="Hal B. Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q529" start="6660" end="6673" title="Louis Pasteur" label="Louis Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619752" start="6683" end="6709" title="The Story of Louis Pasteur" label="The Story of Louis Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q262728" start="6939" end="6958" title="Norman Reilly Raine" label="Norman Reilly Raine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182292" start="7126" end="7135" title="Paul Muni" label="Paul Muni"/>
<link wikidata="Q55413" start="7146" end="7162" title="William Dieterle" label="William Dieterle"/>
<link wikidata="Q932792" start="7665" end="7685" title="Josephine Hutchinson" label="Josephine Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q263215" start="7791" end="7804" title="Gloria Holden" label="Gloria Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886665" start="8586" end="8596" title="Ben Welden" label="Ben Welden"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="8619" end="8631" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Paul Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855635" start="8643" end="8660" title="Vladimir Sokoloff" label="Vladimir Sokoloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q350704" start="9316" end="9327" title="Max Steiner" label="Max Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q974386" start="9636" end="9651" title="Frank S. Nugent" label="Frank S. Nugent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="9661" end="9679" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619752" start="9847" end="9873" title="The Story of Louis Pasteur" label="The Story of Louis Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="10037" end="10044" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="10471" end="10485" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q128560" start="10632" end="10645" title="Graham Greene" label="Graham Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="11662" end="11677" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762325" start="12080" end="12093" title="The Saturdays (novel)" label="The Saturdays"/>
<link wikidata="Q508601" start="12183" end="12202" title="10th Academy Awards" label="10th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q85806805" start="12466" end="12476" title="Ben Urwand" label="Ben Urwand"/>
<link wikidata="Q72614" start="12981" end="12995" title="Jack L. Warner" label="Jack L. Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q214745" start="13068" end="13082" title="Georg Gyssling" label="Georg Gyssling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174197" start="13546" end="13557" title="David Denby" label="David Denby"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="13618" end="13632" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="13877" end="13893" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44211" wikidata="Q751300" url="?curid=44211" title="Shale">
<text>Shale is a fine-grained, clastic sedimentary rock formed from mud that is a mix of flakes of clay minerals (hydrous aluminium phyllosilicates, e.g., kaolin, Al2Si2O5(OH)4) and tiny fragments (silt-sized particles) of other minerals, especially quartz and calcite. Shale is characterized by its tendency to split into thin layers (laminae) less than one centimeter in thickness. This property is called &quot;fissility&quot;. Shale is the most common sedimentary rock.

The term &quot;shale&quot; is sometimes applied more broadly, as essentially a synonym for mudrock, rather than in the narrower sense of clay-rich fissile mudrock.

==Texture==
Shale typically exhibits varying degrees of fissility. Because of the parallel orientation of clay mineral flakes in shale, it breaks into thin layers, often splintery and usually parallel to the otherwise indistinguishable bedding planes. Non-fissile rocks of similar composition and particle size (less than 0.0625 mm) are described as mudstones (1/3 to 2/3 silt particles) or claystones (less than 1/3 silt). Rocks with similar particle sizes but with less clay (greater than 2/3 silt) and therefore grittier are siltstones.
==Composition and color==
Shales are typically gray in color and are composed of clay minerals and quartz grains. The addition of variable amounts of minor constituents alters the color of the rock. Red, brown and green colors are indicative of ferric oxide (hematite – reds), iron hydroxide (goethite – browns and limonite – yellow), or micaceous minerals (chlorite, biotite and illite – greens). The color shifts from reddish to greenish as iron in the oxidized (ferric) state is converted to iron in the reduced (ferrous) state. Black shale results from the presence of greater than one percent carbonaceous material and indicates a reducing environment. Pale blue to blue-green shales typically are rich in carbonate minerals.

Clays are the major constituent of shales and other mudrocks. The clay minerals represented are largely kaolinite, montmorillonite and illite. Clay minerals of Late Tertiary mudstones are expandable smectites, whereas in older rocks (especially in mid-to early Paleozoic shales) illites predominate. The transformation of smectite to illite produces silica, sodium, calcium, magnesium, iron and water. These released elements form authigenic quartz, chert, calcite, dolomite, ankerite, hematite and albite, all trace to minor (except quartz) minerals found in shales and other mudrocks. A typical shale is composed of about 58% clay minerals, 28% quartz, 6% feldspar, 5% carbonate minerals, and 2% iron oxides. Most of the quartz is detrital (part of the original sediments that formed the shale) rather than authigenic (crystallized within the shale after deposition).

Shales and other mudrocks contain roughly 95 percent of the organic matter in all sedimentary rocks. However, this amounts to less than one percent by mass in an average shale. Black shales, which form in anoxic conditions, contain reduced free carbon along with ferrous iron (Fe2+) and sulfur (S2−). Amorphous iron sulfide, along with carbon, produce the black coloration. Because amorphous iron sulfide gradually converts to pyrite, which is not an important pigment, young shales may be quite dark from their iron sulfide content, in spite of a modest carbon content (less than 1%), while a black color in an ancient shale indicates a high carbon content.

Most shales are marine in origin, and the groundwater in shale formations is often highly saline. There is evidence that shale acts as a semipermeable medium, allowing water to pass through while retaining dissolved salts.

== Formation ==
The fine particles that compose shale can remain suspended in water long after the larger particles of sand have been deposited. As a result, shales are typically deposited in very slow moving water and are often found in lakes and lagoonal deposits, in river deltas, on floodplains and offshore below the wave base. Thick deposits of shale are found near ancient continental margins and foreland basins. Some of the most widespread shale formations were deposited by epicontinental seas. Black shales are common in Cretaceous strata on the margins of the Atlantic Ocean, where they were deposited in fault-bounded silled basins associated with the opening of the Atlantic during the breakup of Pangaea. These basins were anoxic, in part because of restricted circulation in the narrow Atlantic, and in part because the very warm Cretaceous seas lacked the circulation of cold bottom water that oxygenates the deep oceans today.

Most clay must be deposited as aggregates and floccules, since the settling rate of individual clay particles is extremely slow. Flocculation is very rapid once the clay encounters highly saline sea water. Whereas individual clay particles are less than 4 microns in size, the clumps of clay particles produced by flocculation vary in size from a few tens of microns to over 700 microns in diameter. The floccules start out water-rich, but much of the water is expelled from the floccules as the clay minerals bind more tightly together over time (a process called syneresis). Clay pelletization by organisms that filter feed is important where flocculation is inhibited. Filter feeders produce an estimated 12 metric tons of clay pellets per square kilometer per year along the U.S. Gulf Coast.

As sediments continue to accumulate, the older, more deeply buried sediments begin to undergo diagenesis. This mostly consists of compaction and lithification of the clay and silt particles. Early stages of diagenesis, described as &quot;eogenesis&quot;, take place at shallow depths (a few tens of meters) and are characterized by bioturbation and mineralogical changes in the sediments, with only slight compaction. Pyrite may be formed in anoxic mud at this stage of diagenesis. 

Deeper burial is accompanied by &quot;mesogenesis&quot;, during which most of the compaction and lithification takes place. As the sediments come under increasing pressure from overlying sediments, sediment grains move into more compact arrangements, ductile grains (such as clay mineral grains) are deformed, and pore space is reduced. In addition to this physical compaction, chemical compaction may take place via pressure solution. Points of contact between grains are under the greatest strain, and the strained mineral is more soluble than the rest of the grain. As a result, the contact points are dissolved away, allowing the grains to come into closer contact. 

It is during compaction that shale develops its fissility, likely through mechanical compaction of the original open framework of clay particles. The particles become strongly oriented into parallel layers that give the shale its distinctive fabric. Fissility likely develops early in the compaction process, at relatively shallow depth, since fissility does not seem to vary with depth in thick formations. Kaolinite flakes have less tendency to align in parallel layers than other clays, so kaolinite-rich clay is more likely to form nonfissile mudstone than shale. On the other hand, black shales often have very pronounced fissility (&quot;paper shales&quot;) due to binding of hydrocarbon molecules to the faces of the clay particles, which weakens the binding between particles.

Lithification follows closely on compaction, as increased temperatures at depth hasten deposition of cement that binds the grains together. Pressure solution contributes to cementing, as the mineral dissolved from strained contact points is redeposited in the unstrained pore spaces. The clay minerals may be altered as well. For example, smectite is altered to illite at temperatures of about , releasing water in the process. Other alteration reactions include the alteration of smectite to chlorite and of kaolinite to illite at temperatures between . Because of these reactions, illite composes 80% of Precambrian shales, versus about 25% of young shales.

Unroofing of buried shale is accompanied by &quot;telogenesis&quot;, the third and final stage of diagenesis. As erosion reduces the depth of burial, renewed exposure to meteoric water produces additional changes to the shale, such as dissolution of some of the cement to produce secondary porosity. Pyrite may be oxidized to produce gypsum.
Black shales are dark, as a result of being especially rich in unoxidized carbon. Common in some Paleozoic and Mesozoic strata, black shales were deposited in anoxic, reducing environments, such as in stagnant water columns. Some black shales contain abundant heavy metals such as molybdenum, uranium, vanadium, and zinc. The enriched values are of controversial origin, having been alternatively attributed to input from hydrothermal fluids during or after sedimentation or to slow accumulation from sea water over long periods of sedimentation.

Fossils, animal tracks or burrows and even raindrop impressions are sometimes preserved on shale bedding surfaces. Shales may also contain concretions consisting of pyrite, apatite, or various carbonate minerals.

Shales that are subject to heat and pressure of metamorphism alter into a hard, fissile, metamorphic rock known as slate. With continued increase in metamorphic grade the sequence is phyllite, then schist and finally gneiss.

==As hydrocarbon source rock==
Shale is the most common source rock for hydrocarbons (natural gas and petroleum). The lack of coarse sediments in most shale beds reflects the absence of strong currents in the waters of the depositional basin. These might have oxygenated the waters and destroyed organic matter before it could accumulate. The absence of carbonate rock in shale beds reflects the absence of organisms that might have secreted carbonate skeletons, also likely due to an anoxic environment. As a result, about 95% of organic matter in sedimentary rocks is found in shales and other mudrocks. Individual shale beds typically have an organic matter content of about 1%, but the richest source rocks may contain as much as 40% organic matter.

The organic matter in shale is converted over time from the original proteins, polysaccharides, lipids, and other organic molecules to kerogen, which at the higher temperatures found at greater depths of burial is further converted to graphite and petroleum.

==Historical mining terminology==
Before the mid-19th century, the terms slate, shale and schist were not sharply distinguished. In the context of underground coal mining, shale was frequently referred to as slate well into the 20th century. Black shale associated with coal seams is called black metal.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="0" end="5" title="Shale" label="Shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q612133" start="25" end="32" title="clastic" label="clastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="33" end="49" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q170449" start="62" end="65" title="mud" label="mud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799034" start="93" end="106" title="Clay mineral" label="clay minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="149" end="155" title="Kaolinite" label="kaolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="157" end="159" title="aluminium" label="Al"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="160" end="162" title="Silicon" label="Si"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="163" end="164" title="Oxygen" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q425597" start="166" end="168" title="hydroxide" label="OH"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="192" end="196" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="244" end="250" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="255" end="262" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711375" start="330" end="337" title="Lamination (geology)" label="laminae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455231" start="408" end="417" title="Fissility (geology)" label="fissility"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931872" start="560" end="567" title="mudrock" label="mudrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q806617" start="870" end="884" title="bedding (geology)" label="bedding planes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="898" end="903" title="Rock (geology)" label="rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642424" start="984" end="992" title="mudstone" label="mudstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931872" start="1025" end="1035" title="claystones" label="claystones"/>
<link wikidata="Q565731" start="1162" end="1171" title="siltstone" label="siltstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q419170" start="1419" end="1431" title="ferric oxide" label="ferric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="1433" end="1441" title="hematite" label="hematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q721849" start="1451" end="1465" title="iron hydroxide" label="iron hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q189703" start="1467" end="1475" title="goethite" label="goethite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193565" start="1489" end="1497" title="limonite" label="limonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="1512" end="1521" title="micaceous" label="micaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q427254" start="1532" end="1540" title="Chlorite group" label="chlorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q105794" start="1542" end="1549" title="biotite" label="biotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145804" start="1554" end="1560" title="illite" label="illite"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="1617" end="1621" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="1629" end="1637" title="Redox" label="oxidized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233795" start="1639" end="1645" title="ferric" label="ferric"/>
<link wikidata="Q428946" start="1690" end="1697" title="ferrous" label="ferrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937941" start="1772" end="1784" title="carbonaceous" label="carbonaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073138" start="1885" end="1903" title="Carbonate mineral" label="carbonate minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="2010" end="2019" title="kaolinite" label="kaolinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q422131" start="2021" end="2036" title="montmorillonite" label="montmorillonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q188645" start="2071" end="2079" title="Tertiary" label="Tertiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777818" start="2105" end="2114" title="Smectite" label="smectites"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="2167" end="2176" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="2256" end="2262" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="2264" end="2270" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="2272" end="2279" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="2281" end="2290" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q784609" start="2337" end="2347" title="authigenic" label="authigenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="2348" end="2354" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070438" start="2356" end="2361" title="chert" label="chert"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="2363" end="2370" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q167741" start="2372" end="2380" title="Dolomite (mineral)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q120481" start="2382" end="2390" title="ankerite" label="ankerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q182264" start="2405" end="2411" title="albite" label="albite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="2564" end="2572" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q721849" start="2604" end="2615" title="Iron oxide" label="iron oxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960315" start="2639" end="2647" title="detrital" label="detrital"/>
<link wikidata="Q568324" start="2982" end="2988" title="Anoxic waters" label="anoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="3022" end="3028" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q428946" start="3040" end="3052" title="ferrous iron" label="ferrous iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="3064" end="3070" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q103382" start="3078" end="3087" title="Amorphous solid" label="Amorphous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073081" start="3088" end="3100" title="iron sulfide" label="iron sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="3204" end="3210" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="3479" end="3490" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q496805" start="3527" end="3533" title="Saline water" label="saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="3909" end="3915" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="3931" end="3942" title="river delta" label="river delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="3948" end="3958" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975300" start="3983" end="3992" title="wave base" label="wave base"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290577" start="4041" end="4060" title="Continental margin" label="continental margins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978695" start="4065" end="4080" title="Foreland basin" label="foreland basins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578218" start="4145" end="4163" title="epicontinental sea" label="epicontinental sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="4193" end="4203" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="4233" end="4247" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="4278" end="4283" title="fault (geology)" label="fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398" start="4372" end="4379" title="Pangaea" label="Pangaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q900689" start="4736" end="4748" title="Flocculation" label="Flocculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q571327" start="5172" end="5181" title="Syneresis (chemistry)" label="syneresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252491" start="5221" end="5232" title="Filter feeder" label="filter feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="5386" end="5401" title="Gulf Coast of the United States" label="U.S. Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q180621" start="5498" end="5508" title="diagenesis" label="diagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414356" start="5534" end="5544" title="compaction (geology)" label="compaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191052" start="5549" end="5562" title="lithification" label="lithification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864907" start="5736" end="5748" title="bioturbation" label="bioturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="5822" end="5828" title="Pyrite" label="Pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799034" start="6163" end="6175" title="clay mineral" label="clay mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q622669" start="6202" end="6212" title="pore space" label="pore space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125457" start="6305" end="6322" title="pressure solution" label="pressure solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="6421" end="6428" title="soluble" label="soluble"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="7242" end="7253" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="7447" end="7453" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777818" start="7685" end="7693" title="smectite" label="smectite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145804" start="7708" end="7714" title="illite" label="illite"/>
<link wikidata="Q593248" start="7839" end="7847" title="chlorite" label="chlorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="7855" end="7864" title="kaolinite" label="kaolinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="7952" end="7963" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744363" start="8177" end="8191" title="meteoric water" label="meteoric water"/>
<link wikidata="Q622669" start="8287" end="8305" title="secondary porosity" label="secondary porosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="8341" end="8347" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="8412" end="8422" title="oxidation" label="unoxidized"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="8423" end="8429" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="8460" end="8468" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="8469" end="8475" title="stratum" label="strata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641506" start="8508" end="8514" title="Hypoxia (environmental)" label="anoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="8630" end="8640" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="8642" end="8649" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q722" start="8651" end="8659" title="vanadium" label="vanadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="8665" end="8669" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036221" start="8771" end="8783" title="hydrothermal" label="hydrothermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="8850" end="8859" title="sea water" label="sea water"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="8897" end="8903" title="Fossil" label="Fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114983" start="8913" end="8919" title="Fossil track" label="tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111395" start="8923" end="8930" title="Burrow fossil" label="burrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284787" start="8940" end="8960" title="raindrop impressions" label="raindrop impressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093379" start="9036" end="9046" title="concretion" label="concretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q178397" start="9070" end="9077" title="apatite" label="apatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="9159" end="9171" title="metamorphism" label="metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="9200" end="9216" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="9226" end="9231" title="slate" label="slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="9260" end="9277" title="metamorphic grade" label="metamorphic grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q731880" start="9294" end="9302" title="phyllite" label="phyllite"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="9309" end="9315" title="schist" label="schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="9328" end="9334" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988844" start="9393" end="9404" title="source rock" label="source rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="9423" end="9434" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="9439" end="9448" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q134219" start="10171" end="10186" title="Polysaccharide" label="polysaccharides"/>
<link wikidata="Q11367" start="10188" end="10194" title="Lipid" label="lipids"/>
<link wikidata="Q938398" start="10227" end="10234" title="kerogen" label="kerogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="10327" end="10335" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="10425" end="10430" title="slate" label="slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="10442" end="10448" title="schist" label="schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="10511" end="10522" title="coal mining" label="coal mining"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44213" wikidata="Q486096" url="?curid=44213" title="Theodore Dreiser">
<text>Theodore Herman Albert Dreiser (; August 27, 1871 – December 28, 1945) was an American novelist and journalist of the naturalist school. His novels often featured main characters who succeeded at their objectives despite a lack of a firm moral code, and literary situations that more closely resemble studies of nature than tales of choice and agency. Dreiser&#x27;s best-known novels include &quot;Sister Carrie&quot; (1900) and &quot;An American Tragedy&quot; (1925).

==Early life==
Dreiser was born in Terre Haute, Indiana, to John Paul Dreiser and Sarah Maria (née Schanab). John Dreiser was a German immigrant from Mayen in the Rhine Province of Prussia, and Sarah was from the Mennonite farming community near Dayton, Ohio. Her family disowned her for converting to Roman Catholicism in order to marry John Dreiser. Theodore was the twelfth of thirteen children (the ninth of the ten surviving). Paul Dresser (1857–1906) was one of his older brothers; Paul changed the spelling of his name as he became a popular songwriter. They were raised as Catholics.

According to Daniels, Dreiser&#x27;s childhood was characterized by severe poverty, and his father could be harsh. His later fiction reflects these experiences.

After graduating from high school in Warsaw, Indiana, Dreiser attended Indiana University in 1889–1890 without taking a degree.

==Career==
===Journalism===
In 1892, Dreiser started work as a reporter and drama critic for newspapers in Chicago, St. Louis, Toledo, Pittsburgh and New York. During this period he published his first work of fiction, &quot;The Return of Genius&quot;, which appeared in the &quot;Chicago Daily Globe&quot; under the name Carl Dreiser. By 1895 he was writing articles for magazines. He authored articles on writers such as Nathaniel Hawthorne, William Dean Howells, Israel Zangwill, and John Burroughs and interviewed public figures such as Andrew Carnegie, Marshall Field, Thomas Edison, and Theodore Thomas. His other interviewees included Lillian Nordica, Emilia E. Barr, Philip Armour, and Alfred Stieglitz.

In 1895, Dreiser convinced business associates of his songwriter brother Paul to give him the editorship of a magazine called &quot;Ev&#x27;ry Month&quot;, in which he published his first story, &quot;Forgotten&quot; a tale based on a song of his brother&#x27;s titled &quot;The Letter That Never Came&quot;. Dreiser continued editing magazines, becoming editor of the women&#x27;s magazine &quot;The Delineator&quot; in June 1907. As Daniels noted, he thereby began to achieve financial independence.

===Literary career===

During 1899, Dreiser and his first wife Sara stayed with Arthur Henry and his wife Maude Wood Henry at the House of Four Pillars, an 1830s Greek Revival house in Maumee, Ohio. There Dreiser began work on his first novel, &quot;Sister Carrie&quot;, published in 1900. Unknown to Maude, Arthur sold a half-interest in the house to Dreiser to finance a move to New York without her.

In &quot;Sister Carrie&quot;, Dreiser portrayed a changing society, writing about a young woman who flees rural life for the city (Chicago), fails to find work that pays a living wage, falls prey to several men, and ultimately achieves fame as an actress. The novel sold poorly and was considered controversial because it featured a country girl who pursues her dreams of fame and fortune through relationships with men. The book has acquired a considerable reputation. It has been called by Donald L. Miller the &quot;greatest of all American urban novels.&quot;
In 1901 Dreiser&#x27;s short story &quot;Nigger Jeff&quot; was published in &quot;Ainslee&#x27;s Magazine&quot;. It was based on a lynching he witnessed in 1893. Dreiser&#x27;s short story &quot;Old Rogaum and His Theresa&quot; was originally published in 1901.

His second novel &quot;Jennie Gerhardt&quot; was published in 1911. Dreiser&#x27;s portrayals of young women as protagonists dramatized the social changes of urbanization, as young people moved from rural villages to cities.

Dreiser&#x27;s first commercial success was &quot;An American Tragedy&quot;, published in 1925. From 1892, when Dreiser began work as a newspaperman, he had begun

to observe a certain type of crime in the United States that proved very common. It seemed to spring from the fact that almost every young person was possessed of an ingrown ambition to be somebody financially and socially. Fortune hunting became a disease with the frequent result of a peculiarly American kind of crime, a form of &quot;murder for money&quot;, when &quot;the young ambitious lover of some poorer girl&quot; found &quot;a more attractive girl with money or position&quot; but could not get rid of the first girl, usually because of pregnancy.

Dreiser claimed to have collected such stories every year between 1895 and 1935. He based his novel on details and the setting of the 1906 murder of Grace Brown by Chester Gillette in upstate New York, a crime that attracted widespread attention from newspapers. While the novel sold well, it also was criticized for its portrayal of a man without morals who commits a sordid murder.

Though known primarily as a novelist, Dreiser also wrote short stories, publishing his first collection of 11, entitled, &quot;Free and Other Stories&quot; in 1918.

His story &quot;My Brother Paul&quot; was a biography of his older brother Paul Dresser, who became a famous songwriter in the 1890s. This story formed the basis for the 1942 romantic movie &quot;My Gal Sal&quot;.

Dreiser also wrote poetry. His poem &quot;The Aspirant&quot; (1929) continues his theme of poverty and ambition: a young man in a shabbily furnished room describes his own and the other tenants&#x27; dreams, and asks &quot;why? why?&quot; The poem appeared in &quot;The Poetry Quartos&quot;, collected and printed by Paul Johnston, and published by Random House in 1929.

Other works include &quot;Trilogy of Desire&quot;, based on the life of Charles Tyson Yerkes (1837–1905), who became a Chicago streetcar tycoon. It is composed of &quot;The Financier&quot; (1912), &quot;The Titan&quot; (1914), and &quot;The Stoic&quot;. The last was published posthumously in 1947.

Dreiser often was forced to battle against censorship because his depiction of some aspects of life, such as sexual promiscuity, offended authorities and challenged popular standards of acceptable opinion. In 1930 he was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature by Swedish author Anders Österling, but was passed over by the Nobel Committee in favor of Sinclair Lewis.

===Political commitment===
Politically, Dreiser was involved in several campaigns defending radicals he believed victims of social injustice. These included the lynching of Frank Little, one of the leaders of the Industrial Workers of the World, the Sacco and Vanzetti case, the deportation of Emma Goldman, and the conviction of the trade union leader Thomas Mooney. In November 1931, Dreiser led the National Committee for the Defense of Political Prisoners (NCDPP) to the coalfields of southeastern Kentucky to take testimony from miners in Pineville and Harlan on the pattern of violence against the miners and their unions by the coal operators. The pattern of violence was known as the Harlan County War.

Dreiser was a committed socialist and wrote several nonfiction books on political issues. These included &quot;Dreiser Looks at Russia&quot; (1928), the result of his 1927 trip to the Soviet Union, and two books presenting a critical perspective on capitalist America, &quot;Tragic America&quot; (1931) and &quot;America Is Worth Saving&quot; (1941). He praised the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin during the Great Terror and the non-aggression pact with Adolf Hitler. Dreiser joined the Communist Party USA in August 1945 and later became the honorary president of the League of American Writers. Although less politically radical friends, such as H. L. Mencken, spoke of Dreiser&#x27;s relationship with communism as an &quot;unimportant detail in his life&quot;, Dreiser&#x27;s biographer Jerome Loving notes that his political activities since the early 1930s had &quot;clearly been in concert with ostensible communist aims with regard to the working class.&quot;

==Personal life==
Dreiser&#x27;s appearance and personality were described by Edgar Lee Masters in a poem, &quot;Theodore Dreiser: A Portrait&quot;, published in &quot;The New York Times Review of Books&quot;. 
While working as a newspaperman in St. Louis, Dreiser met schoolteacher Sara Osborne White. They became engaged in 1893 and married on December 28, 1898. They separated in 1909, partly due to Dreiser&#x27;s infatuation with Thelma Cudlipp, the teenage daughter of a colleague, but were never formally divorced.

In 1913, he began a romantic relationship with the actress and painter Kyra Markham. In 1919, Dreiser met his cousin Helen Patges Richardson (1894–1955) with whom he began an affair. Through the following decades, she remained the constant woman in his life, even through many more temporary love affairs (such as one with his secretary Clara Jaeger in the 1930s). Helen tolerated Dreiser&#x27;s affairs, and they remained together until his death. Dreiser and Helen married on June 13, 1944, his first wife Sara having died in 1942.

Dreiser planned to return from his first European vacation on the &quot;Titanic&quot;, but was talked out of it by an English publisher who recommended he board a cheaper ship.

Dreiser was an atheist.

==Legacy==

===Literature===
Dreiser had an enormous influence on the generation that followed his. In his tribute &quot;Dreiser&quot; from &quot;Horses and Men&quot; (1923), Sherwood Anderson writes (almost repeated 1916 article):

Alfred Kazin characterized Dreiser as &quot;stronger than all the others of his time, and at the same time more poignant; greater than the world he has described, but as significant as the people in it,&quot; while Larzer Ziff (UC Berkeley) remarked that Dreiser &quot;succeeded beyond any of his predecessors or successors in producing a great American business novel.&quot;

Renowned mid-century literary critic Irving Howe spoke of Dreiser as ranking &quot;among the American giants, the very few American giants we have had.&quot; A British view of Dreiser came from the publisher Rupert Hart-Davis: &quot;Theodore Dreiser&#x27;s books are enough to stop me in my tracks, never mind his letters—that slovenly turgid style describing endless business deals, with a seduction every hundred pages as light relief. If he&#x27;s the great American novelist, give me the Marx Brothers every time.&quot; The literary scholar F. R. Leavis wrote that Dreiser &quot;seems as though he learned English from a newspaper. He gives the feeling that he doesn&#x27;t have any native language&quot;.

One of Dreiser&#x27;s strongest champions during his lifetime, H. L. Mencken, declared &quot;that he is a great artist, and that no other American of his generation left so wide and handsome a mark upon the national letters. American writing, before and after his time, differed almost as much as biology before and after Darwin. He was a man of large originality, of profound feeling, and of unshakable courage. All of us who write are better off because he lived, worked, and hoped.&quot;

Dreiser&#x27;s great theme was the tremendous tensions that can arise among ambition, desire, and social mores.

===Academia===
Dreiser Hall, erected 1950 on the Indiana State University campus in Terre Haute, Indiana, houses the University&#x27;s Communications Programs, Student Media (WISU), Sycamore Video and &quot;The Sycamore&quot; (annual yearbook), classroom and lecture space as well as a 255-seat proscenium theater. It was named for Dreiser in 1966.

Dreiser College, at Stony Brook University located in Stony Brook, New York, is also named after him.

In 2011, Dreiser was inducted into the Chicago Literary Hall of Fame.

==Works==
===Fiction===
*&quot;Sister Carrie&quot; (1900)
*&quot;Jennie Gerhardt&quot; (1911)
*&quot;The Financier&quot; (1912)
*&quot;The Titan&quot; (1914)
*&quot;The &quot;Genius&quot;&quot; (1915)
*&quot;Free and Other Stories&quot; (1918)
*&quot;An American Tragedy&quot; (1925)
*&quot;&quot; (1927)
*&quot;The Total Stranger&quot; (abt. 1944)
*&quot;The Bulwark&quot; (1946)
*&quot;The Stoic&quot; (1947)

===Drama===
*&quot;Plays of the Natural and the Supernatural&quot; (1916)
*&quot;The Hand of the Potter&quot; (1918), first produced 1921

===Poetry===
*&quot;Moods: Cadenced and Declaimed&quot; (New York: Boni &amp; Liveright, 1926), 127 poems in a strictly limited edition of 550 numbered copies signed by the author, of which 535 were for sale; revised and enlarged as &quot;Moods: Philosophical and Emotional (Cadenced and Declaimed)&quot; (New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 1935)

===Nonfiction===
*&quot;The Camera Club of New York. Ainslee&#x27;s. Vol. 4, pp. 325–335 &quot; (1899)
*&quot;A Traveler at Forty&quot; (1913)
*&quot;A Hoosier Holiday&quot; (New York: John Lane Company, 1916)
*&quot;Twelve Men&quot; (New York: Boni &amp; Liveright, 1919)
*&quot;Hey Rub-a-Dub-Dub: A Book of the Mystery and Wonder and Terror of Life&quot; (New York: Boni &amp; Liveright, 1920)
*&quot;A Book About Myself&quot; (1922); republished (unexpurgated) as &quot;Newspaper Days&quot; (New York: Horace Liveright, 1931)
*&quot;The Color of a Great City&quot; (New York: Boni &amp; Liveright, 1923)
*&quot;Dreiser Looks at Russia&quot; (New York: Horace Liveright, 1928)
*&quot;My City&quot; (1929)
*&quot;A Gallery of Women&quot; (1929)
*&quot;Tragic America&quot; (New York: Horace Liveright, 1931)
*&quot;Dawn&quot; (New York: Horace Liveright, 1931)
*&quot;America Is Worth Saving&quot; (New York: Modern Age Books, 1941)
*&quot;Notes on Life,&quot; edited by Marguerite Tjader and John J. McAleer (University of Alabama Press; 1974)
*&quot;An Amateur Laborer,&quot; edited with an Introduction by Richard W. Dowell (University of Pennsylvania Press; 1983) 207 pages
*&quot;Theodore Dreiser: Political Writings,&quot; edited by Jude Davies (University of Illinois Press; 2011) 321 pages

==References==
==Additional reading==
*Cassuto, Leonard and Clare Virginia Eby, eds. &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Theodore Dreiser&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
*Loving, Jerome. &quot;The Last Titan: A Life of Theodore Dreiser&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005.
*Riggio Tom and Morgan, Speer, &quot;The Total Stranger&quot;. The Missouri Review 10.3 (1987): 97–107.

==External links==

* 
* 
* The International Theodore Dreiser Society
* Finding aid to the Theodore Dreiser papers at the University of Pennsylvania Libraries, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
* DreiserWebSource at University of Pennsylvania Library, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
* Sister Carrie from American Studies at the University of Virginia.
* Theodore Dreiser at Goodreads
* Dreiser&#x27;s personal library cataloged on LibraryThing
* &quot;Writings of Theodore Dreiser&quot; from C-SPAN&#x27;s &quot;American Writers: A Journey Through History&quot;
* &quot;T.C.&quot; Collection: Early works of Theodore Dreiser collected by Walter N. Tobriner and presented to Roger S. Cohen, (115 titles). From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress
* Theodore Dreiser Letters at Dartmouth College Library
* Finding aid to Theodore Dreiser letters and manuscripts, 1897–1939, at Columbia University. Rare Book &amp; Manuscript Library.
* . Yale Collection of American Literature, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q486096" start="0" end="30" title="Theodore Dreiser" label="Theodore Herman Albert Dreiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q55996" start="118" end="128" title="naturalism (literature)" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951828" start="344" end="350" title="agency (philosophy)" label="agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286961" start="399" end="412" title="Sister Carrie" label="Sister Carrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q604418" start="436" end="455" title="An American Tragedy" label="An American Tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q492478" start="506" end="526" title="Terre Haute, Indiana" label="Terre Haute, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="599" end="605" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q516611" start="621" end="626" title="Mayen" label="Mayen"/>
<link wikidata="Q698162" start="634" end="648" title="Rhine Province" label="Rhine Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="652" end="659" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="684" end="693" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="717" end="729" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="773" end="790" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255425" start="903" end="915" title="Paul Dresser" label="Paul Dresser"/>
<link wikidata="Q992560" start="1263" end="1278" title="Warsaw, Indiana" label="Warsaw, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079140" start="1297" end="1315" title="Indiana University Bloomington" label="Indiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1462" end="1469" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="1471" end="1480" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49239" start="1482" end="1488" title="Toledo, Ohio" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="1490" end="1500" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1505" end="1513" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q69339" start="1778" end="1797" title="Nathaniel Hawthorne" label="Nathaniel Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q526709" start="1799" end="1819" title="William Dean Howells" label="William Dean Howells"/>
<link wikidata="Q113681" start="1821" end="1836" title="Israel Zangwill" label="Israel Zangwill"/>
<link wikidata="Q938841" start="1842" end="1856" title="John Burroughs" label="John Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="1896" end="1911" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902746" start="1913" end="1927" title="Marshall Field" label="Marshall Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="1929" end="1942" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q62613" start="1948" end="1963" title="Theodore Thomas (conductor)" label="Theodore Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916204" start="1997" end="2012" title="Lillian Nordica" label="Lillian Nordica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378975" start="2030" end="2043" title="Philip Danforth Armour" label="Philip Armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q313055" start="2049" end="2065" title="Alfred Stieglitz" label="Alfred Stieglitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729663" start="2465" end="2479" title="The Delineator" label="The Delineator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="2733" end="2746" title="Greek Revival architecture" label="Greek Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004755" start="2756" end="2768" title="Maumee, Ohio" label="Maumee, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286961" start="2821" end="2834" title="Sister Carrie" label="Sister Carrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732606" start="3467" end="3483" title="Donald L. Miller" label="Donald L. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697477" start="3621" end="3644" title="Ainslee&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Ainslee&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15985086" start="3670" end="3678" title="Lynching in the United States" label="lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593329" start="3734" end="3760" title="Old Rogaum and His Theresa" label="Old Rogaum and His Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671379" start="3825" end="3840" title="Jennie Gerhardt" label="Jennie Gerhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q604418" start="4078" end="4097" title="An American Tragedy" label="An American Tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577702" start="4917" end="4933" title="Chester Gillette" label="Chester Gillette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255425" start="5379" end="5391" title="Paul Dresser" label="Paul Dresser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127669" start="5500" end="5510" title="My Gal Sal" label="My Gal Sal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151617" start="5836" end="5849" title="Paul Johnston (fine press printer and book designer)" label="Paul Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066292" start="5963" end="5983" title="Charles Yerkes" label="Charles Tyson Yerkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q577607" start="6060" end="6073" title="The Financier" label="The Financier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4458189" start="6088" end="6109" title="The Titan (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Titan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442752" start="6128" end="6137" title="The Stoic" label="The Stoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="6430" end="6455" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q491355" start="6474" end="6490" title="Anders Österling" label="Anders Österling"/>
<link wikidata="Q46446" start="6519" end="6534" title="Nobel Committee" label="Nobel Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q123469" start="6547" end="6561" title="Sinclair Lewis" label="Sinclair Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082693" start="6737" end="6749" title="Frank Little (unionist)" label="Frank Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046722" start="6777" end="6808" title="Industrial Workers of the World" label="Industrial Workers of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q833926" start="6814" end="6832" title="Sacco and Vanzetti" label="Sacco and Vanzetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q79969" start="6858" end="6870" title="Emma Goldman" label="Emma Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766580" start="6917" end="6930" title="Thomas Mooney" label="Thomas Mooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893567" start="6966" end="7023" title="National Committee for the Defense of Political Prisoners" label="National Committee for the Defense of Political Prisoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="7066" end="7074" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600900" start="7108" end="7117" title="Pineville, Kentucky" label="Pineville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315959" start="7122" end="7128" title="Harlan, Kentucky" label="Harlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658292" start="7256" end="7273" title="Harlan County War" label="Harlan County War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7460" end="7472" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7642" end="7654" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="7661" end="7674" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="7686" end="7698" title="Great Purge" label="Great Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="7732" end="7744" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508992" start="7847" end="7873" title="League of American Writers" label="League of American Writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q439204" start="7926" end="7939" title="H. L. Mencken" label="H. L. Mencken"/>
<link wikidata="Q468247" start="8325" end="8342" title="Edgar Lee Masters" label="Edgar Lee Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413088" start="8415" end="8449" title="The New York Times Review of Books" label="The New York Times Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781058" start="8682" end="8696" title="Thelma Cudlipp" label="Thelma Cudlipp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452318" start="8841" end="8853" title="Kyra Markham" label="Kyra Markham"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173" start="9377" end="9384" title="RMS Titanic" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386100" start="9654" end="9668" title="Horses and Men" label="Horses and Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q233898" start="9683" end="9700" title="Sherwood Anderson" label="Sherwood Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529254" start="9741" end="9753" title="Alfred Kazin" label="Alfred Kazin"/>
<link wikidata="Q728615" start="10155" end="10166" title="Irving Howe" label="Irving Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380298" start="10326" end="10343" title="Rupert Hart-Davis" label="Rupert Hart-Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q64450" start="10610" end="10623" title="Marx Brothers" label="Marx Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428288" start="10663" end="10675" title="F. R. Leavis" label="F. R. Leavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q439204" start="10892" end="10905" title="H. L. Mencken" label="H. L. Mencken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="11151" end="11157" title="Charles Darwin" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q666128" start="11483" end="11507" title="Indiana State University" label="Indiana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950944" start="11609" end="11613" title="WISU" label="WISU"/>
<link wikidata="Q969850" start="11804" end="11826" title="Stony Brook University" label="Stony Brook University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286961" start="11989" end="12002" title="Sister Carrie" label="Sister Carrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671379" start="12023" end="12038" title="Jennie Gerhardt" label="Jennie Gerhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q577607" start="12059" end="12072" title="The Financier" label="The Financier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4458189" start="12093" end="12102" title="The Titan (novel)" label="The Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593382" start="12123" end="12145" title="The &amp;quot;Genius&amp;quot; (novel)" label="The &amp;quot;Genius&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q604418" start="12209" end="12228" title="An American Tragedy" label="An American Tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593599" start="12314" end="12325" title="The Bulwark (novel)" label="The Bulwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442752" start="12346" end="12355" title="The Stoic" label="The Stoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593651" start="13134" end="13204" title="Hey Rub-a-Dub-Dub" label="Hey Rub-a-Dub-Dub: A Book of the Mystery and Wonder and Terror of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="14728" end="14740" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="14777" end="14803" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="14813" end="14825" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q742640" start="14988" end="15000" title="LibraryThing" label="LibraryThing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="15049" end="15055" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15069" end="15112" title="American Writers: A Journey Through History" label="American Writers: A Journey Through History"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="15320" end="15339" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44214" wikidata="Q207079" url="?curid=44214" title="Slate">
<text>Slate is a fine-grained, foliated, homogeneous, metamorphic rock derived from an original shale-type sedimentary rock composed of clay or volcanic ash through low-grade, regional metamorphism. It is the finest-grained foliated metamorphic rock. Foliation may not correspond to the original sedimentary layering, but instead is in planes perpendicular to the direction of metamorphic compression.

The foliation in slate, called &quot;slaty cleavage&quot;, is caused by strong compression in which fine-grained clay forms flakes to regrow in planes perpendicular to the compression. When expertly &quot;cut&quot; by striking parallel to the foliation with a specialized tool in the quarry, many slates display a property called fissility, forming smooth, flat sheets of stone which have long been used for roofing, floor tiles, and other purposes. Slate is frequently grey in color, especially when seen&quot; en masse&quot; covering roofs. However, slate occurs in a variety of colors even from a single locality; for example, slate from North Wales can be found in many shades of grey, from pale to dark, and may also be purple, green, or cyan. Slate is not to be confused with shale, from which it may be formed, or schist.

The word &quot;slate&quot; is also used for certain types of object made from slate rock. It may mean a single roofing tile made of slate, or a writing slate, which was traditionally a small, smooth piece of the rock, often framed in wood, used with chalk as a notepad or notice board, and especially for recording charges in pubs and inns. The phrases &quot;clean slate&quot; and &quot;blank slate&quot; come from this usage.

==Description==

Slate is a fine-grained, metamorphic rock that shows no obvious compositional layering but can easily be split into thin slabs and plates. It is usually formed by low-grade regional metamorphism of mudrock. This mild degree of metamorphism produces a rock in which the individual mineral crystals remain microscopic in size, producing a characteristic slaty cleavage in which fresh cleavage surfaces appear dull. This is in contrast to the silky cleaved surfaces of phyllite, which is the next-higher grade of metamorphic rock derived from mudstone. The direction of cleavage is independent of any sedimentary structures in the original mudrock, reflecting instead the direction of regional compression.

Slaty cleavage is continuous, meaning that the individual cleavage planes are too closely spaced to be discernible in hand samples. The texture of the slate is totally dominated by these pervasive cleavage planes. Under a microscope, the slate is found to consist of very thin lenses of quartz and feldspar (QF-domains) separated by layers of mica (M-domains). These are typically less than 100 μm (micron) thick. Because slate was formed in low heat and pressure, compared to most other metamorphic rocks, some fossils can be found in slate; sometimes even microscopic remains of delicate organisms can be found in slate.

The process of conversion of mudrock to slate involves a loss of up to 50% of the volume of the mudrock as it is compacted. Grains of platy minerals, such as clay minerals, are rotated to form parallel layers perpendicular to the direction of compaction, which begin to impart cleavage to the rock. Slaty cleavage is fully developed as the clay minerals begin to be converted to chlorite and mica. Organic carbon in the rock is converted to graphite.

Slate is mainly composed of the minerals quartz, illite, and chlorite, which account for up to 95% of its composition. The most important accessory minerals are iron oxides (such as hematite and magnetite), iron sulfides (such as pyrite), and carbonate minerals. Feldspar may be present as albite or, less commonly, orthoclase. Occasionally, as in the purple slates of North Wales, ferrous (iron(II)) reduction spheres form around iron nuclei, leaving a light-green, spotted texture. These spheres are sometimes deformed by a subsequent applied stress field into ovoids, which appear as ellipses when viewed on a cleavage plane of the specimen. However, some evidence shows that reduced spots may also form after deformation and acquire an elliptical shape from preferential infiltration along the cleavage direction, so caution is required in using reduction ellipsoids to estimate deformation.

== Terminology ==
Before the mid-19th century, the terms &quot;slate&quot;, &quot;shale&quot;, and &quot;schist&quot; were not sharply distinguished. In the context of underground coal mining in the United States, the term slate was commonly used to refer to shale well into the 20th century. For example, roof slate referred to shale above a coal seam, and draw slate referred to shale that fell from the mine roof as the coal was removed.

The British Geological Survey recommends that the term &quot;slate&quot; be used in scientific writings only when very little else is known about the rock that would allow a more definite classification. For example, if the characteristics of the rock show definitely that it was formed by metamorphosis of shale, it should be described in scientific writings as a metashale. If its origin is uncertain, but the rock is known to be rich in mica, it should be described as a pelite.

==Uses==

===Construction===


Slate can be made into roofing slate, a type of roof tile which are installed by a slater. Slate has two lines of breakability—cleavage and grain—which make it possible to split the stone into thin sheets. When broken, slate retains a natural appearance while remaining relatively flat and easy to stack. A series of &quot;slate booms&quot; occurred in Europe from the 1870s until the First World War following improvements in railway, road and waterway transportation systems.

Slate is particularly suitable as a roofing material as it has an extremely low water absorption index of less than 0.4%, making the material resistant to frost damage. Natural slate, which requires only minimal processing, has an embodied energy that compares favorably with other roofing materials.
Natural slate is used by building professionals as a result of its beauty and durability. Slate is incredibly durable and can last several hundred years, often with little or no maintenance. Natural slate is also fire resistant and energy efficient.

Slate roof tiles are usually fixed (fastened) either with nails or with hooks (as is common with Spanish slate). In the UK, fixing is typically with double nails onto timber battens (England and Wales) or nailed directly onto timber sarking boards (Scotland and Northern Ireland). Nails were traditionally of copper, although there are modern alloy and stainless steel alternatives. Both these methods, if used properly, provide a long-lasting weathertight roof with a lifespan of around 60–125 years.

Some mainland European slate suppliers suggest that using hook fixing means that:
* Areas of weakness on the tile are fewer since no holes have to be drilled
* Roofing features such as valleys and domes are easier to create since narrow tiles can be used
* Hook fixing is particularly suitable in regions subject to severe weather conditions, since there is greater resistance to wind uplift, as the lower edge of the slate is secured.

The metal hooks are, however, visible and may be unsuitable for historic properties.

Slate tiles are often used for interior and exterior flooring, stairs, walkways and wall cladding. Tiles are installed and set on mortar and grouted along the edges. Chemical sealants are often used on tiles to improve durability and appearance, increase stain resistance, reduce efflorescence, and increase or reduce surface smoothness. Tiles are often sold gauged, meaning that the back surface is ground for ease of installation. Slate flooring can be slippery when used in external locations subject to rain. 

Slate tiles were used in 19th century UK building construction (apart from roofs) and in slate quarrying areas such as Blaenau Ffestiniog and Bethesda, Wales there are still many buildings wholly constructed of slate. Slates can also be set into walls to provide a rudimentary damp-proof membrane. Small offcuts are used as shims to level floor joists. In areas where slate is plentiful it is also used in pieces of various sizes for building walls and hedges, sometimes combined with other kinds of stone. 

===Other uses===
Because it is a good electrical insulator and fireproof, it was used to construct early-20th-century electric switchboards and relay controls for large electric motors. Because of its thermal stability and chemical inertness, slate has been used for laboratory bench tops and for billiard table tops.

Slate was used by earlier cultures as whetstone to hone knives, but whetstones are nowadays more typically made of quartz. In 18th- and 19th-century schools, slate was extensively used for blackboards and individual writing slates, for which slate or chalk pencils were used. In modern homes slate is often used as table coasters.

In areas where it is available, high-quality slate is used for tombstones and commemorative tablets. In some cases slate was used by the ancient Maya civilization to fashion stelae. Slate was the traditional material of choice for black Go stones in Japan, alongside clamshell for white stones. It is now considered to be a luxury.

Pennsylvania slate is widely used in the manufacture of turkey calls used for hunting turkeys. The tones produced from the slate, when scratched with various species of wood striker, imitates almost exactly the calls of all four species of wild turkey in North America: eastern, Rio Grande, Osceola and Merriam&#x27;s.

==Extraction==

Slate is found in the Arctic and was used by Inuit to make the blades for ulus. China has vast slate deposits; in recent years its export of finished and unfinished slate has increased. Deposits of slate exist throughout Australia, with large reserves quarried in the Adelaide Hills in Willunga, Kanmantoo, and the Mid North at Mintaro and Spalding. Slate is abundant in Brazil, the world&#x27;s second-largest producer of slate, around Papagaios in Minas Gerais, which extracts 95 percent of Brazil&#x27;s slate. However, not all &quot;slate&quot; products from Brazil are entitled to bear the CE mark.
Most slate in Europe today comes from Spain, the world&#x27;s largest producer and exporter of natural slate, and 90 percent of Europe&#x27;s natural slate used for roofing originates from the slate industry there. Lesser slate-producing regions in present-day Europe include Wales (with UNESCO landscape status and a museum at Llanberis), Cornwall (famously the village of Delabole), Cumbria (see Burlington Slate Quarries, Honister Slate Mine and Skiddaw Slate) and, formerly in the West Highlands of Scotland, around Ballachulish and the Slate Islands in the United Kingdom. Parts of France (Anjou, Loire Valley, Ardennes, Brittany, Savoie) and Belgium (Ardennes), Liguria in northern Italy, especially between the town of Lavagna (whose name is inherited as the term for &quot;chalkboard&quot; in Italian) and Fontanabuona valley; Portugal especially around Valongo in the north of the country. Germany&#x27;s Moselle River region, Hunsrück (with a former mine open as a museum at Fell), Eifel, Westerwald, Thuringia and north Bavaria; and Alta, Norway (actually schist, not a true slate). Some of the slate from Wales and Cumbria is colored slate (non-blue): purple and formerly green in Wales and green in Cumbria.

In North America, slate is produced in Newfoundland, eastern Pennsylvania, Buckingham County, Virginia, and the Slate Valley region in Vermont and New York, where colored slate is mined in the Granville, New York, area. A major slating operation existed in Monson, Maine, during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, where the slate is usually dark purple to blackish, and many local structures are roofed with slate tiles. The roof of St. Patrick&#x27;s Cathedral in New York City and the headstone of John F. Kennedy&#x27;s gravesite in Arlington National Cemetery are both made of Monson slate.

==See also==
*Bluestone in South Australia, a form of slate used extensively in Adelaide 1850s–1920s 

==References==
==Further reading==
* Page, William (ed.) (1906). &quot;The Victoria History of the County of Cornwall&quot;; vol. I. (Chapter on quarries.) Westminster: Constable.
* Hudson, Kenneth (1972). &quot;Building Materials&quot;; &quot;Chapter 2: Stone and Slate&quot;. pp London: Longman, pp. 14–27. .

==External links==

* AditNow—Photographic database of mines
* Granville Slate Museum
* &quot;Hower’s Lightning Slate Reckoner&quot; (1884/1904), by F. M. Hower, Cherryville, Penn., on Stone Quarries and Beyond (PDF/18.95 MB)
* Stone Roofing Association (U.K.) website with detailed information about stone roofing</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="0" end="5" title="Slate" label="Slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q525802" start="25" end="33" title="foliation (geology)" label="foliated"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="48" end="64" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="90" end="95" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="101" end="117" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="130" end="134" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="138" end="146" title="volcano" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q107099" start="147" end="150" title="ash (volcanic)" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="179" end="191" title="metamorphism" label="metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990218" start="434" end="448" title="slaty cleavage" label="slaty cleavage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455231" start="727" end="736" title="fissility (geology)" label="fissility"/>
<link wikidata="Q83180" start="805" end="809" title="roof" label="roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="1038" end="1049" title="North Wales" label="North Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="1218" end="1224" title="schist" label="schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371902" start="1371" end="1384" title="Slate (writing)" label="writing slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q223802" start="1614" end="1625" title="tabula rasa" label="blank slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="1845" end="1866" title="regional metamorphism" label="regional metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931872" start="1870" end="1877" title="mudrock" label="mudrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990218" start="2024" end="2038" title="slaty cleavage" label="slaty cleavage"/>
<link wikidata="Q731880" start="2138" end="2146" title="phyllite" label="phyllite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982302" start="2270" end="2292" title="sedimentary structures" label="sedimentary structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826906" start="2513" end="2520" title="Texture (geology)" label="texture"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="2664" end="2670" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="2675" end="2683" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="2720" end="2724" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="2889" end="2896" title="fossils" label="fossils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799034" start="3159" end="3172" title="clay minerals" label="clay minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q427254" start="3380" end="3388" title="chlorite group" label="chlorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="3442" end="3450" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145804" start="3502" end="3508" title="illite" label="illite"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="3635" end="3643" title="hematite" label="hematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="3648" end="3657" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="3683" end="3689" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q182264" start="3743" end="3749" title="albite" label="albite"/>
<link wikidata="Q21813710" start="3769" end="3779" title="orthoclase" label="orthoclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478550" start="3822" end="3833" title="Slate industry in Wales" label="North Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q428946" start="3844" end="3852" title="iron(II)" label="iron(II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="4432" end="4437" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="4455" end="4461" title="schist" label="schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="4530" end="4541" title="coal mining" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="4693" end="4702" title="coal seam" label="coal seam"/>
<link wikidata="Q919304" start="4796" end="4821" title="British Geological Survey" label="British Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q660019" start="5266" end="5272" title="pelite" label="pelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q268547" start="5354" end="5363" title="Roof tiles" label="roof tile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415295" start="5389" end="5395" title="slater" label="slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5691" end="5706" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153531" start="6016" end="6031" title="embodied energy" label="embodied energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q778128" start="7643" end="7656" title="efflorescence" label="efflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q881062" start="7997" end="8015" title="Blaenau Ffestiniog" label="Blaenau Ffestiniog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883524" start="8020" end="8028" title="Bethesda, Wales" label="Bethesda"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="8030" end="8035" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628165" start="8155" end="8174" title="Damp proofing" label="damp-proof membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q21718894" start="8202" end="8207" title="Shim (spacer)" label="shims"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="8425" end="8445" title="Insulator (electricity)" label="electrical insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972689" start="8505" end="8525" title="electric switchboard" label="electric switchboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="8531" end="8536" title="relay" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q72313" start="8556" end="8570" title="electric motor" label="electric motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500725" start="8684" end="8698" title="billiard table" label="billiard table"/>
<link wikidata="Q507559" start="8744" end="8753" title="whetstone (tool)" label="whetstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q235585" start="8895" end="8906" title="Chalkboard" label="blackboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371902" start="8922" end="8936" title="Slate (writing)" label="writing slates"/>
<link wikidata="Q203443" start="9101" end="9111" title="tombstones" label="tombstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="9183" end="9200" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101423" start="9212" end="9218" title="Maya stelae" label="stelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="9275" end="9277" title="Go (game)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445670" start="9305" end="9314" title="Mollusc shell" label="clamshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q26844" start="9611" end="9622" title="wild turkey" label="wild turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="9729" end="9735" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="9752" end="9757" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424205" start="9781" end="9784" title="ulu" label="ulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9787" end="9792" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q353992" start="9975" end="9989" title="Adelaide Hills" label="Adelaide Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q115718" start="9993" end="10001" title="Willunga, South Australia" label="Willunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462666" start="10003" end="10012" title="Kanmantoo, South Australia" label="Kanmantoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312609" start="10022" end="10031" title="Mid North" label="Mid North"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10035" end="10042" title="Mintaro, South Australia#Slate and Flagstone" label="Mintaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572962" start="10047" end="10055" title="Spalding, South Australia" label="Spalding"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="10078" end="10084" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789565" start="10144" end="10153" title="Papagaios" label="Papagaios"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="10157" end="10169" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q467405" start="10302" end="10309" title="CE marking" label="CE mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538837" start="10338" end="10354" title="Slate industry in Spain" label="comes from Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478550" start="10587" end="10592" title="Slate industry in Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967708" start="10629" end="10648" title="National Slate Museum" label="museum at Llanberis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="10651" end="10659" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253057" start="10685" end="10693" title="Delabole" label="Delabole"/>
<link wikidata="Q23066" start="10696" end="10703" title="Cumbria" label="Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999283" start="10709" end="10734" title="Burlington Slate Quarries" label="Burlington Slate Quarries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5896273" start="10736" end="10755" title="Honister Slate Mine" label="Honister Slate Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021313" start="10760" end="10773" title="Skiddaw Slate" label="Skiddaw Slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011513" start="10831" end="10843" title="Ballachulish" label="Ballachulish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25651" start="10852" end="10865" title="Slate Islands, Scotland" label="Slate Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10873" end="10887" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="10898" end="10904" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040803" start="10906" end="10911" title="Duchy of Anjou" label="Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050483" start="10913" end="10925" title="Loire Valley" label="Loire Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q151985" start="10927" end="10935" title="Ardennes" label="Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="10937" end="10945" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12745" start="10947" end="10953" title="Savoie" label="Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="10959" end="10966" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="10979" end="10986" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="10999" end="11004" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q266794" start="11037" end="11044" title="Lavagna" label="Lavagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="11112" end="11119" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="11146" end="11154" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q604262" start="11173" end="11180" title="Valongo" label="Valongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="11210" end="11217" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667" start="11225" end="11238" title="Moselle River" label="Moselle River"/>
<link wikidata="Q311234" start="11247" end="11255" title="Hunsrück" label="Hunsrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q830714" start="11296" end="11300" title="Fell Exhibition Slate Mine" label="Fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q152356" start="11303" end="11308" title="Eifel" label="Eifel"/>
<link wikidata="Q640966" start="11310" end="11320" title="Westerwald" label="Westerwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205" start="11322" end="11331" title="Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="11342" end="11349" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366952" start="11355" end="11359" title="Alta (town)" label="Alta"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="11361" end="11367" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="11378" end="11384" title="schist" label="schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q48335" start="11572" end="11584" title="Newfoundland (island)" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="11594" end="11606" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983237" start="11608" end="11635" title="Buckingham Slate" label="Buckingham County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="11668" end="11675" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="11680" end="11688" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708396" start="11726" end="11745" title="Granville (town), New York" label="Granville, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945298" start="11790" end="11803" title="Monson, Maine" label="Monson, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q624556" start="11971" end="11999" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, New York" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="12003" end="12016" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="12038" end="12053" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="12074" end="12101" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12148" end="12176" title="Bluestone#South Australia" label="Bluestone in South Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44216" wikidata="Q8357" url="?curid=44216" title="Miniature effect">
<text>A miniature effect is a special effect created for motion pictures and television programs using scale models. Scale models are often combined with high speed photography or matte shots to make gravitational and other effects appear convincing to the viewer. The use of miniatures has largely been superseded by computer-generated imagery in contemporary cinema.

Where a miniature appears in the foreground of a shot, this is often very close to the camera lens — for example when matte-painted backgrounds are used. Since the exposure is set to the object being filmed so the actors appear well-lit, the miniature must be over-lit in order to balance the exposure and eliminate any depth of field differences that would otherwise be visible. This foreground miniature usage is referred to as forced perspective. Another form of miniature effect uses stop motion animation.

The use of scale models in the creation of visual effects by the entertainment industry dates back to the earliest days of cinema. Models and miniatures are copies of people, animals, buildings, settings, and objects. Miniatures or models are used to represent things that do not really exist, or that are too expensive or difficult to film in reality, such as explosions, floods, or fires.

== From 1900 to the mid-1960s ==
French director Georges Méliès incorporated special effects in his 1902 film &quot;Le Voyage dans la Lune&quot; (&quot;A Trip to the Moon&quot;) — including double-exposure, split screens, miniatures and stop-action.

Some of the most influential visual effects films of these early years such as &quot;Metropolis&quot; (1927), &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; (1941), &quot;Godzilla&quot; (1954) &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot; (1956). The 1933 film &quot;King Kong&quot; made extensive use of miniature effects including scale models and stop-motion animation of miniature elements.

== From the mid-1960s ==
The use of miniatures in &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot; was a major development. In production for three years, the film was a significant advancement in creating convincing models.

In the early 1970s, miniatures were often used to depict disasters in such films as &quot;The Poseidon Adventure&quot; (1972), &quot;Earthquake&quot; (1974) and &quot;The Towering Inferno&quot; (1974).

The resurgence of the science fiction genre in film in the late 1970s saw miniature fabrication rise to new heights in such films as &quot;Close Encounters of the Third Kind&quot;, (1977), &quot;Star Wars&quot; (also 1977), &quot;Alien&quot; (1979), &quot;Star Trek: The Motion Picture&quot; (1979) and &quot;Blade Runner&quot; (1982). Iconic film sequences such as the tanker truck explosion from &quot;The Terminator&quot; (1984) and the bridge destruction in &quot;True Lies&quot; (1994) were achieved through the use of large-scale miniatures.

== Largely replaced by CGI ==
The release of &quot;Jurassic Park&quot; (1993) was a turning point in the use of computers to create effects for which physical miniatures would have previously been employed.

While the use of computer-generated imagery (CGI) has largely overtaken their use since then, they are still often employed, especially for projects requiring physical interaction with fire, explosions, or water.
&quot;Independence Day&quot; (1996), &quot;Titanic&quot; (1997), &quot;Godzilla&quot; (1998), the &quot;Star Wars&quot; prequel trilogy (1999–2005), &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; trilogy (2001–2003), &quot;Casino Royale&quot; (2006), &quot;The Dark Knight&quot; (2008), &quot;Inception&quot; (2010), and &quot;Interstellar&quot; (2014) are examples of highly successful films that have utilized miniatures for a significant component of their visual effects work.

== Techniques ==
* Acid-etching metal
* Carpentry
* Fiberglass
* Kit-bashing
* Laser cutting
* Machining
* Miniature lighting and electronics
* Mold Making and Casting
* Motion control photography
* Painting
* Plastic fabrication
* Rapid prototyping
* Vacuum forming
* Welding

== Notable model-makers ==

* Brick Price: &quot;The Abyss&quot;
* David Jones: &quot;Star Wars&quot;, &quot;The Hunt for Red October&quot;
* Grant McCune: &quot;Star Wars&quot;, &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot;, &quot;Star Trek: The Motion Picture&quot;.
* Greg Jein: &quot;Close Encounters of the Third Kind&quot;, &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot;
* Ian Hunter: &quot;The Dark Knight&quot;, &quot;Live Free or Die Hard&quot;, &quot;The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe&quot;
* Leigh Took: &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot;, &quot;The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus&quot;
* Lorne Peterson: &quot;Star Wars&quot; Episodes 1 - 6, &quot;Raiders of the Lost Ark&quot;, &quot;Battlestar Galactica&quot;, &quot;War of the Worlds&quot;
* Mark Stetson: &quot;Blade Runner&quot;, &quot;Die Hard&quot;, &quot;The Fifth Element&quot;, &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;
* Matthew Gratzner: &quot;The Aviator&quot;, &quot;The Good Shepherd&quot;, &quot;Pitch Black&quot;, &quot;Alien Resurrection&quot;.
* Michael Joyce: &quot;The Terminator&quot;, &quot;Independence Day&quot;
* Patrick McClung: &quot;The Empire Strikes Back&quot;, &quot;Aliens&quot;, &quot;The Abyss&quot;, &quot;True Lies&quot;
* Richard Taylor: &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, &quot;Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World&quot;
* Steve Gawley: &quot;Star Wars&quot;, &quot;Raiders of the Lost Ark&quot;

== Miniature effects companies ==
* Vision Crew Unlimited
* Weta Workshop
* WonderWorks

== References ==
== External links ==
* Howard &amp; Theodore Lydecker, miniature effects pioneers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8357" start="2" end="18" title="Miniature effect" label="miniature effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="24" end="38" title="special effect" label="special effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498959" start="97" end="108" title="scale model" label="scale model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794511" start="148" end="170" title="high speed photography" label="high speed photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662817" start="174" end="185" title="Matte (filmmaking)" label="matte shots"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="312" end="338" title="computer-generated imagery" label="computer-generated imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q215932" start="684" end="698" title="depth of field" label="depth of field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264442" start="794" end="812" title="forced perspective" label="forced perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="852" end="863" title="stop motion" label="stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="864" end="873" title="animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q152272" start="1317" end="1331" title="Georges Méliès" label="Georges Méliès"/>
<link wikidata="Q244971" start="1384" end="1406" title="A Trip to the Moon" label="Le Voyage dans la Lune"/>
<link wikidata="Q151599" start="1604" end="1614" title="Metropolis (1927 film)" label="Metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="1635" end="1647" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q860461" start="1668" end="1676" title="Godzilla (1954 film)" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q746733" start="1696" end="1716" title="The Ten Commandments (1956 film)" label="The Ten Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q309048" start="1751" end="1760" title="King Kong (1933 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1936" end="1957" title="2001: A Space Odyssey (film)" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q874496" start="2181" end="2203" title="The Poseidon Adventure (1972 film)" label="The Poseidon Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q500280" start="2224" end="2234" title="Earthquake (1974 film)" label="Earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q372959" start="2258" end="2278" title="The Towering Inferno (film)" label="The Towering Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q320588" start="2433" end="2467" title="Close Encounters of the Third Kind" label="Close Encounters of the Third Kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="2489" end="2498" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q103569" start="2524" end="2529" title="Alien (film)" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2550" end="2579" title="Star Trek: The Motion Picture" label="Star Trek: The Motion Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="2603" end="2615" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q162255" start="2698" end="2712" title="The Terminator" label="The Terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q110397" start="2762" end="2771" title="True Lies" label="True Lies"/>
<link wikidata="Q167726" start="2894" end="2907" title="Jurassic Park (film)" label="Jurassic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q105387" start="3270" end="3286" title="Independence Day (1996 film)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="3307" end="3314" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24075" start="3335" end="3343" title="Godzilla (1998 film)" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q25540924" start="3362" end="3399" title="Star Wars prequel trilogy" label="&amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; prequel trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190214" start="3413" end="3454" title="The Lord of the Rings (film series)" label="&amp;quot;The Lord of the Rings&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q151904" start="3474" end="3487" title="Casino Royale (2006 film)" label="Casino Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q163872" start="3508" end="3523" title="The Dark Knight" label="The Dark Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q25188" start="3544" end="3553" title="Inception" label="Inception"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417189" start="3578" end="3590" title="Interstellar (film)" label="Interstellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q203605" start="3773" end="3782" title="Carpentry" label="Carpentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="3785" end="3795" title="Fiberglass" label="Fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417941" start="3798" end="3806" title="Kit-bash" label="Kit-bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q593053" start="3812" end="3825" title="Laser cutting" label="Laser cutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q192047" start="3828" end="3837" title="Machining" label="Machining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055732" start="3877" end="3888" title="Molding (process)" label="Mold Making"/>
<link wikidata="Q496098" start="3893" end="3900" title="Casting" label="Casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751327" start="3903" end="3929" title="Motion control photography" label="Motion control photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="3932" end="3940" title="Painting" label="Painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128971" start="3965" end="3982" title="Rapid prototyping" label="Rapid prototyping"/>
<link wikidata="Q175996" start="3985" end="3999" title="Vacuum forming" label="Vacuum forming"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="4002" end="4009" title="Welding" label="Welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q336517" start="4060" end="4069" title="The Abyss" label="The Abyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="4097" end="4106" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q507994" start="4120" end="4144" title="The Hunt for Red October (film)" label="The Hunt for Red October"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543195" start="4153" end="4165" title="Grant McCune" label="Grant McCune"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="4173" end="4182" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367132" start="4196" end="4216" title="Battlestar Galactica (1978 TV series)" label="Battlestar Galactica"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4230" end="4259" title="Star Trek: The Motion Picture" label="Star Trek: The Motion Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605776" start="4269" end="4278" title="Greg Jein" label="Greg Jein"/>
<link wikidata="Q320588" start="4286" end="4320" title="Close Encounters of the Third Kind" label="Close Encounters of the Third Kind"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4334" end="4364" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19518695" start="4373" end="4383" title="Ian Hunter (visual effects supervisor)" label="Ian Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q163872" start="4391" end="4406" title="The Dark Knight" label="The Dark Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q50861" start="4420" end="4441" title="Live Free or Die Hard" label="Live Free or Die Hard"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4455" end="4517" title="The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe" label="The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q160560" start="4544" end="4561" title="The Da Vinci Code (film)" label="The Da Vinci Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q578344" start="4575" end="4610" title="The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus" label="The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15832725" start="4619" end="4633" title="Lorne Peterson" label="Lorne Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="4641" end="4650" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q174284" start="4679" end="4702" title="Raiders of the Lost Ark" label="Raiders of the Lost Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367132" start="4716" end="4736" title="Battlestar Galactica (1978 TV series)" label="Battlestar Galactica"/>
<link wikidata="Q202028" start="4750" end="4767" title="War of the Worlds (2005 film)" label="War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q15834040" start="4776" end="4788" title="Mark Stetson" label="Mark Stetson"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="4796" end="4808" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q105598" start="4822" end="4830" title="Die Hard" label="Die Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q106506" start="4844" end="4861" title="The Fifth Element" label="The Fifth Element"/>
<link wikidata="Q190214" start="4875" end="4896" title="The Lord of the Rings (film series)" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q201924" start="4929" end="4940" title="The Aviator (2004 film)" label="The Aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q786562" start="4954" end="4971" title="The Good Shepherd (film)" label="The Good Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q429934" start="4985" end="4996" title="Pitch Black (film)" label="Pitch Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q458314" start="5010" end="5028" title="Alien Resurrection" label="Alien Resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q162255" start="5059" end="5073" title="The Terminator" label="The Terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105387" start="5087" end="5103" title="Independence Day (1996 film)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732243" start="5112" end="5127" title="Patrick McClung" label="Patrick McClung"/>
<link wikidata="Q181795" start="5135" end="5158" title="The Empire Strikes Back" label="The Empire Strikes Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q104814" start="5172" end="5178" title="Aliens (film)" label="Aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q336517" start="5192" end="5201" title="The Abyss" label="The Abyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q110397" start="5215" end="5224" title="True Lies" label="True Lies"/>
<link wikidata="Q630767" start="5233" end="5247" title="Richard Taylor (filmmaker)" label="Richard Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q190214" start="5255" end="5276" title="The Lord of the Rings (film series)" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5290" end="5337" title="Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World" label="Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346975" start="5346" end="5358" title="Steve Gawley" label="Steve Gawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="5366" end="5375" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q174284" start="5389" end="5412" title="Raiders of the Lost Ark" label="Raiders of the Lost Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936149" start="5456" end="5477" title="Vision Crew Unlimited" label="Vision Crew Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236009" start="5480" end="5493" title="Weta Workshop" label="Weta Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031720" start="5496" end="5507" title="WonderWorks" label="WonderWorks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44217" wikidata="Q218526" url="?curid=44217" title="Menhaden">
<text>Menhaden, also known as mossbunker, bunker, and &quot;the most important fish in the sea&quot;, are forage fish of the genera Brevoortia and Ethmidium, two genera of marine fish in the order Clupeiformes. &quot;Menhaden&quot; is a blend of &quot;poghaden&quot; (&quot;pogy&quot; for short) and an Algonquian word akin to Narragansett &quot;munnawhatteaûg&quot;, derived from &quot;munnohquohteau&quot; (&quot;he fertilizes&quot;), referring to their use of the fish as fertilizer. It is generally thought that Pilgrims were advised by Tisquantum (also known as Squanto) to plant menhaden with their crops.

==Description==
Menhaden are flat and have soft flesh and a deeply forked tail. They rarely exceed in length, and have a varied weight range. Gulf menhaden and Atlantic menhaden are small oily-fleshed fish, bright silver, and characterized by a series of smaller spots behind the main humeral spot. They tend to have larger scales than yellowfin menhaden and finescale menhaden. In addition, yellowfin menhaden tail rays are a bright yellow in contrast to those of the Atlantic menhaden.

==Taxonomy==
Recent taxonomic work using DNA comparisons have organized the North American menhadens into large-scaled (Gulf and Atlantic menhaden) and small-scaled (Finescale and Yellowfin menhaden) designations.

The menhaden consist of two genera and seven species:

* Genus &quot;Brevoortia&quot; 
** &quot;Brevoortia aurea&quot; (Brazilian menhaden)
** &quot;Brevoortia gunteri&quot; (Finescale menhaden)
** &quot;Brevoortia patronus&quot; (Gulf menhaden)
** &quot;Brevoortia pectinata&quot; (Argentine menhaden)
** &quot;Brevoortia smithi&quot; (Yellowfin menhaden) 
** &quot;Brevoortia tyrannus&quot; (Atlantic menhaden)
* Genus &quot;Ethmidium&quot; 
** &quot;Ethmidium maculatum&quot; (Pacific menhaden)

==Distribution==
* Finescale menhaden range from the Yucatán to Louisiana.
* Yellowfin menhaden range from Louisiana to Virginia.
* Gulf menhaden range from the Yucatán Peninsula, Mexico, to Tampa Bay, Florida.
* Atlantic menhaden range from Jupiter Inlet, Florida, to Nova Scotia; Atlantic menhaden seasonally migrate along the coast; in June, mature adults typically are in the northern portion of the coastline with sub-adults and juveniles located in the southern portion.
* The various species of menhaden occur anywhere from estuarine waters outward to the continental shelf; menhaden grow in less saline waters of estuaries and may be found in bays and lagoons, as well as at river mouths; adults appear to prefer water temperatures near 18 °C.

==Ecology==
Menhaden are filter feeders that travel in large, slow-moving, and tightly packed schools with open mouths. Filter feeders typically take into their open mouths &quot;materials in the same proportions as they occur in ambient waters&quot;. Menhaden have two main sources of food: phytoplankton and zooplankton. A menhaden&#x27;s diet varies considerably over the course of its lifetime, and is directly related to its size. The smallest menhaden, typically those under one year old, eat primarily phytoplankton. After that age, adult menhaden gradually shift to a diet comprised almost exclusively of zooplankton.

Menhaden are omnivorous filter feeders, feeding by straining plankton and algae from water. Along with oysters, which filter water on the seabed, menhaden play a key role in the food chain in estuaries and bays. Atlantic menhaden are an important link between plankton and upper level predators. Because of their filter feeding abilities, &quot;menhaden consume and redistribute a significant amount of energy within and between Chesapeake Bay and other estuaries, and the coastal ocean.&quot; Because they play this role, and their abundance, menhaden are an invaluable prey species for many predatory fish, such as striped bass, bluefish, mackerel, flounder, tuna, drums, and sharks. They are also a very important food source for many birds, including egrets, ospreys, seagulls, northern gannets, pelicans, and herons.

In 2012, the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission declared that the Atlantic menhaden was depleted due to overfishing. The decision was driven by issues with water quality in the Chesapeake Bay and failing efforts to re-introduce predator species, due to lack of menhaden on which they could feed.

Menhaden are crucial not only because of their keystone species-status in the food web, but also because of their ecological services. The way menhaden filter feed on phytoplankton helps to mitigate toxic algal blooms. These algal blooms, which are often detrimental to a number of fish, bird, and marine mammal species, create hypoxic conditions. The phytoplankton being preyed upon are photosynthetic organisms, converting sunlight into energy which is then transferred to menhaden and then to bigger species of fish or other larger marine organisms such as birds or mammals. The consequence of this behavior is that if menhaden are eliminated or significantly decreased, there are limited means of energy transfer among trophic levels – making menhaden a true keystone species with ecological services that are invaluable to humans.

=== Habitat ===
Menhaden are a pelagic schooling fish that migrate inshore during the summer and off-shore in the winter months. The juvenile and larval menhaden migrate to shore and inland waterways through currents during summer months to grow while feeding on the phytoplankton and eventually zooplankton once they have matured. Commercially caught menhaden have been recorded in waters of around 5 to 24 ‰, as well as in hypersaline waters around 60 ‰.

=== Reproduction ===
Menhaden reproduce in open oceans externally, however, the female does not carry eggs with them during the process as they are released into the water column at the planktonic level as gametes and sperm. Currently, functional hermaphroditism is unknown to the species and identification of sex of the individual organism cannot be determined externally due to the lack of accessory reproductive organs. These fish breed during the winter months through December to March and the eggs and juveniles navigate towards estuaries and inland waterways through tides and currents.

==Human use==
Menhaden are not used directly for food. They are processed into fish oil and fish meal that are used as food ingredients, animal feed, and dietary supplements. The flesh has a high omega-3 fat content. Fish oil made from menhaden also is used as a raw material for products such as lipstick.

===Fisheries===
According to the Virginia Institute of Marine Science (VIMS), there are two established commercial fisheries for menhaden. The first is known as a reduction fishery. The second is known as a bait fishery, which harvests menhaden for the use of both commercial and recreational fishermen. Commercial fishermen, especially crabbers in the Chesapeake Bay area, use menhaden to bait their traps or hooks. The recreational fisherman use ground menhaden chum as a fish attractant, and whole fish as bait. The total harvest is approximately 500 million fish per year. Atlantic menhaden are harvested using purse seines.

Omega Protein – a reduction fishery company with operations in the northwest Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico – takes 90% of the total menhaden harvest in the United States. In October 2005, the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission (ASMFC) approved an addendum to Amendment 1 of the Interstate Fishery Management Plan for Atlantic Menhaden, which &quot;established a five-year annual cap on reduction fishery landings in the Chesapeake Bay&quot;, imposing a limit on reduction fishery operations for 2006–2010. In November 2006, that cap was established at 109,020 metric tons; this cap remained in place until 2013.

In December 2012, in the face of the depletion of Atlantic menhaden, the ASMFC implemented another cap, effective in 2013 and 2014, for the Chesapeake Bay, this time at 87,216 metric tons, as well as a total allowable catch (TAC) of the species of 170,800 metric tons, a 20% reduction from the 2009–2011 average. The TAC was subsequently raised for 2015 and 2016 to 187,880 metric tons. The cap in the Chesapeake Bay was further lowered in November 2017 to 51,000 metric tons, but this came alongside a higher TAC of 216,000 metric tons. Omega Protein has been openly critical of these caps.

====Uses for menhaden oil====
Despite not being a popular fish for consumption, menhaden oil has many uses not only for humans but also for other animals. One element of menhaden oil is that it is high in omega-3 fatty acids. This molecule helps with lowering blood pressure, fixing abnormal heartbeats, reducing the chance of a heart attack or stroke, and other health benefits. It is due to this that menhaden oil can be used in supplements to help with the previously mentioned issues.

One way that menhaden oil benefits animals is seen in chickens. When menhaden oil was given to chickens in their feed, they had a lower chance of fatty liver disease. This was because of menhaden oil&#x27;s high omega-3 fatty acid content, which took the place of omega-6 fatty acid, which is not as beneficial to animals. Another animal that benefits from omega-3 in menhaden oil is guinea pigs. When given menhaden oil in feed guinea pigs were shown to have a longer life span.

====Risks of overfishing====

According to the Chesapeake Bay Foundation, menhaden are the most important fish in the Bay. This is because they are a food source for many commercial important species like striped bass. They also manage the algal bloom occurrences in the Bay because they eat phytoplankton. Decreases in menhaden populations could also leave striped bass vulnerable to disease. In the past 20 years, the number of juvenile menhaden produced in the Chesapeake Bay have been decreasing (Refer to Atlantic Menhaden Graph on bay-wide mean catch per haul).

This is believed to be due to the overfishing of menhaden for their fish oil. This could seriously disrupt the food chain. In response, the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission (ASMFC) put a cap on the Atlantic menhaden harvest in October 2020. This 10% cut to the harvest is the first to ever be seen for menhaden coast-wide. It also was the first vote to consider benchmarks known as &quot;ecological reference points&quot;. This allows managers to account for a species role in the food chain when setting catch limits. This is different from the &quot;single-species stock assessments&quot; that were previously used which only accounted for the demand from the fishing industry rather than the demand from the food web. This cut to the harvest established a quota of 194,400 metric tons of menhaden for the 2021–2022 fishing season. It is the hope that this cut will allow menhaden to fulfill their role in the ecosystem while keeping the commercial fishery alive.

==Cultural significance==
After menhaden had been identified as a valuable alternative to whale oil in the 1870s, the menhaden fishery on the Chesapeake was worked by predominantly African-American crews on open boats hauling purse seines. The men employed sea chanties to help synchronize the hauling of the nets. These chanties pulled from West African, blues, and gospel sources and created a uniquely African American culture of chanty singing. By the late 1950s, hydraulic winches replaced the large crews of manual haulers, and the menhaden chanty tradition declined.

==Notes==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*Virginia Institute of Marine Science (2009). Several menhaden research projects, currently unpublished.
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* NOAA Fisheries | NMFS
* Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission | ASMFC
* Gulf States Marine Fisheries Commission | GSMFC
* Sharks feeding on a large pod of menhaden.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q218526" start="0" end="8" title="Menhaden" label="Menhaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q218526" start="24" end="34" title="Menhaden" label="mossbunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q218526" start="36" end="42" title="Menhaden" label="bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q495488" start="100" end="111" title="forage fish" label="forage fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364423" start="166" end="177" title="marine fish" label="marine fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q193389" start="191" end="203" title="Clupeiformes" label="Clupeiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257525" start="297" end="307" title="Eastern Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336118" start="321" end="333" title="Narragansett language" label="Narragansett"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="469" end="479" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q855700" start="510" end="518" title="Pilgrims (Plymouth Colony)" label="Pilgrims"/>
<link wikidata="Q711498" start="561" end="568" title="Squanto" label="Squanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053687" start="749" end="762" title="Gulf menhaden" label="Gulf menhaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q756893" start="767" end="784" title="Atlantic menhaden" label="Atlantic menhaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q111912110" start="892" end="904" title="humeral spot" label="humeral spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="1137" end="1140" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4844347" start="1380" end="1390" title="Brevoortia" label="Brevoortia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1407" end="1423" title="Brevoortia aurea" label="Brevoortia aurea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1460" end="1478" title="Brevoortia gunteri" label="Brevoortia gunteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053687" start="1515" end="1534" title="Brevoortia patronus" label="Brevoortia patronus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1566" end="1586" title="Brevoortia pectinata" label="Brevoortia pectinata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1623" end="1640" title="Brevoortia smithi" label="Brevoortia smithi"/>
<link wikidata="Q756893" start="1678" end="1697" title="Brevoortia tyrannus" label="Brevoortia tyrannus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15219850" start="1738" end="1747" title="Ethmidium" label="Ethmidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15219850" start="1764" end="1783" title="Ethmidium maculatum" label="Ethmidium maculatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q60176" start="1863" end="1870" title="Yucatán" label="Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="1874" end="1883" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="1917" end="1926" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="1930" end="1938" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053687" start="1942" end="1955" title="Gulf menhaden" label="Gulf menhaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q130978" start="1971" end="1988" title="Yucatán Peninsula" label="Yucatán Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1990" end="1996" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059534" start="2001" end="2010" title="Tampa Bay" label="Tampa Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="2012" end="2019" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q756893" start="2023" end="2040" title="Atlantic menhaden" label="Atlantic menhaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q49380907" start="2052" end="2065" title="Jupiter Inlet" label="Jupiter Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="2067" end="2074" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="2079" end="2090" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="2341" end="2357" title="estuary" label="estuarine waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="2373" end="2390" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252491" start="2588" end="2601" title="filter feeder" label="filter feeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132245" start="2657" end="2664" title="Shoaling and schooling" label="schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="2855" end="2868" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q842627" start="2873" end="2884" title="zooplankton" label="zooplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="3251" end="3259" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="3264" end="3269" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411" start="3293" end="3299" title="oyster" label="oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q159462" start="3368" end="3378" title="food chain" label="food chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="3619" end="3633" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q842647" start="3807" end="3819" title="striped bass" label="striped bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q461432" start="3821" end="3829" title="bluefish" label="bluefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064278" start="3831" end="3839" title="mackerel" label="mackerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4246303" start="3841" end="3849" title="flounder" label="flounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="3851" end="3855" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q216634" start="3857" end="3862" title="Drum (fish)" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="3868" end="3873" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060012" start="3945" end="3950" title="egret" label="egret"/>
<link wikidata="Q25332" start="3953" end="3959" title="osprey" label="osprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="3962" end="3969" title="seagull" label="seagull"/>
<link wikidata="Q26675" start="3972" end="3987" title="northern gannet" label="northern gannet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19413" start="3990" end="3997" title="pelican" label="pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q18789" start="4004" end="4009" title="heron" label="heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816546" start="4026" end="4069" title="Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission" label="Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q756893" start="4088" end="4105" title="Atlantic menhaden" label="Atlantic menhaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737914" start="4110" end="4118" title="Resource depletion" label="depleted"/>
<link wikidata="Q331828" start="4126" end="4137" title="overfishing" label="overfishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="4199" end="4213" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q627371" start="6274" end="6283" title="Food processing" label="processed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786125" start="6289" end="6297" title="fish oil" label="fish oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413095" start="6302" end="6311" title="fish meal" label="fish meal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10675206" start="6329" end="6344" title="food ingredient" label="food ingredient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836947" start="6347" end="6358" title="animal feed" label="animal feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="6364" end="6382" title="dietary supplement" label="dietary supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q191756" start="6406" end="6417" title="Omega-3 fatty acid" label="omega-3 fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q184191" start="6507" end="6515" title="lipstick" label="lipstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934330" start="6551" end="6587" title="Virginia Institute of Marine Science" label="Virginia Institute of Marine Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306361" start="6681" end="6698" title="reduction fishery" label="reduction fishery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180240" start="6855" end="6863" title="Crab fisheries" label="crabbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q600580" start="7133" end="7144" title="purse seine" label="purse seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090016" start="7148" end="7161" title="Omega Protein" label="Omega Protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816546" start="7342" end="7385" title="Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission" label="Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="7579" end="7593" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737914" start="7809" end="7818" title="Resource depletion" label="depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058862" start="9001" end="9020" title="fatty liver disease" label="fatty liver disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053334" start="10973" end="10982" title="whale oil" label="whale oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q600580" start="11109" end="11121" title="Seine fishing" label="purse seines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195253" start="11140" end="11152" title="sea chanties" label="sea chanties"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44218" wikidata="Q130769" url="?curid=44218" title="San Francisco (1936 film)">
<text>San Francisco is a 1936 American musical-drama disaster film directed by W. S. Van Dyke, based on the April 18, 1906 San Francisco earthquake. The film stars Clark Gable, Jeanette MacDonald and Spencer Tracy. MacDonald&#x27;s singing helped make this film a major hit, coming on the heels of her other 1936 blockbuster, &quot;Rose Marie&quot;.

==Plot==
On New Year&#x27;s Eve, 1905, saloon keeper &quot;Blackie&quot; Norton hires Mary Blake to sing in his bar, the &quot;Paradise Club&quot; on Pacific Street in the notorious Barbary Coast of San Francisco. Mary becomes a star attraction at the &quot;Paradise&quot;, especially for her signature tune, &quot;San Francisco&quot;. Blackie&#x27;s friend Mat predicts that Mary will not stay long on the &quot;Coast&quot;.

Blackie decides to run for the San Francisco Board of Supervisors at the behest of his childhood friend Father Tim Mullen, who believes Blackie can use the supervisor position to implement reform.

Mary is hired by the Tivoli Opera House on Market Street, where she becomes involved with Nob Hill scion Jack Burley. After her performance one night, Blackie visits Mary in her dressing room. Realizing she still loves him, Mary asks him to marry her. Blackie agrees, but their reunion is soon interrupted by Burley, who had proposed to Mary prior to the show. Burley appeals to Mary, but Blackie presents Mary with an ultimatum by asking if she wants to marry him or stay at the Tivoli. Mary chooses to return to the &quot;Paradise&quot;.

Backstage on the opening night of her return performance, Father Tim drops in and is angered by Mary&#x27;s skimpy stage costume. He defies Blackie to put her on the stage in front of the rowdy &quot;Paradise&quot; audience. Mary decides to leave with the priest after Blackie strikes him in the face.

Mary goes back to Burley and meets his mother at her Nob Hill mansion. Mrs. Burley tells Mary that she had a &quot;Blackie&quot; in her younger days, but chose to marry the more steadfast Burley. This cements Mary&#x27;s decision to accept Burley&#x27;s proposal of marriage.

On the evening of April 17, 1906, Burley has the San Francisco Police Department raid the &quot;Paradise&quot;. Blackie, distraught about the future of his club, ends up at the city&#x27;s annual Chickens Ball. After performances by acts from the other clubs, the MC requests the &quot;Paradise&#x27;s&quot; entry. When no one steps on stage, Mary, just having learned of the club&#x27;s closing, enters the competition on behalf of the &quot;Paradise&quot;. She rouses the audience to join in a chorus of &quot;San Francisco&quot; and wins, but Blackie refuses the prize money and states that Mary had no right to sing on behalf of his club. Mary is about to leave the ball with Burley when the earthquake hits the city.

As Blackie wanders the devastated city searching for Mary, he finds Burley dead and Mrs. Burley distraught. The police begin dynamiting buildings in order to control the fires. Blackie also comes upon a dying Mat, who tells Blackie he was wrong about Mary.Blackie later meets Father Tim, who takes him to a homeless camp in Golden Gate Park. Blackie hears Mary singing &quot;Nearer, My God, to Thee&quot; with those in mourning. As they reunite, word spreads through the camp that &quot;The fire&#x27;s out!&quot; As people shout about building a new San Francisco, Blackie and Mary join the crowd as they leave the park marching arm-in-arm, singing &quot;The Battle Hymn of the Republic&quot;.

==Cast==
* Clark Gable as Blackie Norton
* Jeanette MacDonald as Mary Blake
* Spencer Tracy as Father Tim Mullin
* Jack Holt as Jack Burley
* Jessie Ralph as Mrs. Burley
* Ted Healy as Mat
* Shirley Ross as Trixie
* Margaret Irving as Della Bailey
* Harold Huber as Babe
* Edgar Kennedy as Sheriff
* Al Shean as The Professor
* William Ricciardi as Signor Baldini
* Kenneth Harlan as Chick
* Roger Imhof as Alaska
* Charles Judels as Tony (credited as Charles Judells)
* Russell Simpson as Red Kelly
* Bert Roach as Freddie Duane
* Warren B. Hymer as Hazeltine
* Frank Mayo as Dealer (uncredited) 
* Jerry Tucker as Choirboy (uncredited) 
* Frank Sheridan as Founders&#x27; Club Member (uncredited)
* James Murray as Earthquake Survivor (uncredited)
* Ralph Lewis as Founders&#x27; Club Member
==Production==

The earthquake montage sequence was created by Slavko Vorkapich, but the montage of effects was credited to Vokapich&#x27;s collaborator and second unit director John Hoffman. The Barbary Coast barroom set was built on a special platform that rocked and shook to simulate the historic tremor (similar sets were built for the 1974 disaster film &quot;Earthquake&quot;).

Famous silent film directors D. W. Griffith and Erich von Stroheim worked on the film without credit. It&#x27;s been a matter of controversy which scene Griffith directed, but his contribution was mainly for publicity purposes. Von Stroheim contributed to the screenplay.

There are two versions of the ending. The original release features a stylish montage of then-current (1936) scenes of a bustling San Francisco, including Market Street and the construction of the Golden Gate Bridge. When the film was re-released in 1948, it was thought these scenes were dated and the film fades out on a single long shot of the modern business district. However, the TV and 16mm versions of the film seen in the 1950s and 60s were struck from the original version which includes the montage. The current DVD and cable version features the shorter, 1948 version.

Gable and Tracy also made two other films together, &quot;Test Pilot&quot; and &quot;Boom Town&quot;, before Tracy eventually insisted on the same top billing clause in his MGM contract that Gable had enjoyed, effectively ending one of the American cinema&#x27;s most famous screen teams.

Gable had played an extremely similar character also named &quot;Blackie&quot; two years earlier in the smash hit gangster epic &quot;Manhattan Melodrama&quot;, with William Powell and Myrna Loy.

==Music==

The title song may be the best-remembered part of the film. It was composed by Bronisław Kaper and Walter Jurmann, with lyrics by Gus Kahn. It is sung by Jeanette MacDonald a half-dozen times in the film, and becomes an anthem for the survivors of the earthquake. It has now become a popular sentimental sing-along at public events such as the city&#x27;s annual earthquake commemoration, as well as one of two official city songs; the other being &quot;I Left My Heart in San Francisco&quot;. At San Francisco&#x27;s historic Castro Theatre, the pre-film organ performance always ends with the song as the organ console is lowered down before the film starts.

Early in the film, the song &quot;The Darktown Strutters Ball&quot; can be heard; this is a historically inaccurate inclusion, since the song was written in 1917.

During the two operatic scenes in the film, MacDonald sang excerpts from Charles Gounod&#x27;s &quot;Faust&quot; and Giuseppe Verdi&#x27;s &quot;La Traviata&quot;. Another song she sings is &quot;The Holy City&quot;.

==Box office==
According to MGM records the film grossed a total – domestic and foreign – of $5,273,000: $2,868,000 in the US and Canada and $2,405,000 elsewhere. It made a profit of $2,237,000.

==Reception==
Frank Nugent, writing in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, described &quot;San Francisco&quot; as &quot;prodigally generous and completely satisfying,&quot; its musical sequences &quot;woven gracefully into the script,&quot; and its earthquake &quot;a shattering spectacle, one of the truly great cinematic illusions; a monstrous, hideous, thrilling débâcle.&quot;

===Academy Awards===
The film won one Academy Award and was nominated for five more.
===Other awards===
==Footnotes==
==References==
* 

==External links==
* &quot;San Francisco&quot; at AllMovie
* San Francisco
* &quot;San Francisco&quot; at Jeanette MacDonald and Nelson Eddy: A Tribute
* &quot;San Francisco&quot; at Virtual History
* &quot;San Francisco&quot; showing at the Regal Stonehouse Glos 1937
* &quot;San Francisco&quot; Brief Synopsis at Turner Classic Movies Archives Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="33" end="40" title="musical film" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="41" end="46" title="Drama (film and television)" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q846544" start="47" end="60" title="disaster film" label="disaster film"/>
<link wikidata="Q547078" start="73" end="87" title="W. S. Van Dyke" label="W. S. Van Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q211386" start="112" end="141" title="1906 San Francisco earthquake" label="1906 San Francisco earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q71243" start="158" end="169" title="Clark Gable" label="Clark Gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q237030" start="171" end="189" title="Jeanette MacDonald" label="Jeanette MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q71275" start="194" end="207" title="Spencer Tracy" label="Spencer Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522827" start="326" end="336" title="Rose Marie (1936 film)" label="Rose Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859490" start="527" end="540" title="Barbary Coast, San Francisco, California" label="Barbary Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781231" start="654" end="679" title="Theme from San Francisco" label="&amp;quot;San Francisco&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658756" start="803" end="837" title="San Francisco Board of Supervisors" label="San Francisco Board of Supervisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q248284" start="1013" end="1026" title="Market Street (San Francisco)" label="Market Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7466" start="1060" end="1068" title="Nob Hill" label="Nob Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7466" start="1867" end="1875" title="Nob Hill" label="Nob Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320247" start="2140" end="2171" title="San Francisco Police Department" label="San Francisco Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q97368680" start="2172" end="2176" title="Police raid" label="raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q211386" start="2783" end="2811" title="1906 San Francisco earthquake" label="the earthquake hits the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q635559" start="3138" end="3154" title="Golden Gate Park" label="Golden Gate Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q833220" start="3189" end="3212" title="Nearer, My God, to Thee" label="Nearer, My God, to Thee"/>
<link wikidata="Q583210" start="3470" end="3501" title="The Battle Hymn of the Republic" label="The Battle Hymn of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q71243" start="3521" end="3532" title="Clark Gable" label="Clark Gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q237030" start="3553" end="3571" title="Jeanette MacDonald" label="Jeanette MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q71275" start="3588" end="3601" title="Spencer Tracy" label="Spencer Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357250" start="3625" end="3634" title="Jack Holt (actor)" label="Jack Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q441745" start="3652" end="3664" title="Jessie Ralph" label="Jessie Ralph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264625" start="3682" end="3691" title="Ted Healy" label="Ted Healy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498838" start="3701" end="3713" title="Shirley Ross" label="Shirley Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q18715766" start="3726" end="3741" title="Margaret Irving" label="Margaret Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127612" start="3760" end="3772" title="Harold Huber" label="Harold Huber"/>
<link wikidata="Q714724" start="3783" end="3796" title="Edgar Kennedy" label="Edgar Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q77570" start="3810" end="3818" title="Al Shean" label="Al Shean"/>
<link wikidata="Q56070644" start="3838" end="3855" title="William Ricciardi" label="William Ricciardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096499" start="3876" end="3890" title="Kenneth Harlan" label="Kenneth Harlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358383" start="3902" end="3913" title="Roger Imhof" label="Roger Imhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959509" start="3926" end="3940" title="Charles Judels" label="Charles Judels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196052" start="3981" end="3996" title="Russell Simpson (actor)" label="Russell Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899205" start="4012" end="4022" title="Bert Roach" label="Bert Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638388" start="4042" end="4057" title="Warren B. Hymer" label="Warren B. Hymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082712" start="4073" end="4083" title="Frank Mayo (actor)" label="Frank Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16090127" start="4110" end="4122" title="Jerry Tucker (actor)" label="Jerry Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356179" start="4151" end="4165" title="Frank Sheridan (actor)" label="Frank Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161293" start="4211" end="4223" title="James Murray (American actor)" label="James Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q684079" start="4262" end="4273" title="Ralph Lewis (actor)" label="Ralph Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q239298" start="4335" end="4351" title="Montage (filmmaking)" label="montage sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270602" start="4367" end="4383" title="Slavko Vorkapich" label="Slavko Vorkapich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239509" start="4482" end="4494" title="John Hoffman (filmmaker)" label="John Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859490" start="4500" end="4513" title="Barbary Coast, San Francisco" label="Barbary Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q500280" start="4670" end="4680" title="Earthquake (1974 film)" label="Earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="4697" end="4708" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q51123" start="4719" end="4733" title="D. W. Griffith" label="D. W. Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q78508" start="4738" end="4756" title="Erich von Stroheim" label="Erich von Stroheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q44440" start="5160" end="5178" title="Golden Gate Bridge" label="Golden Gate Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197352" start="5603" end="5613" title="Test Pilot (film)" label="Test Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193014" start="5630" end="5639" title="Boom Town (film)" label="Boom Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911899" start="5692" end="5703" title="Billing (filmmaking)" label="top billing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="5718" end="5721" title="MGM" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q533902" start="5969" end="5988" title="Manhattan Melodrama" label="Manhattan Melodrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q105960" start="6001" end="6015" title="William Powell" label="William Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q105941" start="6020" end="6029" title="Myrna Loy" label="Myrna Loy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781231" start="6047" end="6057" title="Theme from San Francisco" label="title song"/>
<link wikidata="Q927472" start="6122" end="6137" title="Bronisław Kaper" label="Bronisław Kaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q215611" start="6142" end="6156" title="Walter Jurmann" label="Walter Jurmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q520751" start="6173" end="6181" title="Gus Kahn" label="Gus Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3790286" start="6497" end="6529" title="I Left My Heart in San Francisco" label="I Left My Heart in San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431575" start="6739" end="6766" title="Darktown Strutters&amp;#x27; Ball" label="The Darktown Strutters Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q180278" start="6942" end="6956" title="Charles Gounod" label="Charles Gounod"/>
<link wikidata="Q745951" start="6970" end="6975" title="Faust (opera)" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317" start="6986" end="7000" title="Giuseppe Verdi" label="Giuseppe Verdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q186162" start="7014" end="7025" title="La Traviata" label="La Traviata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740022" start="7065" end="7078" title="The Holy City (song)" label="The Holy City"/>
<link wikidata="Q974386" start="7297" end="7309" title="Frank Nugent" label="Frank Nugent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="7328" end="7346" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="7699" end="7712" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44219" wikidata="Q42229" url="?curid=44219" title="Mel Gibson">
<text>Mel Columcille Gerard Gibson (born January 3, 1956) is an American actor and filmmaker. The recipient of multiple accolades, he is known for directing historical films as well for his action hero roles, particularly his breakout role as Max Rockatansky in the first three films of the post-apocalyptic series &quot;Mad Max&quot; (1979–1985) and as Martin Riggs in the buddy cop series &quot;Lethal Weapon&quot; (1987–1998).

Born in Peekskill, New York, Gibson moved with his parents to Sydney, Australia, when he was 12 years old. He studied acting at the National Institute of Dramatic Art, where he starred opposite Judy Davis in a production of &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;. During the 1980s, he founded Icon Entertainment, a production company. Director Peter Weir cast him as one of the leads in the World War I drama &quot;Gallipoli&quot; (1981), which earned Gibson a Best Actor Award from the Australian Film Institute.

In 1995, Gibson produced, directed, and starred in the war film &quot;Braveheart&quot; for which he won the Golden Globe Award for Best Director, the Academy Award for Best Director, and the Academy Award for Best Picture. He later directed and produced &quot;The Passion of the Christ&quot; (2004), a biblical drama that was both financially successful and highly controversial. He received further critical notice for directing the action-adventure film &quot;Apocalypto&quot; (2006), set in Mesoamerica during the early 16th century. His notable acting roles during this period were in &quot;Ransom&quot; (1996), &quot;Payback&quot; (1999), &quot;What Women Want&quot; (2000), &quot;The Patriot&quot; (2000), and &quot;Signs&quot; (2002). 

After several legal issues and controversial statements leaked to the public, Gibson&#x27;s popularity in Hollywood declined, affecting his career. He subsequently starred in &quot;Edge of Darkness&quot; (2010) and Jodie Foster&#x27;s &quot;The Beaver&quot; (2011). His directorial comeback after an absence of 10 years, &quot;Hacksaw Ridge&quot; (2016), won two Academy Awards.

== Early life and education==
Mel Columcille Gerard Gibson was born in Peekskill, New York, on January 3, 1956 into a family of Irish American descent, as the sixth of 11 children, and the second son of Hutton Gibson, a writer, and Irish-born Anne Patricia (née Reilly, died 1990). Gibson&#x27;s paternal grandmother was opera contralto Eva Mylott (1875–1920), who was born in Australia to Irish parents, while his paternal grandfather, John Hutton Gibson, was a millionaire tobacco businessman from the Southern United States. One of Gibson&#x27;s younger brothers, Donal, is also an actor. Gibson&#x27;s first name is derived from St Mel&#x27;s Cathedral, situated in his mother&#x27;s hometown of Longford. His second name, Colmcille, is also shared with an Irish saint. 

Gibson&#x27;s father was awarded US$145,000 in a work-related-injury lawsuit against the New York Central Railroad on February 14, 1968 (), and soon afterwards relocated his family to West Pymble, Sydney, Australia. Gibson was 12 years old at the time. The move to his grandmother&#x27;s native Australia was both financial and a way to way to avoid the draft of his eldest son during the Vietnam War.

During his high school years, Gibson was educated by members of the Congregation of Christian Brothers at St Leo&#x27;s Catholic College in Wahroonga, New South Wales.

== Career ==
=== Overview ===
Gibson gained favorable notices from film critics when he first entered the cinematic scene, as well as comparisons to several classic movie stars. In 1982, Vincent Canby wrote that &quot;Mr. Gibson recalls the young Steve McQueen... I can&#x27;t define &#x27;star quality,&#x27; but whatever it is, Mr. Gibson has it.&quot; Gibson has also been likened to &quot;a combination Clark Gable and Humphrey Bogart.&quot; Gibson&#x27;s roles in the &quot;Mad Max&quot; series of films, Peter Weir&#x27;s &quot;Gallipoli&quot; (1981), and the &quot;Lethal Weapon&quot; series of films earned him the label of &quot;action hero&quot;.

Later, Gibson expanded into human dramas such as the Franco Zeffirelli film version of &quot;Hamlet&quot; (1990), and comedic roles such as those in &quot;Maverick&quot; (1994) and &quot;What Women Want&quot; (2000). He moved to directing and producing with &quot;The Man Without a Face&quot; (1993), &quot;Braveheart&quot; (1995), &quot;The Passion of the Christ&quot; (2004), and &quot;Apocalypto&quot; (2006). Jess Cagle of &quot;Time&quot; compared Gibson with Cary Grant, Sean Connery, and Robert Redford. Connery once suggested Gibson should play the next James Bond to Connery&#x27;s &quot;M&quot;. Gibson turned down the role, reportedly because he feared being typecast.

=== Acting ===

Gibson studied at the National Institute of Dramatic Art in Sydney. As students, Gibson and actress Judy Davis played the leads in &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;, and Gibson played the role of Queen Titania in an experimental production of &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream.&quot; After graduation in 1977, Gibson immediately began work on the filming of &quot;Mad Max&quot;, but continued to work as a stage actor, and joined the State Theatre Company of South Australia in Adelaide. Gibson&#x27;s theatrical credits include the character Estragon (opposite Geoffrey Rush) in &quot;Waiting for Godot&quot;, and the role of Biff Loman in a 1982 production of &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot; in Sydney. Gibson&#x27;s most recent theatrical performance, opposite Sissy Spacek, was the 1993 production of &quot;Love Letters&quot; by A. R. Gurney, in Telluride, Colorado.

While a student at NIDA, Gibson made his film debut in the 1977 film &quot;Summer City&quot;, for which he was paid $400. Gibson then played the title character in the film &quot;Mad Max&quot; (1979). He was paid $9000 for this role. Shortly after making the film, he did a season with the South Australian Theatre Company. During this period, he shared a $30 a week apartment in Adelaide with his future wife Robyn Moore. After &quot;Mad Max&quot;, Gibson played a mentally slow youth in the film &quot;Tim&quot; (also 1979). Gibson also appeared in Australian television series guest roles. He appeared in serial &quot;The Sullivans&quot; as naval lieutenant Ray Henderson, in police procedural &quot;Cop Shop&quot;, and in the pilot episode of prison serial &quot;Punishment&quot; which was produced in 1980, screened 1981.

Gibson joined the cast of the World War II action film &quot;Attack Force Z&quot;, which was not released until 1982 when Gibson had become a bigger star. Director Peter Weir cast Gibson as one of the leads in the World War I drama &quot;Gallipoli&quot; (1981), which earned Gibson another Best Actor Award from the Australian Film Institute. &quot;Gallipoli&quot; also helped to earn Gibson the reputation of a serious, versatile actor and gained him the Hollywood agent Ed Limato. The sequel &quot;Mad Max 2&quot; (1982) was his first hit in America, where it was released as &quot;The Road Warrior&quot;. Gibson again received positive notices for his role in Peter Weir&#x27;s romantic thriller &quot;The Year of Living Dangerously&quot; (1982). Following a one-year hiatus from film acting after the birth of his twin sons, Gibson took on the role of Fletcher Christian in &quot;The Bounty&quot; (1984). Gibson earned his first million dollar salary for playing Max Rockatansky for the third time, in &quot;Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome&quot; (1985).

Gibson&#x27;s first American film was Mark Rydell&#x27;s drama &quot;The River&quot; (1984), in which he and Sissy Spacek played struggling Tennessee farmers. Gibson then starred in the Gothic romance &quot;Mrs. Soffel&quot; (also 1984) for Australian director Gillian Armstrong. He and Matthew Modine played condemned convict brothers opposite Diane Keaton as the warden&#x27;s wife who visits them to read the Bible. In 1985, after working on four films in a row, Gibson took almost two years off at his Australian cattle station. He returned to play the role of Martin Riggs in &quot;Lethal Weapon&quot; (1987), a film which helped to cement his status as a Hollywood &quot;leading man&quot;. Gibson&#x27;s next film was Robert Towne&#x27;s &quot;Tequila Sunrise&quot; (1988), followed by &quot;Lethal Weapon 2&quot; (1989). Gibson next starred in three films back-to-back, all released in 1990: &quot;Bird on a Wire&quot;, &quot;Air America&quot;, and &quot;Hamlet&quot;.
During the 1990s, Gibson alternated between commercial and personal projects. His films in the first half of the decade were &quot;Forever Young&quot;, &quot;Lethal Weapon 3&quot;, &quot;Maverick&quot;, and &quot;Braveheart&quot;. He then starred in &quot;Ransom&quot;, &quot;Conspiracy Theory&quot;, &quot;Lethal Weapon 4&quot;, and &quot;Payback&quot;. Gibson also served as the speaking and singing voice of John Smith in Disney&#x27;s &quot;Pocahontas&quot;.

Gibson was paid a record salary of $25 million to appear in &quot;The Patriot&quot; (2000). It grossed over $100 million, as did two other films he featured in that year, &quot;Chicken Run&quot; and &quot;What Women Want&quot;. In 2002, Gibson appeared in the Vietnam War drama &quot;We Were Soldiers&quot; and M. Night Shyamalan&#x27;s &quot;Signs&quot;, which became the highest-grossing film of Gibson&#x27;s acting career.

Gibson&#x27;s popularity declined after he had made some controversial statements.

While promoting &quot;Signs&quot;, Gibson said that he no longer wanted to be a movie star and would only act in film again if the script were truly extraordinary. In 2010, Gibson appeared in &quot;Edge of Darkness&quot;, which marked his first starring role since 2002 and was an adaptation of the BBC miniseries, &quot;Edge of Darkness&quot;. In June of the same year, Gibson was in Brownsville, Texas, filming scenes for the film &quot;Get the Gringo&quot;, about a career criminal put in a tough prison in Mexico.

In 2010, following an outburst at his ex-girlfriend that was made public, Gibson was dropped from the talent agency of William Morris Endeavor. Gibson was lined up for a small role in &quot;The Hangover Part II&quot; but he was removed from the film after the cast and crew objected to his involvement.

Gibson also played two villains: Luther Voz in &quot;Machete Kills&quot; in 2013, opposite Danny Trejo, and Conrad Stonebanks in &quot;The Expendables 3&quot; opposite Sylvester Stallone in 2014.

Gibson appeared in the lead role of director S. Craig Zahler&#x27;s police brutality-themed film &quot;Dragged Across Concrete&quot;, released in 2018. He then starred in &quot;The Professor and the Madman&quot; – he and the director both disowned the film.

=== Producing ===

After his success in Hollywood with the &quot;Lethal Weapon&quot; series, Gibson began to move into producing and directing. With partner Bruce Davey, Gibson formed Icon Productions in 1989 in order to make &quot;Hamlet&quot;.

In late 1996, New Zealand producer Timothy White became founding head of a co-production venture between Fox and Gibson, called Fox-Icon, based at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney. The company failed to produce a single film, shutting down in December 1999. 

Gibson has produced a number of projects for television, including a biopic on the Three Stooges and the 2008 PBS documentary &quot;Carrier&quot;. Icon has grown from being just a production company to also be an international distribution company and film exhibitor in Australia and New Zealand. 

Gibson is credited as an executive producer of the 2023 movie &quot;Sound of Freedom&quot;, a film based on a true story which revolves around the topic of trafficking of children.

=== Directing ===
According to Robert Downey Jr., studio executives encouraged Gibson in 1989 to try directing, an idea he rebuffed at the time. Gibson made his directorial debut in 1993 with &quot;The Man Without a Face&quot;, followed two years later by &quot;Braveheart&quot;, which earned Gibson the Academy Award for Best Director. Gibson had long planned to direct a remake of &quot;Fahrenheit 451&quot;, but in 1999 the project was indefinitely postponed because of scheduling conflicts. Gibson was scheduled to direct Robert Downey Jr. in a Los Angeles stage production of &quot;Hamlet&quot; in January 2001, but Downey&#x27;s drug relapse ended the project. In 2002, while promoting &quot;We Were Soldiers&quot; and &quot;Signs&quot; to the press, Gibson mentioned that he was planning to pare back on acting and return to directing. In September 2002, Gibson announced that he would direct a film called &quot;The Passion&quot; in Aramaic and Latin with no subtitles because he hoped to &quot;transcend language barriers with filmic storytelling.&quot;

In 2004, he released the controversial film &quot;The Passion of the Christ&quot;, with subtitles, which he co-wrote, co-produced, and directed. The film went on to become the highest-grossing rated R film at the time with $370,782,930 in U.S. box office sales. Gibson directed a few episodes of &quot;Complete Savages&quot; for the ABC network. In 2006, he directed the action-adventure film &quot;Apocalypto&quot;, his second film to feature sparse dialogue in a non-English language.

Gibson has expressed an intention to direct a movie set during the Viking Age, starring Leonardo DiCaprio. Like &quot;The Passion of the Christ&quot; and &quot;Apocalypto&quot;, he wants this speculative film to feature dialogue in period languages. However, DiCaprio ultimately opted out of the project. In a 2012 interview, Gibson announced that the project, which he has titled &quot;Berserker&quot;, was still moving forward.

In 2011, it was announced that Gibson had commissioned a screenplay from Joe Eszterhas about the Maccabees. The film is to be distributed by Warner Brothers Pictures. The announcement generated significant controversy. In April 2012, Eszterhas wrote a letter to Gibson accusing him of sabotaging their film about the Maccabees because he &quot;hates Jews&quot;, and cited a series of private incidents during which he allegedly heard Gibson express extremely racist views. Although written as a private letter, it was subsequently published on a film industry website. In response, Gibson stated that he still intends to make the film, but will not base it upon Eszterhas&#x27;s script, which he called substandard. Eszterhas then claimed his son had secretly recorded a number of Gibson&#x27;s alleged &quot;hateful rants&quot;. In a 2012 interview, Gibson explained that the Maccabees film was still in preparation. He explained that he was drawn to the Biblical account of the uprising due to its similarity to the American Old West genre.

In June 2016, Gibson announced that he will reunite with &quot;Braveheart&quot; screenwriter Randall Wallace to make a sequel for &quot;The Passion of the Christ&quot;, focusing on the resurrection of Jesus. In early November 2016, Gibson revealed on &quot;The Late Show with Stephen Colbert&quot; that the sequel&#x27;s title will be &quot;The Passion of the Christ: Resurrection&quot;. He also stated that the project could &quot;probably be three years off&quot; because &quot;it&#x27;s a big subject&quot;. In January 2023, it was reported that the sequel will begin filming later that year.

In November 2016, film critic Matt Zoller Seitz named Gibson as &quot;the pre-eminent religious filmmaker in the United States&quot;.

In May 2018, it was announced that Gibson would be directing a WWII film titled &quot;Destroyer&quot;. &quot;Destroyer&quot;, similar to &quot;Hacksaw Ridge&quot;, will also deal with the Battle of Okinawa in the Pacific Theater, although from a different front. It will be based on the heroic story of the crew belonging to USS &quot;Laffey&quot; (DD-724), who defended their ship from 22 kamikaze attacks.

In September 2018, it was announced that Gibson would direct and co-write a remake of the 1969 film, &quot;The Wild Bunch&quot;. In May 2019, &quot;Deadline&quot; reported that Gibson was courting Michael Fassbender, Jamie Foxx, and Peter Dinklage to star in the project; that Jerry Bruckheimer will produce the film, and Warner Bros. will finance and release the project.

In 2021, after the death of &quot;Lethal Weapon&quot; director Richard Donner, Gibson has stated that he will direct, and also star, in a &quot;Lethal Weapon 5&quot;.

In May 2023, it was announced that Gibson would direct a film titled &quot;Flight Risk&quot;, starring Mark Wahlberg. Set to be released by Lionsgate, the film will star Wahlberg as &quot;a pilot transporting a dangerous criminal for trial.&quot; It was later reported that the film had begun shooting in Las Vegas on June 16. Filming was reportedly unaffected by the SAG-AFTRA strike, having been exempted as an independent project.

====Directing style====
Gibson has credited his directors, particularly George Miller, Peter Weir, and Richard Donner, with teaching him the craft of filmmaking and influencing him as a director. As a director, Gibson sometimes breaks the tension on set by having his actors perform serious scenes wearing a red clown nose. Helena Bonham Carter said of him, &quot;He has a very basic sense of humor. It&#x27;s a bit lavatorial and not very sophisticated.&quot; Gibson inserted a single frame of himself smoking a cigarette into the 2005 teaser trailer of &quot;Apocalypto&quot;.

== Film work ==

Gibson&#x27;s screen acting career began in 1976, with a role on the Australian television series &quot;The Sullivans&quot;. In his career, Gibson has appeared in 63 films, including the &quot;Mad Max&quot; and &quot;Lethal Weapon&quot; film series. In addition to acting, Gibson has also directed six films, including &quot;Braveheart&quot; and &quot;The Passion of the Christ&quot;; produced 11 films; and written three films. Films either starring or directed by Mel Gibson have earned over US$2.5 billion, in the United States alone. Gibson&#x27;s filmography includes television series, feature films, television films, and animated films.

=== &quot;Mad Max&quot; series ===

Gibson got his breakthrough role as the leather-clad post-apocalyptic survivor in George Miller&#x27;s &quot;Mad Max&quot;. The independently financed blockbuster helped to make him an international star. In the United States, the actors&#x27; Australian accents were dubbed with American accents. The original film spawned two sequels: &quot;Mad Max 2&quot; (known in North America as &quot;The Road Warrior&quot;) and &quot;Mad Max 3&quot; (known in North America as &quot;Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome&quot;). A fourth movie, &quot;Mad Max: Fury Road&quot; (2015), was made with Tom Hardy in the title role.

=== &quot;Gallipoli&quot; ===
The 1981 Peter Weir film &quot;Gallipoli&quot; is about a group of young men from rural Western Australia who enlist in the Australian Imperial Force during World War I. They are sent to invade the Ottoman Empire, where they take part in the 1915 Gallipoli campaign. During the course of the movie, the young men slowly lose their innocence about the war. The climax of the movie centers on the catastrophic Australian offensive known as the Battle of the Nek.

Peter Weir cast Gibson in the role of Frank Dunne, an Irish-Australian drifter with an intense cynicism about fighting for the British Empire. Newcomer Mark Lee was recruited to play the idealistic Archy Hamilton after participating in a photo session for the director. Gibson later recalled:

I&#x27;d auditioned for an earlier film and he told me right up front, &quot;I&#x27;m not going to cast you for this part. You&#x27;re not old enough. But thanks for coming in, I just wanted to meet you.&quot; He told me he wanted me for &quot;Gallipoli&quot; a couple of years later because I wasn&#x27;t the archetypal Australian. He had Mark Lee, the angelic-looking, ideal Australian kid, and he wanted something of a modern sensibility. He thought the audience needed someone to relate to of their own time.

Gibson later said that &quot;Gallipoli&quot; is, &quot;Not really a war movie. That&#x27;s just the backdrop. It&#x27;s really the story of two young men.&quot;

The critically acclaimed film helped to further launch Gibson&#x27;s career. He won the award for Best Actor in a Leading Role from the Australian Film Institute.

=== &quot;The Year of Living Dangerously&quot; ===

Gibson played a naïve but ambitious journalist opposite Sigourney Weaver and Linda Hunt in Peter Weir&#x27;s atmospheric 1982 film &quot;The Year of Living Dangerously&quot;, based on the novel of the same name by Christopher Koch. The movie was both a critical and commercial success, and the upcoming Australian actor was heavily marketed by MGM studio. In his review of the film, Vincent Canby of &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote, &quot;If this film doesn&#x27;t make an international star of Mr. Gibson, then nothing will. He possesses both the necessary talent and the screen presence.&quot; According to John Hiscock of &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;, the film did, indeed, establish Gibson as an international talent.

Gibson was initially reluctant to accept the role of Guy Hamilton. &quot;I didn&#x27;t necessarily see my role as a great challenge. My character was, like the film suggests, a puppet. And I went with that. It wasn&#x27;t some star thing, even though they advertised it that way.&quot; Gibson saw some similarities between himself and the character of Guy. &quot;He&#x27;s not a silver-tongued devil. He&#x27;s kind of immature and he has some rough edges and I guess you could say the same for me.&quot;

=== &quot;The Bounty&quot; ===

Gibson followed the footsteps of Errol Flynn, Clark Gable, and Marlon Brando by starring as Fletcher Christian in a cinematic retelling of the Mutiny on the &quot;Bounty&quot;. The resulting 1984 film &quot;The Bounty&quot; is considered to be the most historically accurate version. However, Gibson has expressed a belief that the film&#x27;s revisionism did not go far enough. He has stated that his character should have been portrayed as the film&#x27;s antagonist. He has further praised Anthony Hopkins&#x27;s performance as Lieutenant William Bligh as the best aspect of the film.

=== &quot;Lethal Weapon&quot; series ===

Gibson moved into more mainstream commercial filmmaking with the popular action comedy film series &quot;Lethal Weapon&quot;, which began with the 1987 original. In the films he played LAPD Detective Martin Riggs, a recently widowed Vietnam veteran with a death wish and a penchant for violence and gunplay. In the films, he is partnered with a reserved family man named Roger Murtaugh (Danny Glover) and starting with the second film, they&#x27;re joined by a hyperactive informant named Leo Getz (Joe Pesci). Following the success of &quot;Lethal Weapon&quot;, director Richard Donner and principal cast revisited the characters in three sequels, &quot;Lethal Weapon 2&quot; (1989), &quot;Lethal Weapon 3&quot; (1993), and &quot;Lethal Weapon 4&quot; (1998). With its fourth installment, the &quot;Lethal Weapon&quot; series embodied &quot;the quintessence of the buddy cop pic&quot;.

The film series has since been rebooted with a television adaptation, which aired for three seasons on FOX.

On November 15, 2021, Gibson confirmed that he will direct the fifth &quot;Lethal Weapon&quot; film following the death of director Richard Donner. &quot;The man who directed all the &#x27;Lethal films&#x27;, Richard Donner, he was a big guy. He was developing the screenplay and he got pretty far along with it. And he said to me one day, &#x27;Listen kid, if I kick the bucket you will do it.&#x27; And I said: &#x27;Shut up.&#x27; But he did indeed pass away. But he did ask me to do it and at the time I didn&#x27;t say anything. He said it to his wife and to the studio and the producer. So I will be directing the fifth one&quot; Gibson said. In June 2024, Gibson confirmed in an interview with the &quot;Inspire Me&quot; podcast that he would direct the fifth installment of the Lethal Weapon franchise and that the film would stay true to Donner&#x27;s vision and influence. Gibson also stated that he and Glover would return to play their respective roles of Riggs and Murtaugh.

=== &quot;Hamlet&quot; ===

Gibson made the unusual transition from action to classical drama, playing William Shakespeare&#x27;s Danish prince in Franco Zeffirelli&#x27;s &quot;Hamlet&quot;. Gibson was cast alongside experienced Shakespearean actors Ian Holm, Alan Bates, and Paul Scofield. He compared working with Scofield to being &quot;thrown into the ring with Mike Tyson&quot;. Scofield said of Gibson &quot;Not the sort of actor you&#x27;d think would make an ideal Hamlet, but he had enormous integrity and intelligence.&quot;

=== &quot;Braveheart&quot; ===

In 1995, Gibson directed, produced, and starred in &quot;Braveheart&quot;, a biographical film of Sir William Wallace, a Scottish nationalist who was executed in 1305 for &quot;high treason&quot; against King Edward I of England. Gibson received two Academy Awards, Best Director and Best Picture, for his second directorial effort. In winning the Academy Award for Best Director, Gibson became only the sixth actor-turned-filmmaker to do so. &quot;Braveheart&quot; influenced the Scottish nationalist movement and helped to revive the film genre of the historical epic; the Battle of Stirling Bridge sequence is considered by critics to be one of the all-time best-directed battle scenes.

The film&#x27;s depiction of the Prince of Wales as an effeminate homosexual caused the film to be attacked by Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD), which was especially enraged by a scene in which King Edward I murders his son&#x27;s male lover by throwing him out of a castle window.

Gibson, who had previously been reported making several homophobic statements, now replied, &quot;The fact that King Edward throws this character out a window has nothing to do with him being gay ... He&#x27;s terrible to his son, to everybody.&quot;

Gibson asserted that the reason that King Edward I kills his son&#x27;s lover is because the king is a &quot;psychopath&quot;. Gibson also expressed bewilderment that some filmgoers laughed at this murder:

=== &quot;The Passion of the Christ&quot; ===

Gibson directed, produced, co-wrote, and funded the film &quot;The Passion of the Christ&quot; (2004), which chronicled the passion and death of Jesus (Jim Caviezel). The film was shot exclusively in Aramaic, Latin, and Hebrew. Gibson originally intended to release the film without subtitles, but eventually relented for theatrical exhibition. The film sparked divergent reviews, ranging from high praise to criticism of the violence. The Anti-Defamation League accused Gibson of antisemitism over the film&#x27;s unflattering depiction of Caiaphas and the Sanhedrin.

In &quot;The Nation&quot;, reviewer Katha Pollitt wrote: &quot;Gibson has violated just about every precept of the conference&#x27;s own 1988 &#x27;Criteria&#x27; for the portrayal of Jews in dramatizations of the Passion (no bloodthirsty Jews, no rabble, no use of Scripture that reinforces negative stereotypes of Jews, etc.) ... The priests have big noses and gnarly faces, lumpish bodies, yellow teeth; Herod Antipas and his court are a bizarre collection of oily-haired, epicene perverts. The &#x27;good Jews&#x27; look like Italian movie stars (Magdalene actually is an Italian movie star, the lovely Monica Bellucci); Mary, who would have been around 50 and appeared 70, could pass for a ripe 35.&quot;

Among those to defend Gibson were Orthodox Jewish rabbi Daniel Lapin and radio personality Michael Medved. Referring to ADL National Director Abraham Foxman, Rabbi Lapin said that by calling &quot;The Passion of the Christ&quot; antisemitic, &quot;what he is saying is that the only way (for Christians) to escape the wrath of Foxman is to repudiate (their own) faith.&quot;

In an interview with &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot;, Gibson stated: &quot;If anyone has distorted Gospel passages to rationalize cruelty towards Jews or anyone, it&#x27;s in defiance of repeated Papal condemnation. The Papacy has condemned racism in any form... Jesus died for the sins of all times, and I&#x27;ll be the first on the line for culpability&quot;.

Eventually, the continued media attacks began to anger Gibson. After Hutton Gibson&#x27;s Holocaust denial was used to attack his son&#x27;s film in print by &quot;The New York Times&quot; writer Frank Rich, an enraged Mel Gibson retorted, &quot;I want to kill him. I want his intestines on a stick... I want to kill his dog.&quot;

Gibson&#x27;s Traditionalist Catholic upbringing was also the target of criticism. In a 2006 interview with Diane Sawyer, Gibson stated that he feels that his &quot;human rights were violated&quot; by the often vitriolic attacks on his person, his family, and his religious beliefs which were sparked by &quot;The Passion&quot;.

The film grossed US$611,899,420 worldwide and $370,782,930 in the U.S. alone, surpassing any motion picture starring Gibson. In U.S. box offices, it became the seventh-highest-grossing (at the time) film in history and the highest-grossing R-rated film of all time. The film was nominated for three Academy Awards and won the People&#x27;s Choice Award for Favorite Dramatic Motion Picture.

=== &quot;Apocalypto&quot; ===

Gibson received further critical acclaim for his directing of the 2006 action-adventure film &quot;Apocalypto&quot;. Gibson&#x27;s fourth directorial effort is set in Mesoamerica during the early 16th century against the turbulent end times of a Maya civilization. The sparse dialogue is spoken in the Yucatec Maya language by a cast of Native American descent.

Gibson himself has stated that the film is an attempt at making a deliberate point about great civilizations and what causes them to decline and disintegrate. Gibson said, &quot;People think that modern man is so enlightened, but we&#x27;re susceptible to the same forces—and we are also capable of the same heroism and transcendence.&quot; This theme is further explored by a quote from Will Durant, which is superimposed at the very beginning of the film: &quot;A great civilization is not conquered from without until it has destroyed itself from within.&quot;

=== &quot;The Beaver&quot; ===

Gibson starred in &quot;The Beaver&quot;, a domestic drama about a depressed alcoholic directed by former &quot;Maverick&quot; costar Jodie Foster. &quot;The Beaver&quot; premiered at the South by Southwest Festival in Austin, Texas on March 16, 2011. The opening weekend in 22 theaters was considered a flop; it made $104,000 which comes to a per-theater average of $4,745. The film&#x27;s distributor, Summit Entertainment, had originally planned for a wide release of &quot;The Beaver&quot; for the weekend of May 20, but after the initial box-office returns for the film, the company changed course and decided instead to give the film a &quot;limited art-house run&quot;. Michael Cieply of &quot;The New York Times&quot; observed on June 5, 2011, that the film had cleared just about $1 million, making it a certified &quot;flop&quot;. Director Jodie Foster opined that the film did not do well with American audiences because it was a dramedy, and &quot;very often Americans are not comfortable with [that]&quot;.

Before its release, much of the coverage focused on the unavoidable association between the protagonist&#x27;s issues and Mel Gibson&#x27;s own well-publicized personal and legal problems (see ), including a conviction of battery of his ex-girlfriend. Wrote &quot;Time&quot; magazine, &quot;&quot;The Beaver&quot; is a somber, sad domestic drama featuring an alcoholic in acute crisis ... It&#x27;s hard to separate Gibson&#x27;s true-life story from what&#x27;s happening onscreen.&quot;

=== &quot;Hacksaw Ridge&quot; ===
In 2014, Gibson signed on to direct &quot;Hacksaw Ridge&quot;, a World War II drama based on the true story of conscientious objector Desmond T. Doss, played by Andrew Garfield.

The film premiered at the 73rd Venice Film Festival in September 2016 and received what &quot;The New Zealand Herald&quot; called &quot;rave reviews&quot;. It won or been nominated for many awards, including Golden Globe nominations for Best Picture, Best Director for Gibson, and Best Actor for Garfield. &quot;Hacksaw Ridge&quot; was also nominated for an Academy Award for Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor, Best Sound Editing, Best Sound Mixing, and Best Film Editing.

The film grossed $164 million worldwide, four times its production costs.

== Personal life ==
Because of his mother, Gibson retains dual Irish and American citizenship. 

Gibson is also an Australian permanent resident.

=== Relationships ===
==== Robyn Denise Moore ====

Gibson met Robyn Denise Moore in 1977, soon after filming &quot;Mad Max&quot;, in Adelaide, South Australia. At the time, Robyn was a dental nurse and Mel was an unknown actor working for the South Australian Theatre Company. On June 7, 1980, Mel and Robyn were married in a Catholic church in Forestville, New South Wales. They have one daughter, Hannah (b. 1980, married Kenny Wayne Shepherd in 2006), and six sons: twins Edward and Christian (b. 1982), William (b. 1985), Louis (b. 1988), Milo (b. 1990), and Thomas (b. 1999); and seven grandchildren .

After 26 years of marriage, Gibson and Robyn separated on July 29, 2006. In a 2011 interview, Gibson stated that the separation began the day following his arrest for drunk driving in Malibu. Robyn Gibson filed for divorce on April 13, 2009, citing irreconcilable differences. In a joint statement, the Gibsons declared, &quot;Throughout our marriage and separation we have always striven to maintain the privacy and integrity of our family and will continue to do so.&quot; The divorce filing followed the March 2009 release of photographs appearing to show him on a beach embracing his live-in girlfriend of one year, Russian songwriter and pianist Oksana Grigorieva.

The Gibsons&#x27; divorce was finalized on December 23, 2011, and the settlement with his ex-wife was said to be the highest in Hollywood history at over $400 million. The couple reportedly did not have a prenuptial agreement; because California is a community property state, Robyn Gibson received half of everything her husband had earned during their marriage.

==== Oksana Grigorieva ====

In a 2010 interview, Grigorieva stated that, when she first began being wooed by Gibson, she was surprised and only accepted his advances after learning that the actor-director and his wife had been separated for more than 18 months. Grigorieva added, &quot;He wrote me a lot of poetry. It was very beautiful, impressionistic, like an edgy, modern iambic pentameter. Mel has a really good grasp of language, he&#x27;s fantastic with words.&quot;

On April 28, 2009, Gibson made a red carpet-appearance with Grigorieva. She had previously had a son with actor Timothy Dalton and gave birth to Gibson&#x27;s daughter Lucia on October 30, 2009. By April 2010, Gibson and Grigorieva had split. On June 21, 2010, Grigorieva filed a restraining order against Gibson to keep him away from her and their child. The restraining order was modified the next day regarding Gibson&#x27;s contact with their child. Gibson obtained a restraining order against Grigorieva on June 25, 2010.
Grigorieva accused Gibson of domestic violence, leading to an investigation by the Los Angeles County Sheriff&#x27;s Department in July 2010. On July 9, 2010, some audio recordings of a rant, allegedly directed by Gibson toward Grigorieva, were posted on the internet. The same day Gibson was dropped by his agency, William Morris Endeavor. Gibson&#x27;s estranged wife Robyn filed a court statement declaring that she never experienced any abuse from Gibson; while forensic experts have questioned the validity of some of the tapes, Gibson himself did not deny they were accurate at the time. In March 2011, Mel Gibson agreed to plead no contest to a misdemeanor battery charge. In April 2011, Gibson finally broke his silence about the incident in question. In an interview with &quot;Deadline Hollywood&quot;, Gibson expressed gratitude to longtime friends Whoopi Goldberg and Jodie Foster, both of whom had spoken publicly in his defense. About the recordings, Gibson said,

In the same interview, Gibson stated

In August 2011, Gibson settled with Grigorieva, who was awarded $750,000, joint legal custody, and a house in Sherman Oaks, California until their daughter Lucia turns 18. In 2013, Grigorieva sued her attorneys, accusing them of advising her to sign a bad agreement, including a term that taking legal action against Gibson would compromise her financial settlement.

==== Rosalind Ross ====
As of 2014, Gibson is in a relationship with former champion equestrian vaulter and writer Rosalind Ross. Ross gave birth to their son, and Gibson&#x27;s ninth child, Lars Gerard, on January 20, 2017, in Los Angeles.

=== Investments ===
Gibson is a property investor, with multiple properties in Malibu, California, several locations in Costa Rica, a private island in Fiji, and properties in Australia. In December 2004, Gibson sold his Australian farm in the Kiewa Valley for $6 million. Also in December 2004, Gibson purchased Mago Island in Fiji from Tokyu Corporation of Japan for $15 million. Descendants of the original native inhabitants of Mago, who were displaced in the 1860s, have protested the purchase. Gibson stated it was his intention to retain the pristine environment of the undeveloped island.

In early 2005, he sold his Montana ranch to a neighbor. In April 2007, he purchased a ranch in Costa Rica for $26 million, and, in July 2007, he sold his Tudor estate in Connecticut (which he purchased in 1994 for $9 million) for $40 million to an unnamed buyer. Also that month, he sold a Malibu property for $30 million that he had purchased for $24 million two years before.

In 2008, he purchased the Malibu home of actors David Duchovny and Téa Leoni.

In 2009 he bought a house in Sherman Oaks, Los Angeles, built in 2006 to designs inspired by architect Frank Lloyd Wright. He paid $2.4 million for the property, which he bought under a trust, with Vicki Lynn Christianson, COO of his production company Icon Productions, as trustee. He sold the property at a loss in February, for $2.1 million.

==== Jersey Leaks ====
Records of Gibson using offshore accounts and business were revealed in the Jersey Leaks, records of more than 20,000 individuals held with the wealth management firm Kleinwort Benson.

=== Philanthropy ===

Gibson and his former wife have contributed a substantial amount of money to various charities, one of which is Healing the Children. According to Cris Embleton, one of the founders, the Gibsons gave millions to provide lifesaving medical treatment to needy children worldwide. They also supported the restoration of Renaissance artwork and gave millions of dollars to NIDA.

Gibson donated $500,000 to the El Mirador Basin Project to protect the last tract of virgin rain forest in Central America and to fund archeological excavations in the &quot;cradle of Mayan civilization&quot;. In July 2007, Gibson again visited Central America to make arrangements for donations to the indigenous population. Gibson met with Costa Rican President Óscar Arias to discuss how to &quot;channel the funds&quot;. During the same month, Gibson pledged to give financial assistance to a Malaysian company named Green Rubber Global for a tire recycling factory located in Gallup, New Mexico. While on a business trip to Singapore in September 2007, Gibson donated to a local charity for children with chronic and terminal illnesses. Gibson is also a supporter of Angels at Risk, a nonprofit organization focusing on education about drug and alcohol abuse among teens.

In a 2011 interview, Gibson said of his philanthropic works, &quot;It gives you perspective. It&#x27;s one of my faults, you tend to focus on yourself a lot. Which is not always the healthiest thing for your psyche or anything else. If you take a little time out to think about other people, it&#x27;s good. It&#x27;s uplifting.&quot;

=== Religion and politics ===
==== Faith ====
Gibson was raised a sedevacantist traditionalist Catholic (who reject the validity of all Popes since the Second Vatican Council and hold that the Holy See is currently vacant). His father Hutton Gibson was an ardent sedevacantist and a Holocaust denier who held strong antisemitic views and supported various conspiracy theories.

During the filming of &quot;The Passion of The Christ&quot;, he had daily visits from both local priests and priests from the traditionalist Institute of Christ the King (a non-sedevacantist group in full communion with the Pope) in France.

When asked about the Catholic doctrine of &quot;Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus&quot;, Gibson replied, &quot;There is no salvation for those outside the Church ... I believe it. Put it this way. My wife is a saint. She&#x27;s a much better person than I am. Honestly. She&#x27;s ... Episcopalian, Church of England. She prays, she believes in God, she knows Jesus, she believes in that stuff. And it&#x27;s just not fair if she doesn&#x27;t make it, she&#x27;s better than I am. But that is a pronouncement from the chair. I go with it.&quot; When he was asked whether John 14:6 is an intolerant position, he said that &quot;through the merits of Jesus&#x27; sacrifice ... even people who don&#x27;t know Jesus are able to be saved, but &quot;through&quot; him.&quot;

Gibson&#x27;s acquaintance Fr. William Fulco said in 2009 that Gibson denies neither the pope nor Vatican II; even so, as of 2021, Gibson attended the Church of the Holy Family, a traditionalist church he founded and funds in Southern California. Gibson has told Diane Sawyer that he believes non-Catholics and non-Christians can go to Heaven.

In a 1990 interview with Barbara Walters, Gibson said: &quot;God is the only one who knows how many children we should have, and we should be ready to accept them. One can&#x27;t decide for oneself who comes into this world and who doesn&#x27;t. That decision doesn&#x27;t belong to us.&quot;

Gibson, in a letter published by Italian Traditionalist Catholic author Aldo Maria Valli, on his website, on 6 July 2024, stated his full support for the recently excommunicated Italian archbishop Carlo Maria Viganò, who he praised as a &quot;a modern day Athanasius!&quot;, stating that he agreed with him in considering that the &quot;post conciliar church of Vatican II is a counterfeit church&quot;, and that &quot;being called a schismatic &amp; being excommunicated by Jorge Bergoglio is like a badge of honor when you consider he is a total apostate &amp; expels you from a false institution.&quot; He also stated that &quot;I am with you &amp; I hope Bergoglio excommunicates me from his false church also.&quot;

==== Politics ====
In a July 1995 interview with &quot;Playboy&quot;, Gibson said President Bill Clinton was a &quot;low-level opportunist&quot; and someone was &quot;telling him what to do&quot;. He said that the Rhodes Scholarship was established for young men and women who want to strive for a &quot;new world order&quot; and this was a campaign for &quot;Marxism&quot;. Gibson later backed away from such conspiracy theories saying, &quot;It was like: &#x27;Hey, tell us a conspiracy&#x27;... so I laid out this thing, and suddenly, it was like I was talking the gospel truth, espousing all this political shit like I believed in it.&quot; In the same 1995 &quot;Playboy&quot; interview, Gibson argued against ordaining women to the priesthood.

In 2004, he publicly spoke out against taxpayer-funded embryonic stem-cell research that involves the cloning and destruction of human embryos. In March 2005, he condemned the outcome of the Terri Schiavo case, referring to Schiavo&#x27;s death as &quot;state-sanctioned murder&quot;.

Gibson questioned the Iraq War in March 2004. In 2006, Gibson said that the &quot;fearmongering&quot; depicted in his film &quot;Apocalypto&quot; &quot;reminds me a little of President Bush and his guys.&quot; He later said in 2016 that he is anti-war but has an appreciation for the sacrifices made by &quot;warriors&quot;.

Gibson complimented filmmaker Michael Moore and his documentary &quot;Fahrenheit 9/11&quot; when he and Moore were recognized at the 2005 People&#x27;s Choice Awards. Gibson&#x27;s Icon Productions originally agreed to finance Moore&#x27;s film but later sold the rights to Miramax Films. Moore said that his agent Ari Emanuel claimed that &quot;top Republicans&quot; called Gibson to tell him, &quot;don&#x27;t expect to get more invitations to the White House&quot;. Icon&#x27;s spokesman dismissed this story, saying &quot;We never run from a controversy. You&#x27;d have to be out of your mind to think that of the company that just put out &quot;The Passion of the Christ&quot;.&quot;

In a 2011 interview, Gibson stated:

The whole notion of politics is they always present you with this or this or this. I&#x27;ll get a newspaper to read between the lines. Why do you have to adhere to prescribed formulas that they have and people argue over them and they&#x27;re all in a box. And you watch Fox claw CNN, and CNN claw Fox. Sometimes I catch a piece of the news and it seems insanity to me. I quietly support candidates. I&#x27;m not out there banging a drum for candidates. But I have supported a candidate and it&#x27;s a whole other world. Once you&#x27;ve been exposed to it, once or twice or however many times, if you know the facts and see how they&#x27;re presented, it&#x27;s mind-boggling. It&#x27;s a very scary arena to be in, but I do vote. I go in there and pull the lever. It&#x27;s kind of like pulling the lever and watching the trap door fall out from beneath you. Why should we trust any of these people? None of them ever deliver on anything. It&#x27;s always disappointing.

Gibson revealed in a 2016 interview with Jorge Ramos that he voted for neither Donald Trump nor Hillary Clinton in the 2016 United States presidential election. In July 2021, Gibson was recorded saluting Trump while attending UFC 264, which went viral over the Internet.

In October 2020, Gibson released a statement regarding the Second Nagorno-Karabakh War and expressing solidarity with the Armenian people.

Gibson endorsed Trump in the 2024 United States presidential election, adding that Kamala Harris had &quot;the IQ of a fence post&quot;.

On January 16, 2025, it was announced by president-elect Donald Trump that Gibson would serve in a new role as one of three &quot;special ambassadors&quot; to Hollywood, sharing the role with fellow actors Jon Voight and Sylvester Stallone. Trump stated that he wants these actors to make Hollywood &quot;stronger than ever before&quot; by bringing back business lost to &quot;foreign countries&quot;. Trump said that the three would be his &quot;eyes and ears&quot; and he would act on their suggestions, but their duties were not specified.

=== Alcohol abuse and legal issues ===
Gibson has said that he started drinking at the age of 13. In a 2002 interview for the documentary &quot;actingclassof1977.com&quot;, made by his former National Institute of Dramatic Art colleague Sally McKenzie, Gibson said, &quot;I had really good highs but some very low lows.&quot;

Gibson was banned from driving in Ontario, Canada, for three months in 1984, after rear-ending a car in Toronto while under the influence of alcohol. He retreated to his Australian farm for over a year to recover, but he continued to struggle with drinking. Despite this problem, Gibson gained a reputation in Hollywood for professionalism and punctuality such that frequent collaborator Richard Donner was shocked when Gibson confided that he was drinking five pints of beer for breakfast. Reflecting in 2003 and 2004, Gibson said that despair in his mid-30s led him to contemplate suicide, and he meditated on Christ&#x27;s Passion to heal his wounds. He took more time off acting in 1991 and sought professional help. That year, Gibson&#x27;s attorneys were unsuccessful at blocking the &quot;Sunday Mirror&quot; from publishing what Gibson shared at AA meetings. In 1992, Gibson provided financial support to Hollywood&#x27;s Recovery Center, saying, &quot;Alcoholism is something that runs in my family. It&#x27;s something that&#x27;s close to me. People do come back from it, and it&#x27;s a miracle.&quot;

On August 17, 2006, Gibson pleaded no contest to a misdemeanor drunken-driving charge and was sentenced to three years&#x27; probation. He was ordered to attend self-help meetings five times a week for four-and-a-half months and three times a week for the remainder of the first year of his probation. He was also ordered to attend a First Offenders Program and fined $1,300, and his license was restricted for 90 days.

In February 2008, it was reported that screenwriter Benedict Fitzgerald was suing Gibson, along with Vicki Christianson, Icon Productions, Icon Distribution, Marquis Films, and Airborne Productions, for defrauding him of millions of dollars, as well as incorrectly taking co-writing credit for the screenplay of &quot;Passion of the Christ&quot;. In May 2009, Gibson agreed to an undisclosed settlement with Fitzgerald. Details of the settlement, agreed at Los Angeles County Superior Court, were not released. Gibson&#x27;s representatives did not comment on the settlement.

=== Palisades Fire ===
In January 2025, during the Southern California wildfires, Gibson&#x27;s home in Malibu burned down in the Palisades Fire. He criticized California governor Gavin Newsom&#x27;s response to the Los Angeles wildfires.

== Controversies ==
GLAAD accused Gibson of homophobia after a December 1991 interview in the Spanish newspaper &quot;El País&quot; in which he made derogatory comments about gay people. Gibson later defended his comments, and rejected calls to apologize even as he faced fresh accusations of homophobia in the wake of his film &quot;Braveheart&quot;. Gibson joined GLAAD in hosting 10 lesbian and gay filmmakers for an on-location seminar on the set of the movie &quot;Conspiracy Theory&quot; in January 1997. In 1999, when asked about the comments to &quot;El País&quot;, Gibson said, &quot;I shouldn&#x27;t have said it, but I was tickling a bit of vodka during that interview, and the quote came back to bite me on the ass.&quot;

On July 28, 2006, Gibson was arrested by Sheriff&#x27;s Deputy James Mee of the Los Angeles County Sheriff&#x27;s Department for driving under the influence (DUI) while speeding in his vehicle with an open container of alcohol. According to a 2011 article in &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, Gibson first told the arresting officer, &quot;My life is over. I&#x27;m fucked. Robyn&#x27;s going to leave me.&quot; According to the arrest report, Gibson exploded into an angry tirade when the arresting officer would not allow him to drive home. In what &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; was later told was an attempt at suicide by cop, Gibson said to the arresting officer, &quot;Fucking Jews... the Jews are responsible for all the wars in the world. Are you a Jew?&quot;

After the arrest report was leaked on TMZ.com, Gibson issued two apologies through his publicist, and—in a televised interview with Diane Sawyer—he affirmed the accuracy of the quotations. He further apologized for his &quot;despicable&quot; behavior, saying that the comments were &quot;blurted out in a moment of insanity&quot;, and asked to meet with Jewish leaders to help him &quot;discern the appropriate path for healing.&quot; After Gibson&#x27;s arrest, his publicist said he had entered a recovery program to battle alcoholism.

Winona Ryder has repeatedly told a story to various press outlets about speaking to Mel Gibson with her friend at party. Gibson allegedly responded to her friend, who was gay, by asking if he was going to get AIDS from speaking with him, and later asked Ryder if she was an &quot;.&quot; A representative of Gibson later denied the accusations.

In July 2010, Gibson had been recorded during a phone call with Grigorieva where he suggested that if she got &quot;raped by a pack of niggers&quot;, she would be to blame, and threatening to burn down Grigorieva&#x27;s house while she was inside it. Grigorieva said the voices on the multiple recordings leaked were of herself and Gibson, according to CNN. He was barred from coming near Grigorieva or their daughter due to a domestic violence-related restraining order. The Los Angeles County Sheriff&#x27;s Department launched a domestic violence investigation against Gibson, later dropped when Gibson pleaded no contest to a misdemeanor battery charge.

Gibson&#x27;s controversial statements resulted in him being blacklisted in Hollywood for almost a decade. Both Robert Downey Jr. and journalist Allison Hope Weiner advocated for forgiveness for Gibson in 2014. In 2016, Gibson&#x27;s film &quot;Hacksaw Ridge&quot;, which received six Academy Award nominations, resulted in what was perceived as a &quot;thaw&quot; in his reputation.

== Awards and honors ==

===Major film awards===
Gibson has won numerous major awards for his film achievements, including multiple awards for the following:
===Other awards, honors, and appointments===
In 1985, Gibson was named the &quot;Sexiest Man Alive&quot; by &quot;People&quot;, the first person to be named so.

Gibson quietly declined the Chevalier des Arts et Lettres from the French government in 1995 as a protest against France&#x27;s resumption of nuclear testing in the Southwest Pacific. 

On July 25, 1997, Gibson was named an honorary Officer of the Order of Australia (AO), in recognition of his &quot;service to the Australian film industry&quot;. The award was honorary because substantive awards are made only to Australian citizens.

In 2003, he was awarded an honorary doctorate by the Loyola Marymount University.

In 2004, he was named &quot;world&#x27;s most powerful celebrity&quot; by &quot;Forbes&quot;. In the same year, &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; named him Innovator of the Year.

In 2007, Gibson was awarded an honorary fellowship in performing arts by Limkokwing University of Creative Technology.

In 2008, he won the Outstanding Contribution to World Cinema Award at the Irish Film and Television Awards.

He was the recipient of the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Supporting Actor for &quot;Daddy&#x27;s Home 2&quot;, and was nominated for the same award for &quot;The Expendables 3&quot; (2014) and &quot;Dangerous&quot; (2021).

== Citations ==
== General bibliography ==
* 

== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* 
* Mel Gibson on Biography
* Mel Gibson at AllMovie
* 
* Mel Gibson interviewed by Roy Faires at KVUE in Austin discussing his new movie Lethal Weapon (1987) from Texas Archive of the Moving Image</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42229" start="0" end="28" title="Mel Gibson" label="Mel Columcille Gerard Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48229100" start="105" end="123" title="List of awards and nominations received by Mel Gibson" label="multiple accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442950" start="237" end="252" title="Max Rockatansky" label="Max Rockatansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q197949" start="285" end="301" title="Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction" label="post-apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275141" start="315" end="322" title="Mad Max" label="Mad Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q282634" start="348" end="360" title="Martin Riggs" label="Martin Riggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984974" start="368" end="377" title="buddy cop film" label="buddy cop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777059" start="391" end="404" title="Lethal Weapon (franchise)" label="Lethal Weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q876191" start="433" end="452" title="Peekskill, New York" label="Peekskill, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815371" start="557" end="591" title="National Institute of Dramatic Art" label="National Institute of Dramatic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q307882" start="619" end="629" title="Judy Davis" label="Judy Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83186" start="655" end="671" title="Romeo and Juliet" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669403" start="708" end="726" title="Icon Entertainment" label="Icon Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q55424" start="759" end="769" title="Peter Weir" label="Peter Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077160" start="830" end="839" title="Gallipoli (1981 film)" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q781399" start="902" end="927" title="Australian Film Institute" label="Australian Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q162729" start="1000" end="1010" title="Braveheart" label="Braveheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q586356" start="1038" end="1074" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Director" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="1080" end="1111" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Academy Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="1121" end="1151" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q51668" start="1190" end="1215" title="The Passion of the Christ" label="The Passion of the Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q188035" start="1392" end="1402" title="Apocalypto" label="Apocalypto"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="1424" end="1435" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q752362" start="1525" end="1531" title="Ransom (1996 film)" label="Ransom"/>
<link wikidata="Q279057" start="1552" end="1559" title="Payback (1999 film)" label="Payback"/>
<link wikidata="Q156394" start="1580" end="1595" title="What Women Want" label="What Women Want"/>
<link wikidata="Q646633" start="1616" end="1627" title="The Patriot (2000 film)" label="The Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q22432" start="1652" end="1657" title="Signs (2002 film)" label="Signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q760093" start="1855" end="1871" title="Edge of Darkness (2010 film)" label="Edge of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="1889" end="1901" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q847940" start="1915" end="1925" title="The Beaver (film)" label="The Beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010856" start="2001" end="2014" title="Hacksaw Ridge" label="Hacksaw Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q22076019" start="2037" end="2051" title="89th Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q876191" start="2125" end="2144" title="Peekskill, New York" label="Peekskill, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="2182" end="2196" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q11863866" start="2257" end="2270" title="Hutton Gibson" label="Hutton Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415135" start="2391" end="2401" title="Eva Mylott" label="Eva Mylott"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="2558" end="2580" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q534411" start="2621" end="2626" title="Donal Gibson" label="Donal"/>
<link wikidata="Q281026" start="2687" end="2710" title="St Mel&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Mel&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q645623" start="2754" end="2762" title="Longford" label="Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q236326" start="2781" end="2790" title="Columba" label="Colmcille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371464" start="2919" end="2944" title="New York Central Railroad" label="New York Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986305" start="3014" end="3025" title="West Pymble" label="West Pymble"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3184" end="3189" title="Conscription in Australia#Vietnam War" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="3219" end="3230" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q783988" start="3301" end="3335" title="Congregation of Christian Brothers" label="Congregation of Christian Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593971" start="3339" end="3369" title="St Leo&amp;#x27;s Catholic College" label="St Leo&amp;#x27;s Catholic College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959849" start="3373" end="3382" title="Wahroonga" label="Wahroonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="3384" end="3399" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q716442" start="3589" end="3602" title="Vincent Canby" label="Vincent Canby"/>
<link wikidata="Q159347" start="3649" end="3662" title="Steve McQueen" label="Steve McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q71243" start="3809" end="3820" title="Clark Gable" label="Clark Gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q16390" start="3825" end="3840" title="Humphrey Bogart" label="Humphrey Bogart"/>
<link wikidata="Q55424" start="3912" end="3922" title="Peter Weir" label="Peter Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077160" start="3936" end="3945" title="Gallipoli (1981 film)" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q53040" start="4113" end="4130" title="Franco Zeffirelli" label="Franco Zeffirelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422824" start="4153" end="4159" title="Hamlet (1990 film)" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q675520" start="4215" end="4223" title="Maverick (film)" label="Maverick"/>
<link wikidata="Q156394" start="4247" end="4262" title="What Women Want" label="What Women Want"/>
<link wikidata="Q944158" start="4324" end="4346" title="The Man Without a Face" label="The Man Without a Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q162729" start="4367" end="4377" title="Braveheart" label="Braveheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q51668" start="4398" end="4423" title="The Passion of the Christ" label="The Passion of the Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q188035" start="4448" end="4458" title="Apocalypto" label="Apocalypto"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="4493" end="4497" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q83410" start="4525" end="4535" title="Cary Grant" label="Cary Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573" start="4537" end="4549" title="Sean Connery" label="Sean Connery"/>
<link wikidata="Q59215" start="4555" end="4569" title="Robert Redford" label="Robert Redford"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="4622" end="4632" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q246154" start="4651" end="4664" title="M (James Bond)" label="&amp;quot;M&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="4730" end="4738" title="Typecasting (acting)" label="typecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815371" start="4779" end="4813" title="National Institute of Dramatic Art" label="National Institute of Dramatic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q307882" start="4857" end="4867" title="Judy Davis" label="Judy Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765879" start="4879" end="4884" title="leading actor" label="leads"/>
<link wikidata="Q83186" start="4894" end="4910" title="Romeo and Juliet" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332221" start="4948" end="4961" title="Titania (A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream)" label="Queen Titania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096995" start="4968" end="4980" title="experimental theatre" label="experimental"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="5001" end="5031" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q248775" start="5119" end="5126" title="Mad Max (film)" label="Mad Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603583" start="5189" end="5229" title="State Theatre Company of South Australia" label="State Theatre Company of South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="5233" end="5241" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401769" start="5298" end="5306" title="Estragon" label="Estragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q166272" start="5317" end="5330" title="Geoffrey Rush" label="Geoffrey Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871" start="5341" end="5358" title="Waiting for Godot" label="Waiting for Godot"/>
<link wikidata="Q820862" start="5423" end="5442" title="Death of a Salesman" label="Death of a Salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q190994" start="5519" end="5531" title="Sissy Spacek" label="Sissy Spacek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741988" start="5566" end="5578" title="Love Letters (play)" label="Love Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q328627" start="5588" end="5600" title="A. R. Gurney" label="A. R. Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641728" start="5605" end="5614" title="Telluride, Colorado" label="Telluride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815371" start="5646" end="5650" title="National Institute of Dramatic Art" label="NIDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753929" start="5702" end="5713" title="Summer City" label="Summer City"/>
<link wikidata="Q248775" start="5806" end="5813" title="Mad Max (film)" label="Mad Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603583" start="5917" end="5949" title="State Theatre Company of South Australia" label="South Australian Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="6007" end="6015" title="Adelaide, South Australia" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q546256" start="6131" end="6134" title="Tim (film)" label="Tim"/>
<link wikidata="Q932217" start="6248" end="6261" title="The Sullivans" label="The Sullivans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321734" start="6306" end="6323" title="police procedural" label="police procedural"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168143" start="6330" end="6338" title="Cop Shop" label="Cop Shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260220" start="6394" end="6404" title="Punishment (TV series)" label="Punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6485" end="6497" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q463579" start="6516" end="6530" title="Attack Force Z" label="Attack Force Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q55424" start="6619" end="6629" title="Peter Weir" label="Peter Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6669" end="6680" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077160" start="6693" end="6702" title="Gallipoli (1981 film)" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q781399" start="6771" end="6796" title="Australian Film Institute" label="Australian Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335086" start="6927" end="6936" title="Ed Limato" label="Ed Limato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125262" start="6955" end="6964" title="Mad Max 2" label="Mad Max 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q55424" start="7118" end="7128" title="Peter Weir" label="Peter Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q505148" start="7160" end="7190" title="The Year of Living Dangerously (film)" label="The Year of Living Dangerously"/>
<link wikidata="Q316070" start="7311" end="7329" title="Fletcher Christian" label="Fletcher Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211716" start="7339" end="7349" title="The Bounty (1984 film)" label="The Bounty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442950" start="7422" end="7437" title="Max Rockatansky" label="Max Rockatansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q426663" start="7467" end="7493" title="Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome" label="Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q953627" start="7547" end="7558" title="Mark Rydell" label="Mark Rydell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771288" start="7578" end="7587" title="The River (1984 film)" label="The River"/>
<link wikidata="Q190994" start="7618" end="7630" title="Sissy Spacek" label="Sissy Spacek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="7649" end="7658" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344050" start="7716" end="7727" title="Mrs. Soffel" label="Mrs. Soffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q438911" start="7770" end="7787" title="Gillian Armstrong" label="Gillian Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q318249" start="7796" end="7810" title="Matthew Modine" label="Matthew Modine"/>
<link wikidata="Q102642" start="7854" end="7866" title="Diane Keaton" label="Diane Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3663773" start="8026" end="8040" title="cattle station" label="cattle station"/>
<link wikidata="Q282634" start="8074" end="8086" title="Martin Riggs" label="Martin Riggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q462447" start="8096" end="8109" title="Lethal Weapon" label="Lethal Weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q721922" start="8233" end="8245" title="Robert Towne" label="Robert Towne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423568" start="8259" end="8274" title="Tequila Sunrise (film)" label="Tequila Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q751767" start="8307" end="8322" title="Lethal Weapon 2" label="Lethal Weapon 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q135347" start="8414" end="8428" title="Bird on a Wire (film)" label="Bird on a Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q406785" start="8442" end="8453" title="Air America (film)" label="Air America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422824" start="8471" end="8477" title="Hamlet (1990 film)" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q515218" start="8616" end="8629" title="Forever Young (1992 film)" label="Forever Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q751769" start="8643" end="8658" title="Lethal Weapon 3" label="Lethal Weapon 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q675520" start="8672" end="8680" title="Maverick (film)" label="Maverick"/>
<link wikidata="Q162729" start="8698" end="8708" title="Braveheart" label="Braveheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q752362" start="8741" end="8747" title="Ransom (1996 film)" label="Ransom"/>
<link wikidata="Q506661" start="8761" end="8778" title="Conspiracy Theory (film)" label="Conspiracy Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q429397" start="8792" end="8807" title="Lethal Weapon 4" label="Lethal Weapon 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q279057" start="8825" end="8832" title="Payback (1999 film)" label="Payback"/>
<link wikidata="Q228024" start="8896" end="8906" title="John Smith (explorer)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="8910" end="8916" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q218894" start="8930" end="8940" title="Pocahontas (1995 film)" label="Pocahontas"/>
<link wikidata="Q646633" start="9015" end="9026" title="The Patriot (2000 film)" label="The Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q156401" start="9126" end="9137" title="Chicken Run" label="Chicken Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q156394" start="9154" end="9169" title="What Women Want" label="What Women Want"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="9209" end="9220" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q623502" start="9233" end="9249" title="We Were Soldiers" label="We Were Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q51489" start="9260" end="9278" title="M. Night Shyamalan" label="M. Night Shyamalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22432" start="9292" end="9297" title="Signs (2002 film)" label="Signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q760093" start="9659" end="9675" title="Edge of Darkness (2010 film)" label="Edge of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q451399" start="9782" end="9798" title="Edge of Darkness" label="Edge of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q51693" start="9846" end="9864" title="Brownsville, Texas" label="Brownsville, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q403442" start="9900" end="9914" title="Get the Gringo" label="Get the Gringo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515039" start="10099" end="10122" title="William Morris Endeavor" label="William Morris Endeavor"/>
<link wikidata="Q274748" start="10170" end="10190" title="The Hangover Part II" label="The Hangover Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q128187" start="10337" end="10350" title="Machete Kills" label="Machete Kills"/>
<link wikidata="Q223830" start="10375" end="10386" title="Danny Trejo" label="Danny Trejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14370516" start="10419" end="10436" title="The Expendables 3" label="The Expendables 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q40026" start="10452" end="10470" title="Sylvester Stallone" label="Sylvester Stallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16214602" start="10526" end="10541" title="S. Craig Zahler" label="S. Craig Zahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q33256053" start="10584" end="10607" title="Dragged Across Concrete" label="Dragged Across Concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q27961908" start="10658" end="10686" title="The Professor and the Madman (film)" label="The Professor and the Madman"/>
<link wikidata="Q462447" start="10805" end="10818" title="Lethal Weapon" label="Lethal Weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q381807" start="10897" end="10908" title="Bruce Davey" label="Bruce Davey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669403" start="10924" end="10940" title="Icon Productions" label="Icon Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422824" start="10972" end="10978" title="Hamlet (1990 film)" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q63922176" start="11022" end="11035" title="Tim White (New Zealand producer)" label="Timothy White"/>
<link wikidata="Q919514" start="11134" end="11155" title="Fox Studios Australia" label="Fox Studios Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="11159" end="11165" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q949161" start="11325" end="11342" title="the Three Stooges" label="the Three Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="11356" end="11359" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046336" start="11378" end="11385" title="Carrier (TV series)" label="Carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053574" start="11570" end="11588" title="executive producer" label="executive producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847274" start="11613" end="11629" title="Sound of Freedom (film)" label="Sound of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741825" start="11701" end="11724" title="trafficking of children" label="trafficking of children"/>
<link wikidata="Q165219" start="11758" end="11775" title="Robert Downey Jr." label="Robert Downey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q944158" start="11925" end="11947" title="The Man Without a Face" label="The Man Without a Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q162729" start="11989" end="11999" title="Braveheart" label="Braveheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="12031" end="12062" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Academy Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q261546" start="12116" end="12130" title="Fahrenheit 451 (1966 film)" label="Fahrenheit 451"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="12314" end="12320" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q623502" start="12425" end="12441" title="We Were Soldiers" label="We Were Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22432" start="12458" end="12463" title="Signs (2002 film)" label="Signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q51668" start="12647" end="12658" title="The Passion of the Christ" label="The Passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="12668" end="12675" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="12680" end="12685" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q51668" start="12841" end="12866" title="The Passion of the Christ" label="The Passion of the Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604598" start="13093" end="13109" title="Complete Savages" label="Complete Savages"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="13124" end="13127" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q188035" start="13190" end="13200" title="Apocalypto" label="Apocalypto"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="13346" end="13356" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="13367" end="13384" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q220834" start="13783" end="13796" title="Joe Eszterhas" label="Joe Eszterhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q400019" start="13807" end="13816" title="Maccabees" label="Maccabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016302" start="13851" end="13875" title="Warner Brothers Pictures" label="Warner Brothers Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="14728" end="14751" title="Western (genre)" label="American Old West genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339625" start="14847" end="14862" title="Randall Wallace" label="Randall Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="14939" end="14960" title="resurrection of Jesus" label="resurrection of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151598" start="15011" end="15045" title="The Late Show with Stephen Colbert" label="The Late Show with Stephen Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15095" end="15134" title="The Passion of the Christ: Resurrection" label="The Passion of the Christ: Resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q16226322" start="15381" end="15398" title="Matt Zoller Seitz" label="Matt Zoller Seitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871113" start="15811" end="15842" title="USS Laffey (DD-724)" label="USS &amp;quot;Laffey&amp;quot; (DD-724)"/>
<link wikidata="Q133194" start="15876" end="15884" title="kamikaze" label="kamikaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q994481" start="16002" end="16016" title="The Wild Bunch" label="The Wild Bunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037100" start="16043" end="16051" title="Deadline Hollywood" label="Deadline"/>
<link wikidata="Q57147" start="16092" end="16110" title="Michael Fassbender" label="Michael Fassbender"/>
<link wikidata="Q171905" start="16112" end="16122" title="Jamie Foxx" label="Jamie Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q310937" start="16128" end="16142" title="Peter Dinklage" label="Peter Dinklage"/>
<link wikidata="Q217037" start="16172" end="16189" title="Jerry Bruckheimer" label="Jerry Bruckheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="16217" end="16229" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q462447" start="16303" end="16316" title="Lethal Weapon" label="Lethal Weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q262130" start="16332" end="16346" title="Richard Donner" label="Richard Donner"/>
<link wikidata="Q123353613" start="16512" end="16523" title="Flight Risk (film)" label="Flight Risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q164119" start="16540" end="16553" title="Mark Wahlberg" label="Mark Wahlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q515869" start="16577" end="16586" title="Lionsgate" label="Lionsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="16742" end="16751" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q120637995" start="16805" end="16821" title="2023 SAG-AFTRA strike" label="SAG-AFTRA strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q446960" start="16944" end="16957" title="George Miller (filmmaker)" label="George Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q55424" start="16959" end="16969" title="Peter Weir" label="Peter Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q262130" start="16975" end="16989" title="Richard Donner" label="Richard Donner"/>
<link wikidata="Q170428" start="17196" end="17216" title="Helena Bonham Carter" label="Helena Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q188035" start="17433" end="17443" title="Apocalypto" label="Apocalypto"/>
<link wikidata="Q932217" start="17573" end="17586" title="The Sullivans" label="The Sullivans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="18098" end="18111" title="animated film" label="animated film"/>
<link wikidata="Q446960" start="18233" end="18246" title="George Miller (filmmaker)" label="George Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q248775" start="18260" end="18267" title="Mad Max (film)" label="Mad Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125262" start="18494" end="18503" title="Mad Max 2" label="Mad Max 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q426663" start="18626" end="18652" title="Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome" label="Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18683" end="18701" title="Mad Max: Fury Road" label="Mad Max: Fury Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q208026" start="18730" end="18739" title="Tom Hardy" label="Tom Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55424" start="18799" end="18809" title="Peter Weir" label="Peter Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631278" start="18914" end="18939" title="First Australian Imperial Force" label="Australian Imperial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="18947" end="18958" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="18988" end="19002" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="19037" end="19055" title="Gallipoli campaign" label="Gallipoli campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450777" start="19232" end="19249" title="Battle of the Nek" label="Battle of the Nek"/>
<link wikidata="Q55424" start="19252" end="19262" title="Peter Weir" label="Peter Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154488" start="19306" end="19322" title="Irish Australians" label="Irish-Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q245781" start="19347" end="19355" title="Cynicism (contemporary)" label="cynicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="19379" end="19393" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278743" start="19404" end="19412" title="Mark Lee (Australian actor)" label="Mark Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649797" start="20320" end="20348" title="AACTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role" label="Best Actor in a Leading Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q781399" start="20358" end="20383" title="Australian Film Institute" label="Australian Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q102124" start="20494" end="20510" title="Sigourney Weaver" label="Sigourney Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q232874" start="20515" end="20525" title="Linda Hunt" label="Linda Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q55424" start="20529" end="20539" title="Peter Weir" label="Peter Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q505148" start="20575" end="20605" title="The Year of Living Dangerously (film)" label="The Year of Living Dangerously"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086776" start="20652" end="20668" title="Christopher Koch" label="Christopher Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="20782" end="20785" title="MGM" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="20844" end="20862" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="21074" end="21093" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q93188" start="21740" end="21751" title="Errol Flynn" label="Errol Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q71243" start="21753" end="21764" title="Clark Gable" label="Clark Gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="21770" end="21783" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q316070" start="21799" end="21817" title="Fletcher Christian" label="Fletcher Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q749811" start="21850" end="21882" title="Mutiny on the Bounty" label="Mutiny on the &amp;quot;Bounty&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211716" start="21914" end="21924" title="The Bounty (1984 film)" label="The Bounty"/>
<link wikidata="Q245204" start="22165" end="22175" title="antagonist" label="antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q65932" start="22200" end="22215" title="Anthony Hopkins" label="Anthony Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q294147" start="22249" end="22262" title="William Bligh" label="William Bligh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678111" start="22411" end="22429" title="action comedy film" label="action comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q214126" start="22523" end="22527" title="LAPD" label="LAPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q282634" start="22538" end="22550" title="Martin Riggs" label="Martin Riggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="22571" end="22586" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam veteran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435789" start="22709" end="22723" title="Roger Murtaugh" label="Roger Murtaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q192165" start="22725" end="22737" title="Danny Glover" label="Danny Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q20178" start="22837" end="22846" title="Joe Pesci" label="Joe Pesci"/>
<link wikidata="Q462447" start="22880" end="22893" title="Lethal Weapon" label="Lethal Weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q262130" start="22910" end="22924" title="Richard Donner" label="Richard Donner"/>
<link wikidata="Q751767" start="22993" end="23008" title="Lethal Weapon 2" label="Lethal Weapon 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q751769" start="23029" end="23044" title="Lethal Weapon 3" label="Lethal Weapon 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q429397" start="23069" end="23084" title="Lethal Weapon 4" label="Lethal Weapon 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984974" start="23204" end="23217" title="Buddy cop film" label="buddy cop pic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24070370" start="23273" end="23294" title="Lethal Weapon (TV series)" label="television adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="23329" end="23332" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="FOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q262130" start="23467" end="23481" title="Richard Donner" label="Richard Donner"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="24427" end="24446" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q53040" start="24471" end="24488" title="Franco Zeffirelli" label="Franco Zeffirelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422824" start="24496" end="24514" title="Hamlet (1990 film)" label="&amp;quot;Hamlet&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="24554" end="24567" title="Shakespearean" label="Shakespearean"/>
<link wikidata="Q223091" start="24575" end="24583" title="Ian Holm" label="Ian Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q309160" start="24585" end="24595" title="Alan Bates" label="Alan Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q223988" start="24601" end="24614" title="Paul Scofield" label="Paul Scofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q79031" start="24691" end="24701" title="Mike Tyson" label="Mike Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q162729" start="24950" end="24960" title="Braveheart" label="Braveheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="24995" end="25010" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="25070" end="25082" title="high treason" label="high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="25102" end="25121" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q903494" start="25143" end="25157" title="68th Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="25159" end="25172" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="25177" end="25189" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q499626" start="25468" end="25493" title="Battle of Stirling Bridge" label="Battle of Stirling Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="25617" end="25632" title="Edward II of England" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320972" start="25695" end="25738" title="Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation" label="Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51668" start="26455" end="26480" title="The Passion of the Christ" label="The Passion of the Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q623306" start="26516" end="26523" title="Passion (Christianity)" label="passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q200841" start="26544" end="26556" title="Jim Caviezel" label="Jim Caviezel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="26592" end="26599" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="26601" end="26606" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="26612" end="26618" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="26832" end="26854" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="26873" end="26885" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q211246" start="26933" end="26941" title="Caiaphas" label="Caiaphas"/>
<link wikidata="Q208481" start="26950" end="26959" title="Sanhedrin" label="Sanhedrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="26971" end="26981" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194007" start="26998" end="27011" title="Katha Pollitt" label="Katha Pollitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300423" start="27077" end="27087" title="United States Conference of Catholic Bishops" label="conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q192950" start="27369" end="27382" title="Herod Antipas" label="Herod Antipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q85759442" start="27438" end="27445" title="epicene" label="epicene"/>
<link wikidata="Q81819" start="27569" end="27584" title="Monica Bellucci" label="Monica Bellucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="27707" end="27722" title="Orthodox Jewish" label="Orthodox Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014289" start="27729" end="27741" title="Daniel Lapin" label="Daniel Lapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832789" start="27764" end="27778" title="Michael Medved" label="Michael Medved"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914838" start="27815" end="27829" title="Abraham Foxman" label="Abraham Foxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="28076" end="28094" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="28244" end="28249" title="Papal" label="Papal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489205" start="28608" end="28618" title="Frank Rich" label="Frank Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q199993" start="28759" end="28782" title="Traditionalist Catholic" label="Traditionalist Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q236402" start="28853" end="28865" title="Diane Sawyer" label="Diane Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="29315" end="29322" title="Motion Picture Association film rating system" label="R-rated"/>
<link wikidata="Q504962" start="29374" end="29388" title="77th Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q501058" start="29401" end="29427" title="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Award" label="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q188035" start="29598" end="29608" title="Apocalypto" label="Apocalypto"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="29666" end="29677" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="29730" end="29739" title="Eschatology" label="end times"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="29745" end="29762" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q13354" start="29801" end="29822" title="Yucatec Maya language" label="Yucatec Maya language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="29836" end="29851" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q333911" start="30250" end="30261" title="Will Durant" label="Will Durant"/>
<link wikidata="Q847940" start="30483" end="30493" title="The Beaver (film)" label="The Beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="30593" end="30605" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q959755" start="30647" end="30665" title="South by Southwest" label="South by Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q632323" start="30863" end="30883" title="Summit Entertainment" label="Summit Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460448" start="31136" end="31150" title="Michael Cieply" label="Michael Cieply"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="31160" end="31178" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="31400" end="31407" title="dramedy" label="dramedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="31744" end="31748" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010856" start="32046" end="32059" title="Hacksaw Ridge" label="Hacksaw Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264703" start="32138" end="32153" title="Desmond Doss" label="Desmond T. Doss"/>
<link wikidata="Q23891" start="32165" end="32180" title="Andrew Garfield" label="Andrew Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905781" start="32209" end="32234" title="73rd Venice International Film Festival" label="73rd Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199207" start="32277" end="32299" title="The New Zealand Herald" label="The New Zealand Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406706" start="32342" end="32379" title="List of accolades received by Hacksaw Ridge" label="won or been nominated for many awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="32391" end="32403" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011509" start="32420" end="32432" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q586356" start="32434" end="32447" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q593098" start="32464" end="32474" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="32541" end="32571" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="32573" end="32586" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="32588" end="32598" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q830079" start="32600" end="32618" title="Academy Award for Best Sound Editing" label="Best Sound Editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q830079" start="32620" end="32637" title="Academy Award for Best Sound" label="Best Sound Mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q281939" start="32643" end="32660" title="Academy Award for Best Film Editing" label="Best Film Editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133865" start="32796" end="32831" title="Dual citizenship in the United States of America" label="dual Irish and American citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825075" start="32853" end="32882" title="Australian permanent resident" label="Australian permanent resident"/>
<link wikidata="Q248775" start="33001" end="33008" title="Mad Max (film)" label="Mad Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="33019" end="33027" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603583" start="33129" end="33161" title="State Theatre Company of South Australia" label="South Australian Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469295" start="33231" end="33259" title="Forestville, New South Wales" label="Forestville, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q708721" start="33310" end="33330" title="Kenny Wayne Shepherd" label="Kenny Wayne Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q58613040" start="33429" end="33433" title="Milo Gibson" label="Milo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561011" start="33539" end="33548" title="Marital separation" label="separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073552" start="33743" end="33769" title="irreconcilable differences" label="irreconcilable differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4149360" start="34145" end="34162" title="Oksana Grigorieva" label="Oksana Grigorieva"/>
<link wikidata="Q161386" start="34370" end="34390" title="prenuptial agreement" label="prenuptial agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q355736" start="34416" end="34434" title="community property" label="community property"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="34838" end="34844" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481042" start="34907" end="34924" title="iambic pentameter" label="iambic pentameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41233" start="35118" end="35132" title="Timothy Dalton" label="Timothy Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q593132" start="35286" end="35303" title="restraining order" label="restraining order"/>
<link wikidata="Q495304" start="35999" end="36007" title="forensic science" label="forensic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733896" start="36169" end="36179" title="Nolo contendere" label="no contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037100" start="36320" end="36338" title="Deadline Hollywood" label="Deadline Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001" start="36393" end="36408" title="Whoopi Goldberg" label="Whoopi Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="36413" end="36425" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015874" start="36660" end="36684" title="Sherman Oaks, Los Angeles" label="Sherman Oaks, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q387047" start="37239" end="37245" title="Malibu, California" label="Malibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163340" start="37404" end="37416" title="Kiewa River" label="Kiewa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884674" start="37473" end="37484" title="Mago Island" label="Mago Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332242" start="37498" end="37515" title="Tokyu Corporation" label="Tokyu Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="37785" end="37792" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="37928" end="37939" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q484365" start="38185" end="38199" title="David Duchovny" label="David Duchovny"/>
<link wikidata="Q202475" start="38204" end="38213" title="Téa Leoni" label="Téa Leoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015874" start="38245" end="38270" title="Sherman Oaks, Los Angeles" label="Sherman Oaks, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604" start="38319" end="38337" title="Frank Lloyd Wright" label="Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q623279" start="38439" end="38442" title="Chief operating officer" label="COO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047357" start="38490" end="38497" title="trustee" label="trustee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133779" start="39110" end="39125" title="Renaissance art" label="Renaissance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815371" start="39162" end="39166" title="National Institute of Dramatic Art" label="NIDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8352397" start="39200" end="39216" title="Mirador Basin" label="El Mirador Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49344" start="39533" end="39544" title="Óscar Arias" label="Óscar Arias"/>
<link wikidata="Q577981" start="39750" end="39756" title="Gallup, New Mexico" label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632256" start="39941" end="39955" title="Angels at Risk" label="Angels at Risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q48124" start="40449" end="40486" title="Sedevacantism" label="sedevacantist traditionalist Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="40535" end="40557" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="40576" end="40584" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q11863866" start="40618" end="40631" title="Hutton Gibson" label="Hutton Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="40666" end="40682" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denier"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="40699" end="40710" title="Antisemitism" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="40739" end="40758" title="Conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664727" start="40902" end="40930" title="Institute of Christ the King Sovereign Priest" label="Institute of Christ the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q649499" start="40961" end="40975" title="full communion" label="full communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q971965" start="41051" end="41078" title="Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus" label="Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="41282" end="41294" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="41296" end="41313" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41568" end="41577" title="John 14#Verse 6" label="John 14:6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921755" start="41636" end="41642" title="Merit (Christianity)" label="merits"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020014" start="41799" end="41812" title="William Fulco" label="William Fulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="41866" end="41876" title="Vatican II" label="Vatican II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117903" start="41919" end="41944" title="Church of the Holy Family (Agoura Hills, California)" label="Church of the Holy Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q236402" start="42031" end="42043" title="Diane Sawyer" label="Diane Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694585" start="42104" end="42110" title="Heaven in Christianity" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q231417" start="42138" end="42153" title="Barbara Walters" label="Barbara Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="42570" end="42584" title="excommunication" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q947215" start="42604" end="42622" title="Carlo Maria Viganò" label="Carlo Maria Viganò"/>
<link wikidata="Q48124" start="42738" end="42809" title="Sedevacantism" label="&amp;quot;post conciliar church of Vatican II is a counterfeit church&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="42882" end="42897" title="Pope Francis" label="Jorge Bergoglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="43184" end="43191" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="43221" end="43233" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="43343" end="43361" title="Rhodes Scholarship" label="Rhodes Scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q926348" start="43433" end="43448" title="New World Order (conspiracy theory)" label="new world order"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303428" start="43489" end="43496" title="Marxist (insult)" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q294308" start="43919" end="43934" title="Publicly funded health care" label="taxpayer-funded"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="43945" end="43954" title="stem-cell" label="stem-cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q110763745" start="44071" end="44089" title="Terri Schiavo case" label="Terri Schiavo case"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="44188" end="44196" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188035" start="44295" end="44305" title="Apocalypto" label="Apocalypto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="44341" end="44368" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="President Bush and his guys"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="44409" end="44417" title="Anti-war movement" label="anti-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q174908" start="44522" end="44535" title="Michael Moore" label="Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q221852" start="44562" end="44577" title="Fahrenheit 9/11" label="Fahrenheit 9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q501058" start="44630" end="44657" title="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards" label="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669403" start="44673" end="44689" title="Icon Productions" label="Icon Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q465449" start="44766" end="44779" title="Miramax Films" label="Miramax Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861138" start="44807" end="44818" title="Ari Emanuel" label="Ari Emanuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51668" start="45143" end="45168" title="The Passion of the Christ" label="The Passion of the Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="45492" end="45495" title="Fox News" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="45501" end="45504" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981462" start="46237" end="46248" title="Jorge Ramos (news anchor)" label="Jorge Ramos"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="46275" end="46287" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="46292" end="46307" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="46315" end="46355" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q106432965" start="46422" end="46429" title="UFC 264" label="UFC 264"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030329" start="46442" end="46447" title="viral video" label="viral"/>
<link wikidata="Q99659280" start="46527" end="46554" title="Second Nagorno-Karabakh War" label="Second Nagorno-Karabakh War"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="46590" end="46605" title="Armenian people" label="Armenian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="46637" end="46677" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="46691" end="46704" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467287" start="46787" end="46802" title="President-elect of the United States" label="president-elect"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="46803" end="46815" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="46905" end="46914" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q167520" start="46952" end="46962" title="Jon Voight" label="Jon Voight"/>
<link wikidata="Q40026" start="46967" end="46985" title="Sylvester Stallone" label="Sylvester Stallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676877" start="47434" end="47455" title="actingclassof1977.com" label="actingclassof1977.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815371" start="47482" end="47516" title="National Institute of Dramatic Art" label="National Institute of Dramatic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q528517" start="47527" end="47541" title="Sally McKenzie" label="Sally McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="47651" end="47658" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="47721" end="47728" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q262130" start="48005" end="48019" title="Richard Donner" label="Richard Donner"/>
<link wikidata="Q623306" start="48229" end="48250" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s Passion" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s Passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639452" start="48413" end="48426" title="Sunday Mirror" label="Sunday Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q18231" start="48471" end="48473" title="Alcoholics Anonymous" label="AA"/>
<link wikidata="Q816861" start="49205" end="49224" title="Benedict Fitzgerald" label="Benedict Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682102" start="49610" end="49643" title="Los Angeles County Superior Court" label="Los Angeles County Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q131704535" start="49781" end="49810" title="January 2025 Southern California wildfires" label="Southern California wildfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q131700096" start="49860" end="49874" title="Palisades Fire" label="Palisades Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q461391" start="49910" end="49922" title="Gavin Newsom" label="Gavin Newsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320972" start="49990" end="49995" title="GLAAD" label="GLAAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="50014" end="50024" title="homophobia" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q50009" start="50088" end="50095" title="El País" label="El País"/>
<link wikidata="Q506661" start="50440" end="50457" title="Conspiracy Theory (film)" label="Conspiracy Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259709" start="50785" end="50829" title="Los Angeles County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Department" label="Los Angeles County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q250062" start="50834" end="50861" title="driving under the influence" label="driving under the influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="50970" end="50981" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887233" start="51304" end="51318" title="suicide by cop" label="suicide by cop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630118" start="51496" end="51499" title="TMZ" label="TMZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q236402" start="51590" end="51602" title="Diane Sawyer" label="Diane Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260022" start="51957" end="51973" title="drug rehabilitation" label="recovery program"/>
<link wikidata="Q101797" start="51997" end="52009" title="Winona Ryder" label="Winona Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="52206" end="52210" title="HIV/AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="52696" end="52699" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="52770" end="52787" title="domestic violence" label="domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q593132" start="52796" end="52813" title="restraining order" label="restraining order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733896" start="52957" end="52967" title="no contest" label="no contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q111658718" start="53063" end="53074" title="Blacklisting" label="blacklisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q165219" start="53114" end="53131" title="Robert Downey Jr." label="Robert Downey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q21010856" start="53247" end="53260" title="Hacksaw Ridge" label="Hacksaw Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q48229100" start="53451" end="53498" title="List of awards and nominations received by Mel Gibson" label="numerous major awards for his film achievements"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="53626" end="53643" title="Sexiest Man Alive" label="Sexiest Man Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="53659" end="53665" title="People (American magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q716909" start="53735" end="53764" title="Ordre des Arts et des Lettres" label="Chevalier des Arts et Lettres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="53940" end="53973" title="Officer of the Order of Australia" label="Officer of the Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="54171" end="54189" title="honorary doctorate" label="honorary doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786078" start="54197" end="54224" title="Loyola Marymount University" label="Loyola Marymount University"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="54307" end="54313" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="54345" end="54367" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119675" start="54481" end="54525" title="Limkokwing University of Creative Technology" label="Limkokwing University of Creative Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q71612940" start="54602" end="54634" title="Irish Film and Television Awards" label="Irish Film and Television Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q641316" start="54665" end="54714" title="Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Supporting Actor" label="Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28975643" start="54725" end="54744" title="Daddy&amp;#x27;s Home 2" label="Daddy&amp;#x27;s Home 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q14370516" start="54799" end="54816" title="The Expendables 3" label="The Expendables 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q104834192" start="54840" end="54849" title="Dangerous (2021 film)" label="Dangerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914884" start="54975" end="54984" title="Biography (journal)" label="Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q477809" start="55001" end="55009" title="AllMovie" label="AllMovie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768586" start="55121" end="55154" title="Texas Archive of the Moving Image" label="Texas Archive of the Moving Image"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44220" wikidata="Q18756" url="?curid=44220" title="UEFA Champions League">
<text>The UEFA Champions League (UCL) is an annual club association football competition organised by the Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) that is contested by top-division European clubs. The competition begins with a round robin league phase to qualify for the double-legged knockout rounds, and a single-leg final. It is the most-watched club competition in the world and the third most-watched football competition overall, behind only the FIFA World Cup and the UEFA European Championship. It is one of the most prestigious football tournaments in the world and the most prestigious club competition in European football, played by the national league champions (and, for some nations, one or more runners-up) of their national associations.

Introduced in 1955 as the European Champion Clubs&#x27; Cup (), and commonly known as the European Cup, it was initially a straight knockout tournament open only to the champions of Europe&#x27;s domestic leagues, with its winner reckoned as the European club champion. The competition took on its current name in 1992, adding a round-robin group stage in 1991 and allowing multiple entrants from certain countries since the 1997–98 season. While only the winners of many of Europe&#x27;s national leagues can enter the competition, the top 5 leagues by coefficient provide four teams each by default, with a possibility for additional spots based on performance during the previous season. Clubs that finish below the qualifying spots are eligible for the second-tier UEFA Europa League competition, and since 2021, for the third-tier UEFA Conference League.

In its present format, the Champions League begins in early July with three qualifying rounds and a play-off round, all played over two legs. The seven surviving teams enter the league phase, joining 29 teams qualified in advance. The 36 teams each play eight opponents, four home and four away. The 24 highest-ranked teams proceed to the knockout phase that culminates with the final match in late May or early June. The winner of the Champions League automatically qualifies for the following year&#x27;s Champions League, the UEFA Super Cup, the FIFA Intercontinental Cup and the FIFA Club World Cup.

Spanish clubs have the most victories (20 wins), followed by England (15 wins), Italy (12 wins), Germany (8 wins), Netherlands (6 wins) and Portugal (4 wins). England has the most winning teams, with six clubs having won the title. The competition has been won by 23 clubs and 13 of them have won it more than once. Real Madrid is the most successful club in the tournament&#x27;s history, having won it 15 times. Madrid is the only club to have won it five times in a row (the first five editions). Only one club has won all of their matches in a single tournament en route to the tournament victory: Bayern Munich in the 2019–20 season. Real Madrid is the current European champion, having beaten Borussia Dortmund 2–0 in the 2024 final for their fifteenth title.

==History==

The first time the champions of two European leagues met was in what was nicknamed the 1895 World Championship, when English champions Sunderland beat Scottish champions Heart of Midlothian 5–3. The first pan-European tournament was the Challenge Cup, a competition between clubs in the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Three years later, in 1900, the champions of Belgium, Netherlands and Switzerland, which were the only existing leagues in continental Europe at the time, participated in the Coupe Van der Straeten Ponthoz, thus being dubbed as the &quot;club championship of the continent&quot; by the local newspapers.

The Mitropa Cup, a competition modelled after the Challenge Cup, was created in 1927, an idea of Austrian Hugo Meisl, and played between Central European clubs. In 1930, the Coupe des Nations (), the first attempt to create a cup for national champion clubs of Europe, was played and organised by Swiss club Servette. Held in Geneva, it brought together ten champions from across the continent. The tournament was won by Újpest of Hungary. Latin European nations came together to form the Latin Cup in 1949.

After receiving reports from his journalists over the highly successful South American Championship of Champions of 1948, Gabriel Hanot, editor of &quot;L&#x27;Équipe&quot;, began proposing the creation of a continent-wide tournament. In interviews, Jacques Ferran (one of the founders of the European Champions Cup, together with Gabriel Hanot), said that the South American Championship of Champions was the inspiration for the European Champions Cup. After Stan Cullis declared Wolverhampton Wanderers &quot;Champions of the World&quot; following a successful run of friendlies in the 1950s, in particular a 3–2 friendly victory against Budapest Honvéd, Hanot finally managed to convince UEFA to put into practice such a tournament. It was conceived in Paris in 1955 as the European Champion Clubs&#x27; Cup.

===1955–1967: Beginnings===

The first European Cup took place during the 1955–56 season. Sixteen teams participated (some by invitation): AC Milan (Italy), AGF Aarhus (Denmark), Anderlecht (Belgium), Djurgården (Sweden), Gwardia Warszawa (Poland), Hibernian (Scotland), Partizan (Yugoslavia), PSV Eindhoven (Netherlands), Rapid Wien (Austria), Real Madrid (Spain), Rot-Weiss Essen (West Germany), Saarbrücken (Saar), Servette (Switzerland), Sporting CP (Portugal), Reims (France) and Vörös Lobogó (Hungary).

The first European Cup match took place on 4 September 1955, and ended in a 3–3 draw between Sporting CP and Partizan. The first goal in European Cup history was scored by João Baptista Martins of Sporting CP. The inaugural final took place at the Parc des Princes between Stade de Reims and Real Madrid on 13 June 1956. The Spanish squad came back from behind to win 4–3 thanks to goals from Alfredo Di Stéfano and Marquitos, as well as two goals from Héctor Rial. Real Madrid successfully defended the trophy next season in their home stadium, the Santiago Bernabéu, against Fiorentina. After a scoreless first half, Real Madrid scored twice in six minutes to defeat the Italians. In 1958, Milan failed to capitalise after going ahead on the scoreline twice, only for Real Madrid to equalise. The final, held in Heysel Stadium, went to extra time where Francisco Gento scored the game-winning goal to allow Real Madrid to retain the title for the third consecutive season.

In a rematch of the first final, Real Madrid faced Stade Reims at the Neckarstadion for the 1959 final, and won 2–0. West German side Eintracht Frankfurt became the first team not to compete in the Latin cup to reach the European Cup final. The 1960 final holds the record for the most goals scored, with Real Madrid beating Eintracht Frankfurt 7–3 at Hampden Park, courtesy of four goals by Ferenc Puskás and a hat-trick by Alfredo Di Stéfano. This was Real Madrid&#x27;s fifth consecutive title, a record that still stands today.

Real Madrid&#x27;s reign ended in the 1960–61 season when bitter rivals Barcelona dethroned them in the first round. Barcelona were defeated in the final by Portuguese side Benfica 3–2 at the Wankdorf Stadium. Reinforced by Eusébio, Benfica defeated Real Madrid 5–3 at the Olympic Stadium in Amsterdam and kept the title for a second consecutive season. Benfica wanted to repeat Real Madrid&#x27;s successful run of the 1950s after reaching the showpiece event of the 1962–63 European Cup, but a brace from Brazilian-Italian José Altafini at Wembley gave the spoils to Milan, making the trophy leave the Iberian Peninsula for the first time ever.

Inter Milan beat an ageing Real Madrid 3–1 at the Ernst-Happel-Stadion to win the 1963–64 season and replicate their local-rival&#x27;s success. The title stayed in Milan for the third year in a row after Inter beat Benfica 1–0 at their home ground, the San Siro. Under the leadership of Jock Stein, Scottish club Celtic beat Inter Milan 2–1 in the 1967 final to become the first British club to win the European Cup. The Celtic players that day, all of whom were born within of Glasgow, subsequently became known as the &quot;Lisbon Lions&quot;.

===1968–1982 ===

The 1967–68 season saw Manchester United become the first English team to win the European Cup, beating two-times winners Benfica 4–1 in the final. This final came ten years after the Munich air disaster, which had claimed the lives of eight United players and left their manager, Matt Busby, fighting for his life. In the 1968–69 season, Ajax became the first Dutch team to reach the European Cup final, but they were beaten 4–1 by Milan, who claimed their second European Cup, with Pierino Prati scoring a hat-trick.

The 1969–70 season saw the first Dutch winners of the competition. Feyenoord knocked out the defending champions, Milan in the second round, before beating Celtic in the final. In the 1970–71 season, Ajax won the title, beating Greek side Panathinaikos in the final. the season saw a number of changes, with penalty shoot-outs being introduced, and the away goals rule being changed so that it would be used in all rounds except the final. It was also the first time a Greek team reached the final, as well as the first season that Real Madrid failed to qualify, having finished sixth in La Liga the previous season. Ajax went on to win the competition three years in row (1971 to 1973), which Bayern Munich emulated from 1974 to 1976, before Liverpool won their first two titles in 1977 and 1978.

The following seasons saw victories in 1978–79 and 1979–80 for Brian Clough&#x27;s Nottingham Forest. The following year Liverpool won their third title before Aston Villa continued the sense of English dominance in 1982.

===1982–1992: English dominance is broken===
In 1982–83, Hamburger SV broke the English dominance. Liverpool regained it in 1983–84 before losing to Juventus (1984–85); Steaua București then won in 1985–86, Porto in 1986–87, PSV Eindhoven in 1987–88; AC Milan (2), Red Star Belgrade and Barcelona became champions before the competition was re-formulated as the UEFA Champions League. All English clubs were banned for five years (Liverpool for six years) following the 1985 European Cup final due to the Heysel Stadium disaster.

==Anthem==

The UEFA Champions League anthem, officially titled simply as &quot;Champions League&quot;, was written by Tony Britten, and is an adaptation of George Frideric Handel&#x27;s 1727 anthem &quot;Zadok the Priest&quot; (one of his Coronation Anthems). UEFA commissioned Britten in 1992 to arrange an anthem, and the piece was performed by London&#x27;s Royal Philharmonic Orchestra and sung by the Academy of St. Martin in the Fields. Stating that &quot;the anthem is now almost as iconic as the trophy&quot;, UEFA&#x27;s official website adds it is &quot;known to set the hearts of many of the world&#x27;s top footballers aflutter&quot;.

The chorus contains the three official languages used by UEFA: English, German, and French. The climactic moment is set to the exclamations &#x27;Die Meister! Die Besten! Les Grandes Équipes! The Champions!&#x27;. The anthem&#x27;s chorus is played before each UEFA Champions League game as the two teams are lined up, as well as at the beginning and end of television broadcasts of the matches. In addition to the anthem, there is also entrance music, which contains parts of the anthem itself, which is played as teams enter the field. The complete anthem is about three minutes long, and has two short verses and the chorus.

Special vocal versions have been performed live at the Champions League final with lyrics in other languages, changing over to the host nation&#x27;s language for the chorus. These versions were performed by Andrea Bocelli (Italian; Rome 2009, Milan 2016 and Cardiff 2017), Juan Diego Flores (Spanish; Madrid 2010), All Angels (Wembley 2011), Jonas Kaufmann and David Garrett (Munich 2012) and Mariza (Lisbon 2014). In the 2013 final at Wembley, the chorus was played twice. In the 2018 and 2019 finals, held in Kyiv and Madrid respectively, the instrumental version of the chorus was played, by 2Cellos (2018) and Asturia Girls (2019). In the 2023 final, held in Istanbul, Hungarian pianist Ádám György performed the piano version of the anthem. The anthem has been released commercially in its original version on iTunes and Spotify with the title of Champions League Theme. In 2018, composer Hans Zimmer remixed the anthem with rapper Vince Staples for EA Sports&#x27; video game &quot;FIFA 19&quot;, with it also featuring in the game&#x27;s reveal trailer.
==Branding==
In 1991, UEFA asked its commercial partner, Television Event and Media Marketing (TEAM), to help brand the Champions League. This resulted in the anthem, &quot;house colours&quot; of black and white or silver and a logo, and the &quot;starball&quot;. The starball was created by Design Bridge, a London-based firm selected by TEAM after a competition. TEAM gives particular attention to detail in how the colours and starball are depicted at matches. According to TEAM, &quot;Irrespective of whether you are a spectator in Moscow or Milan, you will always see the same stadium dressing materials, the same opening ceremony featuring the &#x27;starball&#x27; centre circle ceremony, and hear the same UEFA Champions League Anthem&quot;. Based on research it conducted, TEAM concluded that by 1999, &quot;the starball logo had achieved a recognition rate of 94 percent among fans&quot;.

==Format==
===Qualification===
The UEFA Champions League used to begin with a double round-robin group stage of 32 teams until it evolved into a league phase of 36 teams, which is preceded by two qualification &#x27;streams&#x27; for teams that do not receive direct entry to the tournament proper. The two streams are divided between teams qualified by virtue of being league champions, and those qualified by virtue of finishing second, third or fourth in their national championship.

The number of teams that each association enters into the UEFA Champions League is based upon the UEFA coefficients of the member associations. These coefficients are generated by the results of clubs representing each association during the previous five Champions League, Europa League and Conference League seasons. The higher an association&#x27;s coefficient, the more teams represent the association in the Champions League, and the fewer qualification rounds the association&#x27;s teams must compete in.

Five of the remaining seven qualifying places are granted to the winners of a four-round qualifying tournament between the remaining 43 or 44 national champions, within which those champions from associations with higher coefficients receive byes to later rounds. The other two are granted to the winners of a three-round qualifying tournament between ten and eleven clubs from the associations ranked 5–6 through 15, which have qualified based upon finishing second, third or fourth in their respective national league.

In addition to sporting criteria, any club must be licensed by its national association to participate in the Champions League. To obtain a license, the club must meet certain stadium, infrastructure and finance requirements.

In 2005–06, Liverpool and Artmedia Bratislava became the first teams to reach the Champions League group stage after playing in all three qualifying rounds. Real Madrid and Barcelona hold the record for the most appearances in the group stage, having qualified 25 times, followed by Porto and Bayern Munich on 24.

Between 1999 and 2008, no differentiation was made between champions and non-champions in qualification. The 16 top-ranked teams spread across the biggest domestic leagues qualified directly for the tournament group stage. Prior to this, three preliminary knockout qualifying rounds whittled down the remaining teams, with teams starting in different rounds.

An exception to the usual European qualification system happened in 2005, after Liverpool won the Champions League the year before, but did not finish in a Champions League qualification place in the Premier League that season. UEFA gave special dispensation for Liverpool to enter the Champions League, giving England five qualifiers. UEFA subsequently ruled that the defending champions qualify for the competition the following year regardless of their domestic league placing. However, for those leagues with four entrants in the Champions League, this meant that, if the Champions League winner fell outside of its domestic league&#x27;s top four, it would qualify at the expense of the fourth-placed team in the league. Until 2015–16, no association could have more than four entrants in the Champions League. In May 2012, Tottenham Hotspur finished fourth in the 2011–12 Premier League, two places ahead of Chelsea, but failed to qualify for the 2012–13 Champions League, after Chelsea won the 2012 final. Tottenham were demoted to the 2012–13 UEFA Europa League.

In May 2013, it was decided that, starting from the 2015–16 season (and continuing at least for the three-year cycle until the 2017–18 season), the winners of the previous season&#x27;s UEFA Europa League would qualify for the UEFA Champions League, entering at least the play-off round, and entering the group stage if the berth reserved for the Champions League title holders was not used. The previous limit of a maximum of four teams per association was increased to five, meaning that a fourth-placed team from one of the top three ranked associations would only have to be moved to the Europa League if both the Champions League and Europa League winners came from that association and both finished outside the top four of their domestic league.

In 2007, Michel Platini, the UEFA president, had proposed taking one place from the three leagues with four entrants and allocating it to that nation&#x27;s cup winners. This proposal was rejected in a vote at a UEFA Strategy Council meeting. In the same meeting, however, it was agreed that the third-placed team in the top three leagues would receive automatic qualification for the group stage, rather than entry into the third qualifying round, while the fourth-placed team would enter the play-off round for non-champions, guaranteeing an opponent from one of the top 15 leagues in Europe. This was part of Platini&#x27;s plan to increase the number of teams qualifying directly into the group stage, while simultaneously increasing the number of teams from lower-ranked nations in the group stage.

In 2012, Arsène Wenger referred to qualifying for the Champions League by finishing in the top four places in the Premier League as the &quot;4th Place Trophy&quot;. The phrase was coined after a pre-match conference when he was questioned about Arsenal&#x27;s lack of a trophy after exiting the FA Cup. He said &quot;The first trophy is to finish in the top four&quot;. At Arsenal&#x27;s 2012 AGM, Wenger was also quoted as saying: &quot;For me there are five trophies every season: Premier League, Champions League, the third is to qualify for the Champions League...&quot;

===League phase and knockout phase===
Beginning with the 2024–25 season, UEFA changed the format of their three club competitions, abandoning the group stage in favour of an expanded league phase. The number of participating teams was increased from 32 to 36 teams. Teams are no longer divided into groups of four teams each but are ranked in a single table. Each team plays eight matches against eight different opponents. For the draw of the league phase, teams are divided into four seeding pots according to their UEFA coefficient. Each team will play against two teams from each pot, one home and one away. The league phase is played from September to January, while the knockout phase begins in February, with matches predominantly played on Tuesday and Wednesday nights.

After the league phase, a two-legged knockout play-off round is played between teams finishing 9–16 (seeded) and 17–24 (unseeded) in the league phase. Teams finishing in the top eight of the league phase receive a bye to the round of 16 as seeded teams, while the eight winning teams from the knockout play-off round will enter the round of 16 draw as unseeded teams. Teams finishing 25th–36th place in the league phase and the eight losers of the knockout play-offs are eliminated from the competition and from European football since it is no longer possible to enter the Europa League from the league phase onwards.

After the round of 16 the competition follows the traditional knockout format with quarter-finals, semi-finals (both two legged and without association draw protection) and then the final at a venue chosen prior to the season. The final is typically held in late May or early June.

Prior to the 2024–25 season, there was a group stage of 32 teams, divided into eight groups of four. The draw to determine which teams entered each group was seeded based on each team&#x27;s UEFA coefficient, and no group could contain more than one club from each association. Each team played six group stage games, meeting the other three teams in its group home and away in a round-robin format. The first place team and the runners-up from each group then progressed to the next round. The third-placed teams entered the Europa League&#x27;s knockout round and the fourth-placed teams were eliminated from the competition.

For the next stage – the last 16 – the winning team from one group played against the runners-up from another group, but teams from the same association could not be drawn against each other (see random two-sided matching). From the quarter-finals onwards, the draw was entirely random, without association protection.

The group stage was played from September to December, whilst the knockout stage began in February, with matches usually played on Tuesday and Wednesday nights. The knockout ties were played in a two-legged format, with the exception of the final. In the 2019–20 season, due to the COVID-19 pandemic the tournament was suspended for five months. The format of the remainder of the tournament was temporarily amended as a result, with the quarter-finals and semi-finals being played as single match knockout ties at neutral venues in Lisbon, Portugal in the summer with the final taking place on 23 August 2020.

===Distribution===
The following is the default access list.
Changes will be made to the access list above if the Champions League or Europa League title holders qualify for the tournament via their domestic leagues.
* If the Champions League title holders qualify for the league phase via their domestic league&#x27;s standard berth allocation, the best champions in qualifying rounds enter the league phase, and champions of the highest-ranked associations in earlier rounds are also promoted accordingly.
* If the Europa League title holders qualify for the league phase via their domestic league&#x27;s standard berth allocation, the best club in qualifying rounds enters the league phase, except for the runners-up of associations 11–15, as they have a higher-ranked domestic team in the qualifiers, and teams of the highest-ranked associations in earlier rounds are also promoted accordingly.
* If the Champions League or Europa League title holders qualify for the qualifying rounds via their domestic league, their spot in the qualifying rounds is vacated, and teams of the highest-ranked associations in earlier rounds are promoted accordingly.

==Prizes==
===Trophy and medals===
Each year, the winning team is presented with the European Champion Clubs&#x27; Cup, the current version of which has been awarded since 1967. From the 1968–69 season and prior to the 2008–09 season any team that won the Champions League three years in a row or five times overall was awarded the official trophy permanently. Each time a club achieved this, a new official trophy had to be forged for the following season. Five clubs own a version of the official trophy: Real Madrid, Ajax, Bayern Munich, Milan and Liverpool. Since 2008, the official trophy has remained with UEFA and the clubs are awarded a replica.

The current trophy is tall and made of silver, weighing . It was designed by Jürg Stadelmann, a jeweller from Bern, Switzerland, after the original was given to Real Madrid in 1966 in recognition of their six titles to date, and cost 10,000 Swiss francs.

As of the 2012–13 season, 40 gold medals are presented to the Champions League winners, and 40 silver medals to the runners-up.

===Prize money===
Starting with the 2024–25 season, the distribution of the prize money is as follows.
* Play-off round: €4,290,000
* Base fee for league phase: €18,620,000
* League phase victory: €2,100,000
* League phase draw: €700,000
* League phase top 8: €2,000,000
* League phase ranked 9 through 16: €1,000,000
* Knockout round play-offs: €1,000,000
* Round of 16: €11,000,000
* Quarter-finals: €12,500,000
* Semi-finals: €15,000,000
* Runners-up: €18,500,000
* Champions: €25,000,000

A large part of the distributed revenue from the UEFA Champions League is linked to the &quot;market pool&quot;, the distribution of which is determined by the value of the television market in each nation. For the 2019–20 season, Paris Saint-Germain, who were the runners-up, earned nearly €126.8 million in total, of which €101.3 million was prize money, compared with the €125.46 million earned by Bayern Munich, who won the tournament and were awarded €112.96 million in prize money.

==Sponsorship==
Like the FIFA World Cup, the UEFA Champions League is sponsored by a group of multinational corporations, in contrast to the single main sponsor typically found in national top-flight leagues. When the Champions League was created in 1992, it was decided that a maximum of eight companies should be allowed to sponsor the event, with each corporation being allocated four advertising boards around the perimeter of the pitch, as well as logo placement at pre- and post-match interviews and a certain number of tickets to each match. This, combined with a deal to ensure tournament sponsors were given priority on television advertisements during matches, ensured that each of the tournament&#x27;s main sponsors was given maximum exposure.

From the 2012–13 knockout phase, UEFA used LED advertising hoardings installed in knockout participant stadiums, including the final. From the 2015–16 season onwards, UEFA has used such hoardings from the play-off round until the final. Since 2021, the UEFA also used Virtual Board Replacement (VBR) technology to offer region-based advertising; regional sponsors are inserted into the hoardings as shown on the broadcast feed in specific regions along with the global sponsors.

Individual clubs may wear jerseys with advertising. However, only two sponsorships are permitted per jersey in addition to that of the kit manufacturer, at the chest and the left sleeve. Exceptions are made for non-profit organisations, which can feature on the front of the shirt, incorporated with the main sponsor or in place of it; or on the back, either below the squad number or on the collar area.

If a club plays a match in a nation where the relevant sponsorship category is restricted (such as France&#x27;s alcohol advertising restriction), then they must remove that logo from their jerseys. For example, when Rangers played French side Auxerre in the 1996–97 Champions League, they wore the logo of the holiday chain Center Parcs instead of their primary sponsor, McEwan&#x27;s Lager (both companies at the time were subsidiaries of Scottish &amp; Newcastle).

The tournament&#x27;s main sponsors for the 2024–27 cycle are:

* FedEx
* Qatar Airways
* Heineken N.V.
* Just Eat Takeaway
* Mastercard
* PepsiCo
** Gatorade
** Lay&#x27;s
* Sony
** PlayStation 5
* Bet365
* Crypto.com

Adidas is a secondary sponsor and supplies the official match ball, while Macron supplies the referee kits.

==Media coverage==

The competition attracts an extensive television audience, not just in Europe, but throughout the world. The final of the tournament has been, in recent years, the most-watched annual sporting event in the world. The final of the 2012–13 tournament had the competition&#x27;s highest TV ratings to date, drawing approximately 360 million television viewers.

==Team records and statistics==

===Performance by club===

===Performances by nation===

Notes
==Player records==
===Most wins===
===Most appearances===

===Most goals===

==See also ==
* Continental football championships
* List of association football competitions

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="4" end="25" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="27" end="30" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="50" end="70" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="100" end="139" title="UEFA" label="Union of European Football Associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861456" start="168" end="195" title="List of top-division football clubs in UEFA countries" label="top-division European clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q841144" start="227" end="238" title="Round-robin tournament" label="round robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="452" end="466" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="475" end="501" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q219384" start="767" end="774" title="1955–56 European Cup" label="in 1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="782" end="815" title="UEFA Champions League" label="European Champion Clubs&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="846" end="858" title="UEFA Champions League" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q491781" start="1310" end="1321" title="UEFA coefficient" label="coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="1525" end="1543" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q59365764" start="1592" end="1614" title="UEFA Conference League" label="UEFA Conference League"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="2146" end="2160" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q116796566" start="2166" end="2191" title="FIFA Intercontinental Cup" label="FIFA Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q223366" start="2200" end="2219" title="FIFA Club World Cup" label="FIFA Club World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="2283" end="2290" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2302" end="2307" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2319" end="2326" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2337" end="2348" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="2362" end="2370" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="2538" end="2549" title="Real Madrid CF" label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="2824" end="2837" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q53164830" start="2845" end="2852" title="2019–20 UEFA Champions League" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q41420" start="2921" end="2938" title="Borussia Dortmund" label="Borussia Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371011" start="2950" end="2960" title="2024 UEFA Champions League final" label="2024 final"/>
<link wikidata="Q14665653" start="3089" end="3112" title="1895 World Championship (football)" label="1895 World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="3137" end="3147" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q202093" start="3172" end="3191" title="Heart of Midlothian F.C." label="Heart of Midlothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q876173" start="3239" end="3252" title="Challenge Cup (Austria-Hungary)" label="Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="3289" end="3312" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="3359" end="3366" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="3368" end="3379" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="3384" end="3395" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q580025" start="3489" end="3519" title="Coupe Van der Straeten Ponthoz" label="Coupe Van der Straeten Ponthoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q330558" start="3623" end="3634" title="Mitropa Cup" label="Mitropa Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q93697" start="3725" end="3735" title="Hugo Meisl" label="Hugo Meisl"/>
<link wikidata="Q687269" start="3793" end="3810" title="Coupe des Nations" label="Coupe des Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q219235" start="3927" end="3935" title="Servette FC" label="Servette"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="3945" end="3951" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q244595" start="4040" end="4046" title="Újpest FC" label="Újpest"/>
<link wikidata="Q48366" start="4059" end="4071" title="Romance-speaking Europe" label="Latin Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216" start="4108" end="4117" title="Latin Cup" label="Latin Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030886" start="4200" end="4240" title="South American Championship of Champions" label="South American Championship of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q947157" start="4250" end="4263" title="Gabriel Hanot" label="Gabriel Hanot"/>
<link wikidata="Q815748" start="4281" end="4294" title="L&amp;#x27;Équipe" label="L&amp;#x27;Équipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3158884" start="4378" end="4392" title="Jacques Ferran" label="Jacques Ferran"/>
<link wikidata="Q182705" start="4588" end="4599" title="Stan Cullis" label="Stan Cullis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="4609" end="4632" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18737063" start="4737" end="4759" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. v Budapest Honvéd FC" label="a 3–2 friendly victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q275612" start="4768" end="4783" title="Budapest Honvéd FC" label="Budapest Honvéd"/>
<link wikidata="Q219384" start="5015" end="5022" title="1955–56 European Cup" label="1955–56"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="5080" end="5088" title="AC Milan" label="AC Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q301431" start="5098" end="5108" title="Aarhus Gymnastikforening" label="AGF Aarhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187528" start="5120" end="5130" title="R.S.C. Anderlecht" label="Anderlecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q622430" start="5142" end="5152" title="Djurgårdens IF Fotboll" label="Djurgården"/>
<link wikidata="Q770080" start="5163" end="5179" title="Gwardia Warszawa" label="Gwardia Warszawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q192597" start="5190" end="5199" title="Hibernian F.C." label="Hibernian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188656" start="5212" end="5220" title="FK Partizan" label="Partizan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="5222" end="5232" title="Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11938" start="5235" end="5248" title="PSV Eindhoven" label="PSV Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q131215" start="5264" end="5274" title="SK Rapid Wien" label="Rapid Wien"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="5286" end="5297" title="Real Madrid CF" label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q155218" start="5307" end="5322" title="Rot-Weiss Essen" label="Rot-Weiss Essen"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="5324" end="5336" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q157463" start="5339" end="5350" title="1. FC Saarbrücken" label="Saarbrücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q310293" start="5352" end="5356" title="Saar (protectorate)" label="Saar"/>
<link wikidata="Q219235" start="5359" end="5367" title="Servette FC" label="Servette"/>
<link wikidata="Q75729" start="5383" end="5394" title="Sporting CP" label="Sporting CP"/>
<link wikidata="Q208228" start="5407" end="5412" title="Stade de Reims" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q208406" start="5426" end="5438" title="MTK Budapest FC" label="Vörös Lobogó"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187281" start="5623" end="5644" title="João Baptista Martins" label="João Baptista Martins"/>
<link wikidata="Q193431" start="5699" end="5715" title="Parc des Princes" label="Parc des Princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q164546" start="5844" end="5862" title="Alfredo Di Stéfano" label="Alfredo Di Stéfano"/>
<link wikidata="Q725746" start="5867" end="5876" title="Marcos Alonso Imaz" label="Marquitos"/>
<link wikidata="Q447706" start="5904" end="5915" title="Héctor Rial" label="Héctor Rial"/>
<link wikidata="Q245202" start="5962" end="5973" title="1956–57 European Cup" label="next season"/>
<link wikidata="Q164027" start="6001" end="6018" title="Santiago Bernabéu Stadium" label="Santiago Bernabéu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052" start="6028" end="6038" title="ACF Fiorentina" label="Fiorentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q309318" start="6137" end="6141" title="1957–58 European Cup" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q622671" start="6265" end="6279" title="King Baudouin Stadium" label="Heysel Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q493081" start="6306" end="6321" title="Francisco Gento" label="Francisco Gento"/>
<link wikidata="Q152349" start="6497" end="6510" title="MHPArena" label="Neckarstadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044283" start="6519" end="6529" title="1959 European Cup Final" label="1959 final"/>
<link wikidata="Q38245" start="6561" end="6580" title="Eintracht Frankfurt" label="Eintracht Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068883" start="6672" end="6682" title="1960 European Cup Final" label="1960 final"/>
<link wikidata="Q193651" start="6779" end="6791" title="Hampden Park" label="Hampden Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q482931" start="6819" end="6832" title="Ferenc Puskás" label="Ferenc Puskás"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="6839" end="6848" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q330686" start="6998" end="7012" title="1960–61 European Cup" label="1960–61 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q484736" start="7018" end="7031" title="El Clásico" label="bitter rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="7032" end="7041" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q131499" start="7133" end="7140" title="S.L. Benfica" label="Benfica"/>
<link wikidata="Q676004" start="7152" end="7168" title="Wankdorf Stadium" label="Wankdorf Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q162043" start="7184" end="7191" title="Eusébio" label="Eusébio"/>
<link wikidata="Q503319" start="7233" end="7248" title="Olympic Stadium (Amsterdam)" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q497028" start="7287" end="7312" title="1961–62 European Cup" label="second consecutive season"/>
<link wikidata="Q500074" start="7428" end="7448" title="1962–63 European Cup" label="1962–63 European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q62182" start="7485" end="7498" title="José Altafini" label="José Altafini"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="7502" end="7509" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="7564" end="7581" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q631" start="7608" end="7619" title="Inter Milan" label="Inter Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185741" start="7658" end="7678" title="Ernst-Happel-Stadion" label="Ernst-Happel-Stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q500084" start="7690" end="7704" title="1963–64 European Cup" label="1963–64 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q497052" start="7787" end="7806" title="1964–65 European Cup" label="third year in a row"/>
<link wikidata="Q133566" start="7862" end="7870" title="San Siro" label="San Siro"/>
<link wikidata="Q355378" start="7896" end="7906" title="Jock Stein" label="Jock Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="7922" end="7928" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827911" start="8135" end="8147" title="Lisbon Lions" label="Lisbon Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q426678" start="8178" end="8192" title="1967–68 European Cup" label="1967–68 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="8197" end="8214" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q131499" start="8296" end="8303" title="S.L. Benfica" label="Benfica"/>
<link wikidata="Q308923" start="8358" end="8377" title="Munich air disaster" label="Munich air disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q206237" start="8455" end="8465" title="Matt Busby" label="Matt Busby"/>
<link wikidata="Q642758" start="8497" end="8511" title="1968–69 European Cup" label="1968–69 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q81888" start="8513" end="8517" title="AFC Ajax" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q515815" start="8658" end="8671" title="Pierino Prati" label="Pierino Prati"/>
<link wikidata="Q371848" start="8698" end="8712" title="1969–70 European Cup" label="1969–70 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q134241" start="8761" end="8770" title="Feyenoord" label="Feyenoord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068946" start="8864" end="8869" title="1970 European Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q117079" start="8878" end="8892" title="1970–71 European Cup" label="1970–71 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122219" start="8933" end="8946" title="Panathinaikos F.C." label="Panathinaikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="9002" end="9020" title="Penalty shoot-out (association football)" label="penalty shoot-outs"/>
<link wikidata="Q208679" start="9047" end="9062" title="away goals rule" label="away goals rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="9282" end="9289" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="9388" end="9401" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="9437" end="9446" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="9576" end="9593" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q642743" start="9709" end="9713" title="1981–82 European Cup" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q51974" start="9773" end="9785" title="Hamburger SV" label="Hamburger SV"/>
<link wikidata="Q179658" start="9885" end="9901" title="FCSB" label="Steaua București"/>
<link wikidata="Q11938" start="9941" end="9954" title="PSV Eindhoven" label="PSV Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="9967" end="9975" title="AC Milan" label="AC Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q173009" start="9981" end="9998" title="Red Star Belgrade" label="Red Star Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="10003" end="10012" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068861" start="10186" end="10209" title="1985 European Cup final" label="1985 European Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q323888" start="10221" end="10244" title="Heysel Stadium disaster" label="Heysel Stadium disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q375813" start="10366" end="10378" title="Tony Britten" label="Tony Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="10404" end="10426" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q656769" start="10452" end="10468" title="Zadok the Priest" label="Zadok the Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134562" start="10487" end="10505" title="Coronation Anthems (Handel)" label="Coronation Anthems"/>
<link wikidata="Q856125" start="10609" end="10637" title="Royal Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Royal Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q337362" start="10654" end="10689" title="Academy of St. Martin in the Fields" label="Academy of St. Martin in the Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q42402" start="11734" end="11748" title="Andrea Bocelli" label="Andrea Bocelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q509024" start="11759" end="11768" title="2009 UEFA Champions League final" label="Rome 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q18084793" start="11770" end="11780" title="2016 UEFA Champions League final" label="Milan 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q20650304" start="11785" end="11797" title="2017 UEFA Champions League final" label="Cardiff 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q160427" start="11800" end="11817" title="Juan Diego Flores" label="Juan Diego Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q751782" start="11828" end="11839" title="2010 UEFA Champions League final" label="Madrid 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577167" start="11842" end="11852" title="All Angels" label="All Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q719830" start="11854" end="11866" title="2011 UEFA Champions League final" label="Wembley 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q62358" start="11869" end="11883" title="Jonas Kaufmann" label="Jonas Kaufmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q160430" start="11888" end="11901" title="David Garrett (musician)" label="David Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q719820" start="11903" end="11914" title="2012 UEFA Champions League final" label="Munich 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q463918" start="11920" end="11926" title="Mariza" label="Mariza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614328" start="11928" end="11939" title="2014 UEFA Champions League final" label="Lisbon 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q572031" start="11949" end="11959" title="2013 UEFA Champions League final" label="2013 final"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="11963" end="11970" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q26897857" start="12008" end="12012" title="2018 UEFA Champions League final" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q28842926" start="12017" end="12021" title="2019 UEFA Champions League final" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q222015" start="12122" end="12129" title="2Cellos" label="2Cellos"/>
<link wikidata="Q67593285" start="12170" end="12180" title="2023 UEFA Champions League final" label="2023 final"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341565" start="12218" end="12229" title="Ádám György" label="Ádám György"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="12342" end="12348" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="12353" end="12360" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q76364" start="12421" end="12432" title="Hans Zimmer" label="Hans Zimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16235863" start="12464" end="12477" title="Vince Staples" label="Vince Staples"/>
<link wikidata="Q869106" start="12482" end="12491" title="EA Sports" label="EA Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q54153179" start="12515" end="12522" title="FIFA 19" label="FIFA 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453101" start="13301" end="13329" title="UEFA Champions League Anthem" label="UEFA Champions League Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q841144" start="13572" end="13583" title="Round-robin tournament" label="round-robin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14073" end="14090" title="UEFA coefficients#League coefficient" label="UEFA coefficients"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="14249" end="14262" title="UEFA Europa League" label="Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q59365764" start="14267" end="14284" title="UEFA Conference League" label="Conference League"/>
<link wikidata="Q219705" start="15240" end="15247" title="2005–06 UEFA Champions League" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q39877" start="15263" end="15282" title="FC Petržalka" label="Artmedia Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q128446" start="15520" end="15525" title="FC Porto" label="Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="16741" end="16758" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489492" start="16782" end="16804" title="2011–12 Premier League" label="2011–12 Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q485956" start="16865" end="16889" title="2012–13 UEFA Champions League" label="2012–13 Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q719820" start="16913" end="16923" title="2012 UEFA Champions League Final" label="2012 final"/>
<link wikidata="Q381298" start="16955" end="16981" title="2012–13 UEFA Europa League" label="2012–13 UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416183" start="17036" end="17050" title="2015–16 UEFA Champions League" label="2015–16 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q20972117" start="17111" end="17125" title="2017–18 UEFA Champions League" label="2017–18 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="17170" end="17188" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261" start="17747" end="17761" title="Michel Platini" label="Michel Platini"/>
<link wikidata="Q47576" start="18552" end="18565" title="Arsène Wenger" label="Arsène Wenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="18657" end="18671" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="18839" end="18845" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q491781" start="19638" end="19654" title="UEFA coefficient" label="UEFA coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499911" start="20960" end="20966" title="Seed (sports)" label="seeded"/>
<link wikidata="Q491781" start="20993" end="21009" title="UEFA coefficient" label="UEFA coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q124759142" start="21627" end="21652" title="random two-sided matching" label="random two-sided matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q53164830" start="22006" end="22020" title="2019–20 UEFA Champions League" label="2019–20 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="22033" end="22050" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23976" end="24023" title="European Champion Clubs&amp;#x27; Cup#Clubs awarded the trophy permanently" label="Five clubs own a version of the official trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="24283" end="24287" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344" start="24414" end="24425" title="Swiss franc" label="Swiss franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q483020" start="25282" end="25301" title="Paris Saint-Germain F.C." label="Paris Saint-Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="25565" end="25579" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q264760" start="26306" end="26328" title="2012–13 UEFA Champions League knockout phase" label="2012–13 knockout phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q623149" start="26344" end="26365" title="Billboard" label="advertising hoardings"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416183" start="26440" end="26454" title="2015–16 UEFA Champions League" label="2015–16 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772637" start="27296" end="27315" title="alcohol advertising" label="alcohol advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597" start="27400" end="27407" title="Rangers F.C." label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q182876" start="27427" end="27434" title="AJ Auxerre" label="Auxerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q196515" start="27442" end="27466" title="1996–97 UEFA Champions League" label="1996–97 Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q448083" start="27508" end="27520" title="Center Parcs Europe" label="Center Parcs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801103" start="27555" end="27574" title="McEwan&amp;#x27;s" label="McEwan&amp;#x27;s Lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777807" start="27624" end="27648" title="Scottish &amp;amp; Newcastle" label="Scottish &amp;amp; Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q459477" start="27718" end="27723" title="FedEx" label="FedEx"/>
<link wikidata="Q208033" start="27726" end="27739" title="Qatar Airways" label="Qatar Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q180855" start="27742" end="27755" title="Heineken N.V." label="Heineken N.V."/>
<link wikidata="Q1359435" start="27758" end="27775" title="Just Eat Takeaway" label="Just Eat Takeaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q489921" start="27778" end="27788" title="Mastercard" label="Mastercard"/>
<link wikidata="Q334800" start="27791" end="27798" title="PepsiCo" label="PepsiCo"/>
<link wikidata="Q304992" start="27802" end="27810" title="Gatorade" label="Gatorade"/>
<link wikidata="Q723513" start="27814" end="27824" title="Lay&amp;#x27;s" label="Lay&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="27827" end="27831" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q63184502" start="27835" end="27848" title="PlayStation 5" label="PlayStation 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q557620" start="27851" end="27857" title="Bet365" label="Bet365"/>
<link wikidata="Q105659003" start="27860" end="27870" title="Crypto.com" label="Crypto.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="27872" end="27878" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439645" start="27946" end="27952" title="Macron (sportswear)" label="Macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q572031" start="28218" end="28249" title="2013 UEFA Champions League final" label="final of the 2012–13 tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466201" start="28549" end="28583" title="Continental football championships" label="Continental football championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493707" start="28586" end="28627" title="List of association football competitions" label="List of association football competitions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44221" wikidata="Q966967" url="?curid=44221" title="Xerox Network Systems">
<text>Xerox Network Systems (XNS) is a computer networking protocol suite developed by Xerox within the Xerox Network Systems Architecture. It provided general purpose network communications, internetwork routing and packet delivery, and higher level functions such as a reliable stream, and remote procedure calls. XNS predated and influenced the development of the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) networking model, and was very influential in local area networking designs during the 1980s.

XNS was developed by the Xerox Systems Development Department in the early 1980s, who were charged with bringing Xerox PARC&#x27;s research to market. XNS was based on the earlier (and equally influential) PARC Universal Packet (PUP) suite from the late 1970s. Some of the protocols in the XNS suite were lightly modified versions of the ones in the Pup suite. XNS added the concept of a network number, allowing larger networks to be constructed from multiple smaller ones, with routers controlling the flow of information between the networks.

The protocol suite specifications for XNS were placed in the public domain in 1977. This helped XNS become the canonical local area networking protocol, copied to various degrees by practically all networking systems in use into the 1990s. XNS was used unchanged by 3Com&#x27;s 3+Share and Ungermann-Bass&#x27;s Net/One. It was also used, with modifications, as the basis for Novell NetWare, and Banyan VINES. XNS was used as the basis for the AppleNet system, but this was never commercialized; a number of XNS&#x27;s solutions to common problems were used in AppleNet&#x27;s replacement, AppleTalk.

==Description==

===Overall design===
In comparison to the OSI model&#x27;s 7 layers, XNS is a five-layer system, like the later Internet protocol suite.

The Physical and Data Link layers of the OSI model correspond to the Physical layer (layer 0) in XNS, which was designed to use the transport mechanism of the underlying hardware and did not separate the data link. Specifically, XNS&#x27;s Physical layer is really the Ethernet local area network system, also being developed by Xerox at the same time, and a number of its design decisions reflect that fact. The system was designed to allow Ethernet to be replaced by some other system, but that was not defined by the protocol (nor had to be).

The primary part of XNS is its definition of the Internal Transport layer (layer 1), which corresponds to OSI&#x27;s Network layer, and it is here that the primary internetworking protocol, IDP, is defined. XNS combined the OSI&#x27;s Session and Transport layers into the single Interprocess Communications layer (layer 2). Layer 3 was Resource Control, similar to the OSI&#x27;s Presentation.

Finally, on top of both models, is the Application layer, although these layers were not defined in the XNS standard.

===Basic internetwork protocol===
The main internetwork layer protocol is the Internet Datagram Protocol (IDP). IDP is a close descendant of Pup&#x27;s internetwork protocol, and roughly corresponds to the Internet Protocol (IP) layer in the Internet protocol suite.

IDP uses Ethernet&#x27;s 48-bit address as the basis for its own network addressing, generally using the machine&#x27;s MAC address as the primary unique identifier. To this is added another 48-bit address section provided by the networking equipment; 32 bits are provided by routers to identify the network number in the internetwork, and another 16 bits define a socket number for service selection within a single host. The network number portion of the address also includes a special value which meant &quot;this network&quot;, for use by hosts which did not (yet) know their network number.

Unlike TCP/IP, socket numbers are part of the full network address in the IDP header, so that upper-layer protocols do not need to implement demultiplexing; IDP also supplies packet types (again, unlike IP). IDP also contains a checksum covering the entire packet, but it is optional, not mandatory. This reflects the fact that LANs generally have low-error rates, so XNS removed error correction from the lower-level protocols in order to improve performance. Error correction could be optionally added at higher levels in the protocol stack, for instance, in XNS&#x27;s own SPP protocol. XNS was widely regarded as faster than IP due to this design note.

In keeping with the low-latency LAN connections it runs on, XNS uses a short packet size, which improves performance in the case of low error rates and short turnaround times. IDP packets are up to 576 bytes long, including the 30 byte IDP header. In comparison, IP requires all hosts to support at &quot;least&quot; 576, but supports packets of up to 65K bytes. Individual XNS host pairs on a particular network might use larger packets, but no XNS router is required to handle them, and no mechanism is defined to discover if the intervening routers support larger packets. Also, packets can not be fragmented, as they can in IP.

The Routing Information Protocol (RIP), a descendant of Pup&#x27;s &quot;Gateway Information Protocol&quot;, is used as the router information-exchange system, and (slightly modified to match the syntax of addresses of other protocol suites), remains in use today in other protocol suites, such as the Internet protocol suite.

XNS also implements a simple echo protocol at the internetwork layer, similar to IP&#x27;s ping, but operating at a lower level in the networking stack. Instead of adding the ICMP data as payload in an IP packet, as in ping, XNS&#x27;s echo placed the command directly within the underlying IDP packet. The same might be achieved in IP by expanding the ICMP Protocol field of the IP header.

===Transport layer protocols===
There are two primary transport layer protocols, both very different from their Pup predecessor:

* Sequenced Packet Protocol (SPP) is an acknowledgment transport protocol, with a 3-way handshake analogous to TCP; one chief technical difference is that the sequence numbers count packets, and not the bytes as in TCP and PUP&#x27;s BSP; it is the direct antecedent to Novell&#x27;s IPX/SPX.
* Packet Exchange Protocol (PEP) is a connectionless non-reliable protocol similar in nature to UDP and the antecedent to Novell&#x27;s PXP.

XNS, like Pup, also uses EP, the &quot;Error Protocol&quot;, as a reporting system for problems such as dropped packets. This provided a unique set of packets which can be filtered to look for problems.

===Application protocols===

====Courier RPC====
In the original Xerox concept, application protocols such as remote printing, filing, and mailing, etc., employed a remote procedure call protocol named Courier. Courier contained primitives to implement most of the features of Xerox&#x27;s Mesa programming language function calls. Applications had to manually serialize and de-serialize function calls in Courier; there was no automatic facility to translate a function activation frame into an RPC (i.e. no &quot;RPC compiler&quot; was available). Because Courier was used by all applications, the XNS application protocol documents specified only courier function-call interfaces, and module+function binding tuples. There was a special facility in Courier to allow a function call to send or receive bulk data.

Initially, XNS service location was performed via broadcasting remote procedure-calls using a series of expanding ring broadcasts (in consultation with the local router, to get networks at increasing distances.) Later, the Clearinghouse Protocol 3-level directory service was created to perform service location, and the expanding-ring broadcasts were used only to locate an initial Clearinghouse.

Due to its tight integration with Mesa as an underlying technology, many of the traditional higher-level protocols were not part of the XNS system itself. This meant that vendors using the XNS protocols all created their own solutions for file sharing and printer support. While many of these 3rd party products theoretically could talk to each other at a packet level, there was little or no capability to call each other&#x27;s application services. This led to complete fragmentation of the XNS market, and has been cited as one of the reasons that IP easily displaced it.

====Authentication====
The XNS protocols also included an Authentication Protocol and an Authentication Service to support it. Its &quot;Strong credentials&quot; were based on the same Needham–Schroeder protocol that was later used by Kerberos. After contacting the authentication service for credentials, this protocol provided a lightweight way to digitally sign Courier procedure calls, so that receivers could verify the signature and authenticate senders over the XNS internet, without having to contact the Authentication service again for the length of the protocol communication session.

====Printing====
Xerox&#x27;s printing language, Interpress, was a binary-formatted standard for controlling laser printers. The designers of this language, John Warnock and Chuck Geschke, later left Xerox PARC to start Adobe Systems. Before leaving, they realized the difficulty of specifying a binary print language, where functions to serialize the print job were cumbersome and which made it difficult to debug errant printing jobs. To realize the value of specifying both a programmable and easily debug-able print job in ASCII, Warnock and Geschke created the Postscript language as one of their first products at Adobe.

====Remote Debug Protocols====
Because all 8000+ machines in the Xerox corporate Intranet ran the Wildflower architecture (designed by Butler Lampson), there was a remote-debug protocol for microcode. Basically, a peek and poke function could halt and manipulate the microcode state of a C-series or D-series machine, anywhere on earth, and then restart the machine.

Also, there was a remote debug protocol for the world-swap debugger. This protocol could, via the debugger &quot;nub&quot;, freeze a workstation and then peek and poke various parts of memory, change variables, and continue execution. If debugging symbols were available, a crashed machine could be remote debugged from anywhere on earth.

==History==

===Origins in Ethernet and PUP===
In his final year at Harvard University, Bob Metcalfe began interviewing at a number of companies and was given a warm welcome by Jerry Elkind and Bob Taylor at Xerox PARC, who were beginning to work on the networked computer workstations that would become the Xerox Alto. He agreed to join PARC in July, after defending his thesis. In 1970, while couch surfing at Steve Crocker&#x27;s home while attending a conference, Metcalfe picked up a copy Proceedings of the Fall Joint Computer Conference off the table with the aim of falling asleep while reading it. Instead, he became fascinated by an article on ALOHAnet, an earlier wide-area networking system. By June he had developed his own theories on networking and presented them to his professors, who rejected it and he was &quot;thrown out on my ass.&quot;

Metcalfe was welcomed at PARC in spite of his unsuccessful thesis, and soon started development of what was then referred to as &quot;ALOHAnet in a wire&quot;. He teamed up with David Boggs to help with the electronic implementation, and by the end of 1973 they were building working hardware at 3 Mbit/s. The pair then began working on a simple protocol that would run on the system. This led to the development of the PARC Universal Packet (Pup) system, and by late 1974 the two had Pup successfully running on Ethernet. They filed a patent on the concepts, with Metcalfe adding several other names because he believed they deserved mention, and then submitted a paper on the concept to Communications of the ACM on &quot;Ethernet: Distributed Packet Switching for Local Computer Networks&quot;, published in July 1976.

===PUP to XNS===
By 1975, long before PUP was complete, Metcalfe was already chafing under the stiff Xerox management. He believed the company should immediately put Ethernet into production, but found little interest among upper management. A seminal event took place when professors from MIT&#x27;s famed Artificial Intelligence Laboratory approached Xerox in 1974 with the intention of buying Ethernet for use in their lab. Xerox management declined, believing Ethernet was better used to help sell their own equipment. The AI Lab would then go on to make their own version of Ethernet, Chaosnet.

Metcalfe eventually left Xerox November 1975 for Transaction Technology, a division of Citibank tasked with advanced product development. However, he was lured back to Xerox seven months later by David Liddle, who had recently organized the Systems Development Division within Xerox specifically to bring PARCs concepts to market. Metcalfe immediately began re-designing Ethernet to work at 20 Mbit/s and started an effort to re-write Pup in a production quality version. Looking for help on Pup, Metcalfe approached Yogen Dalal, who was at that time completing his PhD thesis under Vint Cerf at Stanford University. Dalal was also being heavily recruited by Bob Kahn&#x27;s ARPANET team (working on TCP/IP), but when Cerf left to join DARPA, Dalal agreed to move to PARC and started there in 1977.

Dalal built a team including William Crowther and Hal Murray, and started with a complete review of Pup. Dalal also attempted to remain involved in the TCP efforts underway at DARPA, but eventually gave up and focussed fully on Pup. Dalal combined his experience with ARPANET with the concepts from Pup and by the end of 1977 they had published the first draft of the Xerox Network System specification. This was essentially a version of Pup with absolute 48-bit host IDs, and TCP&#x27;s 3-Way handshake in the Sequenced Packet Protocol.

By early 1978 the new system was working, but management was still not making any move to commercialize it. As Metcalfe put it:

When I came back to Xerox in 1976, we were about two and a half years from product shipment and in 1978 we were about two and a half years from product shipment.

When no further action was forthcoming, Metcalfe left the company at the end of 1978.

===Impact===
Last used by Xerox for communication with the DocuTech 135 Publishing System, XNS is no longer in use, due to the ubiquity of IP. However, it played an important role in the development of networking technology in the 1980s, by influencing software and hardware vendors to seriously consider the need for computing platforms to support more than one network protocol stack simultaneously.

A wide variety of proprietary networking systems were directly based on XNS or offered minor variations on the theme. Among these were Net/One, 3+, Banyan VINES and Novell&#x27;s IPX/SPX. These systems added their own concepts on top of the XNS addressing and routing system; VINES added a directory service among other services, while Novell NetWare added a number of user-facing services like printing and file sharing. AppleTalk used XNS-like routing, but had incompatible addresses using shorter numbers.

XNS also helped to validate the design of the 4.2BSD network subsystem by providing a second protocol suite, one which was significantly different from the Internet protocols; by implementing both stacks in the same kernel, Berkeley researchers demonstrated that the design was suitable for more than just IP. Additional BSD modifications were eventually necessary to support the full range of Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) protocols.

==Literature==
&quot;Xerox Network Systems Architecture Introduction to Xerox Network Systems&quot; (XNSG 058504) is &quot;a general discussion meant for those who want to know how office people can become more effective and productive by using the Xerox Network Systems.&quot;

The components of Xerox Network Systems Architecture are briefly described in &quot;Xerox Network Systems Architecture General Information Manual&quot; (XNSG 068504).

A series of sixteen individual protocol descriptions are listed in the &quot;Xerox Systems Institute Literature Catalog&quot;. Possibly more recent versions of these standards are:
* &quot;Authentication Protocol&quot; (XSIS 098404)
* &quot;Bulk Data Transfer (Appendix f to Courier)&quot;, April 1984 (XNSS 038112/XSIS 038112)
* &quot;Character Code Standard&quot;, May 1986 (XNSS 058605)
* &quot;Clearinghouse Protocol&quot;, April 1984 (XNSS 078404/XSIS 078404)
* &quot;Clearinghouse Entry Formats&quot;, April 1984 (XNSS 168404/XSIS 168404)
* &quot;Courier: The Remote Procedure Call Protocol&quot;, December 1981 (XNSS 038112/XSIS 038112)
* &quot;The Ethernet. A Local Area Network: Data Link Layer and Physical Layer Specifications&quot; (Blue Book, Version 2.0), November 1982 (XNSS 018211/XSIS 018211)
* &quot;Filing Protocol&quot;, May 1986 (XNSS 108605)
* &quot;Font Interchange Standard&quot;, December 1985 (XNSS 238512)
* &quot;Internet Transport Protocols&quot;, December 1981 (XNSS 028112/XSIS 028112)
* &quot;Interpress Electronic Printing Standard, Version 3.0&quot;, January 1986 (XNSS 048601)
* &quot;Print Service Integration Standard&quot;, June 1985 (XNSS 198506)
* &quot;Printing Protocol&quot;, April 1984 (XNSS 118404/XSIS 118404)
* &quot;Raster Encoding Standard&quot;, June 1985 (XNSS 178506)
* &quot;Synchronous Point-to-Point Protocol&quot;, December 1984 (XNSS 158412)
* &quot;Time Protocol&quot;, April 1984 (XNSS 088404/XSIS 088404)

==See also==

* Protocol Wars

*Xerox Character Code Standard

==References==

;Citations
;Bibliography
* 
* Oppen, D.C., and Dalal, Y.K., The Clearinghouse: A Decentralized Agent for Locating Named Objects in a Distributed Environment. Palo Alto: Xerox Corporation, Office Systems Division, 1981 October: Tech Report OSD-T8103.
* Israel, J.E, and Linden, T.A, Authentication in Xerox&#x27;s Star and Network Systems. Palo Alto: Xerox Corporation, Office Systems Division, 1982 May: Tech Report OSD-T8201.
* &quot;Office Systems Technology - a look into the world of the Xerox 8000 Series Products: Workstations, Services, Ethernet, and Software Development&quot;, (Edited by Ted Linden and Eric Harslem), Tech Report Xerox OSD-R8203, November 1982. A compendium of 24 papers describing all aspects of the Xerox STAR Workstation and Networking Protocols, most of them were reprints of journal and conference publications.
==External links==
* Xerox Network Systems Architecture: Introduction to Xerox Network Systems
* Xerox Network Systems Architecture: General Information Manual
* Example of an actual implementation in kernel space</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q966967" start="0" end="21" title="Xerox Network Systems" label="Xerox Network Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q966967" start="23" end="26" title="Xerox Network Systems" label="XNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="33" end="49" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757693" start="53" end="67" title="protocol suite" label="protocol suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q152433" start="81" end="86" title="Xerox" label="Xerox"/>
<link wikidata="Q966967" start="98" end="132" title="Xerox Network Systems" label="Xerox Network Systems Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q22725" start="199" end="206" title="routing" label="routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310995" start="265" end="280" title="reliable stream" label="reliable stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q62270" start="286" end="307" title="remote procedure call" label="remote procedure call"/>
<link wikidata="Q93312" start="361" end="389" title="Open Systems Interconnection" label="Open Systems Interconnection"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="442" end="463" title="local area networking" label="local area networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="604" end="614" title="Xerox PARC" label="Xerox PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118200" start="697" end="718" title="PARC Universal Packet" label="PARC Universal Packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="1099" end="1112" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="1159" end="1177" title="local area network" label="local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q229329" start="1304" end="1308" title="3Com" label="3Com"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634039" start="1316" end="1323" title="3+Share" label="3+Share"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884469" start="1328" end="1342" title="Ungermann-Bass" label="Ungermann-Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q691990" start="1414" end="1428" title="Novell NetWare" label="Novell NetWare"/>
<link wikidata="Q731220" start="1434" end="1446" title="Banyan VINES" label="Banyan VINES"/>
<link wikidata="Q200606" start="1482" end="1490" title="AppleNet" label="AppleNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q200606" start="1628" end="1637" title="AppleTalk" label="AppleTalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q93312" start="1699" end="1708" title="OSI model" label="OSI model"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="1769" end="1792" title="Internet protocol suite" label="Internet protocol suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="2064" end="2072" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="2073" end="2091" title="local area network" label="local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067099" start="2900" end="2912" title="internetwork" label="internetwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="2919" end="2927" title="Network protocol" label="protocol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3009" end="3030" title="PARC Universal Packet#Basic internetwork protocol" label="internetwork protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8795" start="3063" end="3080" title="Internet Protocol" label="Internet Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4418000" start="3190" end="3205" title="network address" label="network address"/>
<link wikidata="Q20484" start="3245" end="3256" title="MAC address" label="MAC address"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="3401" end="3407" title="Router (computing)" label="router"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141160" start="4621" end="4627" title="Header (computing)" label="header"/>
<link wikidata="Q207580" start="5018" end="5046" title="Routing Information Protocol" label="Routing Information Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q188876" start="5433" end="5437" title="Ping (networking utility)" label="ping"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5700" end="5708" title="IPv4#Protocol" label="Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8803" start="5975" end="5978" title="Transmission Control Protocol" label="TCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q691990" start="6134" end="6147" title="Novell NetWare" label="Novell&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q39532" start="6148" end="6155" title="IPX/SPX" label="IPX/SPX"/>
<link wikidata="Q11163" start="6253" end="6256" title="User Datagram Protocol" label="UDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q691990" start="6279" end="6292" title="Novell NetWare" label="Novell&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q62270" start="6668" end="6689" title="remote procedure call" label="remote procedure call"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042397" start="6793" end="6818" title="Mesa (programming language)" label="Mesa programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q22666" start="7957" end="7969" title="file sharing" label="file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q82" start="7974" end="7981" title="Printer (computing)" label="printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q934370" start="8480" end="8506" title="Needham–Schroeder protocol" label="Needham–Schroeder protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q506053" start="8530" end="8538" title="Kerberos (protocol)" label="Kerberos"/>
<link wikidata="Q924737" start="8941" end="8951" title="Interpress" label="Interpress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="9112" end="9125" title="Adobe Systems" label="Adobe Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="10296" end="10314" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q92766" start="10316" end="10328" title="Robert Metcalfe" label="Bob Metcalfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407011" start="10405" end="10417" title="Jerome I. Elkind" label="Jerry Elkind"/>
<link wikidata="Q93038" start="10422" end="10432" title="Robert Taylor (computer scientist)" label="Bob Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="10436" end="10446" title="Xerox PARC" label="Xerox PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140061" start="10536" end="10546" title="Xerox Alto" label="Xerox Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130026" start="10623" end="10636" title="couch surfing" label="couch surfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178997" start="10640" end="10653" title="Steve Crocker" label="Steve Crocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269156" start="10722" end="10771" title="Joint Computer Conference" label="Proceedings of the Fall Joint Computer Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q294502" start="10882" end="10890" title="ALOHAnet" label="ALOHAnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173774" start="11266" end="11277" title="David Boggs" label="David Boggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118200" start="11508" end="11529" title="PARC Universal Packet" label="PARC Universal Packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120519" start="11777" end="11802" title="Communications of the ACM" label="Communications of the ACM"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="12201" end="12204" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354917" start="12218" end="12252" title="MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory" label="Artificial Intelligence Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356555" start="12501" end="12509" title="Chaosnet" label="Chaosnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q857063" start="12599" end="12607" title="Citibank" label="Citibank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236592" start="12708" end="12720" title="David Liddle" label="David Liddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574347" start="13029" end="13040" title="Yogen Dalal" label="Yogen Dalal"/>
<link wikidata="Q92743" start="13095" end="13104" title="Vint Cerf" label="Vint Cerf"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="13108" end="13127" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q62843" start="13171" end="13179" title="Bob Kahn" label="Bob Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="13187" end="13194" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="13248" end="13253" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344970" start="13341" end="13357" title="William Crowther (programmer)" label="William Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287614" start="14289" end="14297" title="DocuTech" label="DocuTech"/>
<link wikidata="Q731220" start="14781" end="14793" title="Banyan VINES" label="Banyan VINES"/>
<link wikidata="Q39532" start="14812" end="14819" title="IPX/SPX" label="IPX/SPX"/>
<link wikidata="Q756230" start="14923" end="14940" title="directory service" label="directory service"/>
<link wikidata="Q691990" start="14969" end="14983" title="Novell NetWare" label="Novell NetWare"/>
<link wikidata="Q200606" start="15055" end="15064" title="AppleTalk" label="AppleTalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="15189" end="15195" title="BSD" label="4.2BSD"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15367" end="15387" title="UC Berkeley College of Engineering#Research units" label="Berkeley researchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q93312" start="15537" end="15565" title="Open Systems Interconnection" label="Open Systems Interconnection"/>
<link wikidata="Q85851705" start="17513" end="17526" title="Protocol Wars" label="Protocol Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17651329" start="17529" end="17558" title="Xerox Character Code Standard" label="Xerox Character Code Standard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44229" wikidata="Q903244" url="?curid=44229" title="Hungarian notation">
<text>Hungarian notation is an identifier naming convention in computer programming in which the name of a variable or function indicates its intention or kind, or in some dialects, its type. The original Hungarian notation uses only intention or kind in its naming convention and is sometimes called &quot;Apps Hungarian&quot; as it became popular in the Microsoft Apps division in the development of Microsoft Office applications. When the Microsoft Windows division adopted the naming convention, they based it on the actual data type, and this convention became widely spread through the Windows API; this is sometimes called &quot;Systems Hungarian&quot; notation.

Hungarian notation was designed to be language-independent, and found its first major use with the BCPL programming language. Because BCPL has no data types other than the machine word, nothing in the language itself helps a programmer remember variables&#x27; types. Hungarian notation aims to remedy this by providing the programmer with explicit knowledge of each variable&#x27;s data type.

In Hungarian notation, a variable name starts with a group of lower-case letters which are mnemonics for the type or purpose of that variable, followed by whatever name the programmer has chosen; this last part is sometimes distinguished as the &quot;given name&quot;. The first character of the given name can be capitalized to separate it from the type indicators (see also CamelCase). Otherwise the case of this character denotes scope.

==History==
The original Hungarian notation was invented by Charles Simonyi, a programmer who worked at Xerox PARC circa 1972–1981, and who later became Chief Architect at Microsoft. The name of the notation is a reference to Simonyi&#x27;s nation of origin, and also, according to Andy Hertzfeld, because it made programs &quot;look like they were written in some inscrutable foreign language&quot;. Hungarian people&#x27;s names are &quot;reversed&quot; compared to most other European names; the family name precedes the given name. For example, the anglicized name &quot;Charles Simonyi&quot; in Hungarian was originally &quot;Simonyi Károly&quot;. In the same way, the type name precedes the &quot;given name&quot; in Hungarian notation. The similar Smalltalk &quot;type last&quot; naming style (e.g. aPoint and lastPoint) was common at Xerox PARC during Simonyi&#x27;s tenure there.

Simonyi&#x27;s paper on the notation referred to prefixes used to indicate the &quot;type&quot; of information being stored. His proposal was largely concerned with decorating identifier names based upon the semantic information of what they store (in other words, the variable&#x27;s &quot;purpose&quot;). Simonyi&#x27;s notation came to be called Apps Hungarian, since the convention was used in the applications division of Microsoft. Systems Hungarian developed later in the Microsoft Windows development team. Apps Hungarian is not entirely distinct from what became known as Systems Hungarian, as some of Simonyi&#x27;s suggested prefixes contain little or no semantic information (see below for examples).

==Systems Hungarian vs. Apps Hungarian==
Where Systems notation and Apps notation differ is in the purpose of the prefixes.

In Systems Hungarian notation, the prefix encodes the actual data type of the variable. For example:

*codice_1 : variable is a &quot;long integer&quot; (codice_2);
*codice_3 : variable is &quot;an array of unsigned 8-bit integers&quot; (codice_4);
*codice_5 : function with a byte-value return code.
*codice_6 : Variable represents a string (codice_7) containing the name, but does not specify how that string is implemented.

Apps Hungarian notation strives to encode the logical data type rather than the physical data type; in this way, it gives a hint as to what the variable&#x27;s purpose is, or what it represents.
*codice_8 : variable represents a &quot;row&quot; (codice_9);
*codice_10 : variable represents an &quot;unsafe string&quot; (codice_11), which needs to be &quot;sanitized&quot; before it is used (e.g. see code injection and cross-site scripting for examples of attacks that can be caused by using raw user input)
*codice_12 : variable is a &quot;zero-terminated string&quot; (codice_13); this was one of Simonyi&#x27;s original suggested prefixes.

Most, but not all, of the prefixes Simonyi suggested are semantic in nature. To modern eyes, some prefixes seem to represent physical data types, such as codice_14 for strings. However, such prefixes were still semantic, as Simonyi intended Hungarian notation for languages whose type systems could not distinguish some data types that modern languages take for granted.

The following are examples from the original paper:
* codice_15 is a pointer to another type &quot;X&quot;; this contains very little semantic information.
* codice_16 is a prefix meaning difference between two values; for instance, &quot;dY&quot; might represent a distance along the Y-axis of a graph, while a variable just called &quot;y&quot; might be an absolute position. This is entirely semantic in nature.
* codice_13 is a null- or zero-terminated string. In C, this contains some semantic information because it is not clear whether a variable of type &quot;char*&quot; is a pointer to a single character, an array of characters or a zero-terminated string.
* codice_18 marks a variable that is a word. This contains essentially no semantic information at all, and would probably be considered Systems Hungarian.
* codice_19 marks a byte, which in contrast to w might have semantic information, because in C the only byte-sized data type is the &quot;char&quot;, so these are sometimes used to hold numeric values. This prefix might clear ambiguity between whether the variable is holding a value that should be treated as a character or a number.

While the notation always uses initial lower-case letters as mnemonics, it does not prescribe the mnemonics themselves. There are several widely used conventions (see examples below), but any set of letters can be used, as long as they are consistent within a given body of code.

It is possible for code using Apps Hungarian notation to sometimes contain Systems Hungarian when describing variables that are defined solely in terms of their type.

==Relation to sigils==
In some programming languages, a similar notation now called sigils is built into the language and enforced by the compiler. For example, in some forms of BASIC, codice_20 names a string and codice_21 names an integer. The major difference between Hungarian notation and sigils is that sigils declare the type of the variable in the language, whereas Hungarian notation is purely a naming scheme with no effect on the machine interpretation of the program text.

==Examples==
*codice_22 : Boolean
*codice_23 : char
*codice_24 : count of items
*codice_25 : double word (Systems)
*codice_26 : flag (or float)
*codice_27 : integer (Systems) or count (Apps)
*codice_28 : integer (Systems) or index (Apps)
*codice_29 : floating-point
*codice_30 : decimal
*codice_31 : double (Systems)
*codice_32 : pointer
*codice_33 : array, or range
*codice_34 : zero-terminated string
*codice_35 : unsigned 16-bit integer (Systems)
*codice_36 : unsigned 32-bit integer (Systems)
*codice_37 : clock time structure
*codice_38 : function name

The mnemonics for pointers and arrays, which are not actual data types, are usually followed by the type of the data element itself:

*codice_39 : pointer to zero-terminated string
*codice_40 : array of floating-point values
*codice_41 : array of unsigned long (Systems)

While Hungarian notation can be applied to any programming language and environment, it was widely adopted by Microsoft for use with the C language, in particular for Microsoft Windows, and its use remains largely confined to that area. In particular, use of Hungarian notation was widely evangelized by Charles Petzold&#x27;s &quot;Programming Windows&quot;, the original (and for many readers, the definitive) book on Windows API programming. Thus, many commonly seen constructs of Hungarian notation are specific to Windows:

* For programmers who learned Windows programming in C, probably the most memorable examples are the codice_42 (word-size parameter) and codice_43 (long-integer parameter) for the WindowProc() function.
* codice_44 : handle to a window
* codice_45 : long pointer to a zero-terminated string

The notation is sometimes extended in C++ to include the scope of a variable, optionally separated by an underscore. This extension is often also used without the Hungarian type-specification:

* codice_46 : member of a global namespace, integer
* codice_47 : member of a structure/class, integer
* codice_48, codice_49 : member of a structure/class
* codice_50 : static member of a class
* codice_51 : static member of a function

In JavaScript code using jQuery, a codice_52 prefix is often used to indicate that a variable holds a jQuery object (versus a plain DOM object or some other value).

==Advantages==
(Some of these apply to Systems Hungarian only.)

Supporters argue that the benefits of Hungarian Notation include:
* The symbol type can be seen from its name. This is useful when looking at the code outside an integrated development environment — like on a code review or printout — or when the symbol declaration is in another file from the point of use, such as a function.
* In a language that uses dynamic typing or that is untyped, the decorations that refer to types cease to be redundant. In such languages variables are typically not declared as holding a particular type of data, so the only clue as to what operations can be done on it are hints given by the programmer, such as a variable naming scheme, documentation and comments. As mentioned above, Hungarian Notation expanded in such a language (BCPL).
* The formatting of variable names may simplify some aspects of code refactoring (while making other aspects more error-prone).
* Multiple variables with similar semantics can be used in a block of code: dwWidth, iWidth, fWidth, dWidth.
* Variable names can be easy to remember from knowing just their types.
* It leads to more consistent variable names.
* Inappropriate type casting and operations using incompatible types can be detected easily while reading code.
* In complex programs with many global objects (VB/Delphi Forms), having a basic prefix notation can ease the work of finding the component inside of the editor. For example, searching for the string codice_53 might find all the Button objects.
* Applying Hungarian notation in a narrower way, such as applying only for member variables, helps avoid naming collision.
* Printed code is more clear to the reader in case of datatypes, type conversions, assignments, truncations, etc.

==Disadvantages==
Most arguments against Hungarian notation are against &quot;Systems&quot; Hungarian notation, not &quot;Apps&quot; Hungarian notation. Some potential issues are:
* The Hungarian notation is redundant when type-checking is done by the compiler. Compilers for languages providing strict type-checking, such as Pascal, ensure the usage of a variable is consistent with its type automatically; checks by eye are redundant and subject to human error.
* Most modern integrated development environments display variable types on demand, and automatically flag operations which use incompatible types, making the notation largely obsolete.
* Hungarian Notation becomes confusing when it is used to represent several properties, as in codice_54: a constant reference argument, holding the contents of a database column codice_55 of type varchar(30) which is part of the table&#x27;s primary key.
* It may lead to inconsistency when code is modified or ported. If a variable&#x27;s type is changed, either the decoration on the name of the variable will be inconsistent with the new type, or the variable&#x27;s name must be changed. A particularly well known example is the standard WPARAM type, and the accompanying wParam formal parameter in many Windows system function declarations. The &#x27;w&#x27; stands for &#x27;word&#x27;, where &#x27;word&#x27; is the native word size of the platform&#x27;s hardware architecture. It was originally a 16 bit type on 16-bit word architectures, but was changed to a 32-bit on 32-bit word architectures, or 64-bit type on 64-bit word architectures in later versions of the operating system while retaining its original name (its true underlying type is UINT_PTR, that is, an unsigned integer large enough to hold a pointer). The semantic impedance, and hence programmer confusion and inconsistency from platform-to-platform, is on the assumption that &#x27;w&#x27; stands for a two byte, 16-bit word in those different environments.
* Most of the time, knowing the use of a variable implies knowing its type. Furthermore, if the usage of a variable is not known, it cannot be deduced from its type.
* Hungarian notation reduces the benefits of using code editors that support completion on variable names, for the programmer has to input the type specifier first, which is more likely to collide with other variables than when using other naming schemes.
* It makes code less readable, by obfuscating the purpose of the variable with type and scoping prefixes.
* The additional type information can insufficiently replace more descriptive names. E.g. sDatabase does not tell the reader what it is. databaseName might be a more descriptive name.
* When names are sufficiently descriptive, the additional type information can be redundant. E.g. firstName is most likely a string. So naming it sFirstName only adds clutter to the code.
* It&#x27;s harder to remember the names.
* Multiple variables with different semantics can be used in a block of code with similar names: &quot;dwTmp, iTmp, fTmp, dTmp&quot;.

==Notable opinions==
* Robert Cecil Martin (against Hungarian notation and all other forms of encoding): ... nowadays HN and other forms of type encoding are simply impediments. They make it harder to change the name or type of a variable, function, member or class. They make it harder to read the code. And they create the possibility that the encoding system will mislead the reader.
* Linus Torvalds (against Systems Hungarian): Encoding the type of a function into the name (so-called Hungarian notation) is brain damaged—the compiler knows the types anyway and can check those, and it only confuses the programmer.
* Steve McConnell (for Apps Hungarian): Although the Hungarian naming convention is no longer in widespread use, the basic idea of standardizing on terse, precise abbreviations continues to have value. Standardized prefixes allow you to check types accurately when you&#x27;re using abstract data types that your compiler can&#x27;t necessarily check.
* Bjarne Stroustrup (against Systems Hungarian for C++):No I don&#x27;t recommend &#x27;Hungarian&#x27;. I regard &#x27;Hungarian&#x27; (embedding an abbreviated version of a type in a variable name) as a technique that can be useful in untyped languages, but is completely unsuitable for a language that supports generic programming and object-oriented programming — both of which emphasize selection of operations based on the type and arguments (known to the language or to the run-time support). In this case, &#x27;building the type of an object into names&#x27; simply complicates and minimizes abstraction.
* Joel Spolsky (for Apps Hungarian): If you read Simonyi&#x27;s paper closely, what he was getting at was the same kind of naming convention as I used in my example above where we decided that codice_56 meant unsafe string and codice_57 meant safe string. They&#x27;re both of type codice_58. The compiler won&#x27;t help you if you assign one to the other and Intellisense [an intelligent code completion system] won&#x27;t tell you bupkis. But they are semantically different. They need to be interpreted differently and treated differently and some kind of conversion function will need to be called if you assign one to the other or you will have a runtime bug. If you&#x27;re lucky. There&#x27;s still a tremendous amount of value to Apps Hungarian, in that it increases collocation in code, which makes the code easier to read, write, debug and maintain, and, most importantly, it makes wrong code look wrong... (Systems Hungarian) was a subtle but complete misunderstanding of Simonyi’s intention and practice.
* Microsoft&#x27;s Design Guidelines discourage developers from using Systems Hungarian notation when they choose names for the elements in .NET class libraries, although it was common on prior Microsoft development platforms like Visual Basic 6 and earlier. These Design Guidelines are silent on the naming conventions for local variables inside functions.

==See also==
* Leszynski naming convention, a variant of Hungarian for database development
* Camel case, another widespread naming convention
* Polish notation, an unrelated concept with a similar name

==References==
==External links==
*Meta-Programming: A Software Production Method Charles Simonyi, December 1976 (PhD Thesis)
*Hugarian notation - it&#x27;s my turn now :) – Larry Osterman&#x27;s WebLog
*Hungarian Notation (MSDN)
*HTML version of Doug Klunder&#x27;s paper, Idle Loop Software Design, archived May 9, 2023
*RVBA Naming Conventions
*Coding Style Conventions (MSDN)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q903244" start="0" end="18" title="Hungarian notation" label="Hungarian notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q461984" start="25" end="53" title="identifier naming convention" label="identifier naming convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="57" end="77" title="computer programming" label="computer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q877977" start="101" end="109" title="variable (computer science)" label="variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="113" end="121" title="subroutine" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q190087" start="180" end="184" title="data type" label="type"/>
<link wikidata="Q11255" start="396" end="412" title="Microsoft Office" label="Microsoft Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="436" end="453" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q828191" start="586" end="597" title="Windows API" label="Windows API"/>
<link wikidata="Q810009" start="764" end="768" title="BCPL" label="BCPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="845" end="849" title="Word (computer architecture)" label="word"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="1151" end="1159" title="mnemonic" label="mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18710" start="1436" end="1445" title="CamelCase" label="CamelCase"/>
<link wikidata="Q49819" start="1561" end="1576" title="Charles Simonyi" label="Charles Simonyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="1605" end="1615" title="Xerox PARC" label="Xerox PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="1673" end="1682" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q526166" start="1783" end="1797" title="Andy Hertzfeld" label="Andy Hertzfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q830844" start="1902" end="1931" title="Hungarian name" label="Hungarian people&amp;#x27;s names"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071027" start="1996" end="2035" title="Name order" label="the family name precedes the given name"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="2101" end="2110" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q235086" start="2256" end="2265" title="Smalltalk" label="Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="2793" end="2805" title="application software" label="applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="2870" end="2887" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920753" start="4058" end="4072" title="code injection" label="code injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q371199" start="4077" end="4097" title="cross-site scripting" label="cross-site scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483527" start="6366" end="6371" title="sigil (computer programming)" label="sigil"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="6460" end="6465" title="BASIC programming language" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="6485" end="6491" title="string (computer science)" label="string"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="6515" end="6522" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q520777" start="6794" end="6801" title="Boolean data type" label="Boolean"/>
<link wikidata="Q32483" start="6815" end="6819" title="character (computing)" label="char"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="6868" end="6872" title="Word (data type)" label="word"/>
<link wikidata="Q520777" start="6896" end="6900" title="Boolean data type" label="flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="6905" end="6910" title="Floating-point" label="float"/>
<link wikidata="Q729138" start="6925" end="6932" title="Integer (computer science)" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q729138" start="6972" end="6979" title="Integer (computer science)" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="7019" end="7033" title="floating-point" label="floating-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243369" start="7068" end="7074" title="double precision" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q118155" start="7098" end="7105" title="pointer (computer programming)" label="pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q729138" start="7200" end="7207" title="Integer (computer science)" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q729138" start="7247" end="7254" title="Integer (computer science)" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q186152" start="7358" end="7364" title="Array data structure" label="arrays"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="7530" end="7544" title="floating-point" label="floating-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="7709" end="7718" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="7766" end="7783" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q139648" start="7888" end="7899" title="Technology evangelist" label="evangelized"/>
<link wikidata="Q93023" start="7903" end="7918" title="Charles Petzold" label="Charles Petzold"/>
<link wikidata="Q828191" start="8019" end="8030" title="Windows API" label="Windows API"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024333" start="8308" end="8318" title="WindowProc" label="WindowProc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="8458" end="8461" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034415" start="8477" end="8482" title="scope (programming)" label="scope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="8855" end="8865" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q230036" start="8877" end="8883" title="jQuery" label="jQuery"/>
<link wikidata="Q865760" start="9437" end="9451" title="dynamic typing" label="dynamic typing"/>
<link wikidata="Q810009" start="9846" end="9850" title="BCPL" label="BCPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q116877" start="9917" end="9933" title="code refactoring" label="code refactoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814247" start="10640" end="10656" title="Member variable" label="member variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961868" start="10670" end="10686" title="naming collision" label="naming collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="11129" end="11135" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="11281" end="11315" title="integrated development environment" label="integrated development environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284190" start="11560" end="11568" title="constant (computer science)" label="constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334113" start="11569" end="11578" title="reference (computer science)" label="reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410440" start="11579" end="11587" title="parameter (computer science)" label="argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="11615" end="11623" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715350" start="11649" end="11656" title="varchar" label="varchar"/>
<link wikidata="Q934729" start="11695" end="11706" title="primary key" label="primary key"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410440" start="12036" end="12052" title="formal parameter" label="formal parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q93010" start="13888" end="13907" title="Robert Cecil Martin" label="Robert Cecil Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34253" start="14254" end="14268" title="Linus Torvalds" label="Linus Torvalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q93021" start="14488" end="14503" title="Steve McConnell" label="Steve McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q92620" start="14840" end="14857" title="Bjarne Stroustrup" label="Bjarne Stroustrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387083" start="15454" end="15466" title="Joel Spolsky" label="Joel Spolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q116761507" start="15830" end="15857" title="intelligent code completion" label="intelligent code completion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15886" end="15892" title=":wikt:bupkis#English" label="bupkis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="16472" end="16481" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378" start="16701" end="16715" title="Visual Basic (classic)" label="Visual Basic 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136183" start="16844" end="16871" title="Leszynski naming convention" label="Leszynski naming convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q18710" start="16923" end="16933" title="Camel case" label="Camel case"/>
<link wikidata="Q214510" start="16974" end="16989" title="Polish notation" label="Polish notation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44230" wikidata="Q294777" url="?curid=44230" title="Gelimer">
<text>Gelimer (original form possibly Geilamir, 480–553), was a Germanic king who ruled the Vandal Kingdom in antique North Africa from 530 to 534. He became ruler on 15 June 530 after deposing his first cousin twice removed, Hilderic, who had angered the Vandal nobility by converting to Chalcedonian Christianity; most Vandals at the time were fierce Arian Christians.

The Eastern Roman Emperor Justinian I, who had supported Hilderic, soon declared war on the Vandals, ostensibly to restore Hilderic. In June 533, Justinian sent an expeditionary force commanded by Belisarius which finally reached Africa in the beginning of September. Meanwhile, in Sardinia, which formed part of the Vandal domain, the governor Godas, a Goth, revolted against Gelimer and began to treat with Justinian as an independent sovereign. Gelimer, ignorant or contemptuous of Justinian&#x27;s plans, sent a large army consisting of most of the available army in Africa under his brother Tzazo to crush the rebellion, meaning that the landing of Belisarius was entirely unopposed. 

On landing, Belisarius immediately marched for Carthage, finally meeting resistance on 13 September when he was confronted by Gelimer at Ad Decimum, 10 miles from Carthage. Although outnumbered 11,000 to 17,000 the battle was evenly fought by the Vandals until Gelimer&#x27;s brother Ammatus was killed, at which time Gelimer lost heart and fled. On 14 September 533, Belisarius entered Carthage and ate the feast prepared for Gelimer in his palace. However, Belisarius was too late to save the life of Hilderic, who had been slain at Gelimer&#x27;s orders as soon as the news of the landing of the imperial army came.

However, Gelimer had escaped the Roman pursuit, and on the return of Tzazo from Sardinia the combined Vandal army met Belisarius in battle at Tricamarum about 20 miles from Carthage (December 533). This battle was far more stubbornly contested than that of Ad Decimum, but it ended in the utter rout of the Vandals and, once more, the flight of Gelimer. He retreated to &quot;Mons Pappua&quot; (maybe in the Mount Edough, near Annaba) on the border of Numidia, where he soon found himself besieged by Byzantine forces under Pharas. According to Procopius, when summoned to surrender Gelimer instead asked Pharas to send him a loaf of bread, a sponge, and a lyre, to make the winter months on Pappua more bearable. 

Finally, in March 534, with his followers and their children starving and realizing he had no chance of regaining his kingdom, Gelimer surrendered to Belisarius and accepted the Romans&#x27; offer of vast estates in Galatia where he lived to be an old man. According to Procopius, on his abdication he achieved some degree of anecdotal fame by crying out the verse from Ecclesiastes1:2, &#x27;Vanity of vanities, all is vanity&#x27; during Belisarius&#x27;s triumph in Constantinople.

==Notes==
==Sources==
*Hodgkin, Thomas. &quot;Italy and her Invaders&quot;. Clarendon Press: 1895.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q294777" start="0" end="7" title="Gelimer" label="Gelimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q294777" start="32" end="40" title="Gelimer" label="Geilamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="58" end="66" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10416611" start="86" end="100" title="Vandal Kingdom" label="Vandal Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826229" start="104" end="124" title="North Africa during classical antiquity" label="antique North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23009870" start="192" end="218" title="Cousin" label="first cousin twice removed"/>
<link wikidata="Q310962" start="220" end="228" title="Hilderic" label="Hilderic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711500" start="283" end="308" title="Chalcedonian Christianity" label="Chalcedonian Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="347" end="363" title="Arianism" label="Arian Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="370" end="391" title="Eastern Roman Emperor" label="Eastern Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="392" end="403" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136575" start="447" end="465" title="Vandalic War" label="war on the Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q174943" start="563" end="573" title="Belisarius" label="Belisarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="648" end="656" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293530" start="711" end="716" title="Godas" label="Godas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="720" end="724" title="Goths" label="Goth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282687" start="962" end="967" title="Tzazo" label="Tzazo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127353" start="1194" end="1204" title="battle of Ad Decimum" label="Ad Decimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="1220" end="1228" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q20047918" start="1341" end="1348" title="Ammatus" label="Ammatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q598261" start="1819" end="1829" title="Battle of Tricamarum" label="Tricamarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048243" start="2085" end="2097" title="Mount Edough" label="Mount Edough"/>
<link wikidata="Q45942" start="2104" end="2110" title="Annaba" label="Annaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q102679" start="2129" end="2136" title="Numidia" label="Numidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q924253" start="2201" end="2207" title="Pharas the Herulian" label="Pharas"/>
<link wikidata="Q186153" start="2222" end="2231" title="Procopius" label="Procopius"/>
<link wikidata="Q26847" start="2609" end="2616" title="Galatia" label="Galatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186153" start="2663" end="2672" title="Procopius" label="Procopius"/>
<link wikidata="Q131072" start="2763" end="2775" title="Ecclesiastes" label="Ecclesiastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q174943" start="2833" end="2843" title="Belisarius" label="Belisarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990642" start="2902" end="2917" title="Thomas Hodgkin (historian)" label="Hodgkin, Thomas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44232" wikidata="Q515904" url="?curid=44232" title="Andrzej Żuławski">
<text>Andrzej Żuławski (; 22 November 1940 – 17 February 2016) was a Polish film director and writer best known for his 1981 film &quot;Possession&quot;. Żuławski often went against mainstream commercialism in his films, and enjoyed success mostly with European art-house audiences.

In the late 1950s, he studied cinema in France. His second feature, &quot;The Devil&quot; (1972), was banned in communist Poland, and Żuławski went to France. After the success of &quot;That Most Important Thing: Love&quot; in 1975, he returned to Poland where he spent two years making &quot;On the Silver Globe&quot; (not released until 1988). The work on this film was interrupted and destroyed by the authorities. After that, Żuławski moved to France where he became known for controversial and violent art-house films such as &quot;Possession&quot; (1981). Żuławski is also known for his work with actresses including Romy Schneider, Isabelle Adjani and Sophie Marceau.

His films have received awards at various international film festivals. Żuławski had also written several novels, for example: &quot;Il était Un Verger&quot;, &quot;Lity Bór&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;La Forêt Forteresse&quot;), &quot;W Oczach Tygrysa&quot;, and &quot;Ogród Miłości&quot;.

== Biography ==
Żuławski was born in Lviv. His father, Mirosław Żuławski, was a Polish civil servant (and later diplomat) who had studied and worked in that city while it was part of the Second Polish Republic and prior to its annexation by the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic in 1939. 

Żuławski was an assistant of the filmmaker Andrzej Wajda. He studied at the prestigious Institut des hautes études cinématographiques (IDHEC) in Paris and in the Department of Philosophy at the Sorbonne.

When his second film &quot;The Devil&quot; was banned in Poland, he decided to move to France, where he made &quot;That Most Important Thing: Love&quot; (1975) with Romy Schneider.

After returning to Poland he worked for two years on a film which the authorities did not allow him to finish (&quot;On the Silver Globe&quot;), based on a book by his great-uncle Jerzy Żuławski. Since then he lived and worked mostly in France, making art films.

Being described as a maverick who always defied mainstream commercialism, Żuławski enjoyed success mostly with the European art-house audiences. His wild, imaginative, and controversial pictures have received awards at various international film festivals. He also wrote the novels &quot;Il était Un Verger&quot;, &quot;Lity Bór&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;La Forêt Forteresse&quot;), W Oczach Tygrysa, and Ogród Miłości.

In 2006 he was the Head of the Jury at the 28th Moscow International Film Festival.

Żuławski worked many times with composer Andrzej Korzyński, beginning in &quot;The Third Part of the Night&quot; (1971). Their last collaboration was for &quot;Cosmos&quot; (2015), which was also Żuławski&#x27;s last film.

On 17 February 2016, Żuławski died at a hospital in Warsaw from cancer.

== Personal life ==
Żuławski&#x27;s first wife was Barbara Baranowska, a member of the Polish School of Posters. She created the iconic French version of the poster for Żuławski&#x27;s &quot;Possession&quot;. Her first husband, Adolf Rudnicki, inspired the character Abe in the movie.

Żuławski had three sons from different relationships. One of Żuławski&#x27;s ex-wives was Małgorzata Braunek, who was a Polish film and stage actress. Their son, Xawery, is also a film director.

His relationship with the painter Hanna Wolska resulted in the birth of his son Ignacy.

He was in a relationship with French actress Sophie Marceau for sixteen years, with whom he made four films over a 15-year period (&quot;L&#x27;Amour braque&quot;, &quot;My Nights Are More Beautiful Than Your Days&quot;, &quot;La Note bleue&quot;, &quot;Fidelity&quot;). They had a son Vincent together. They broke up in 2001.

From 2007 to 2008 Żuławski dated Weronika Rosati, daughter of Polish politician Dariusz Rosati. In 2010 Żuławski released a book titled &quot;Nocnik&quot;, which included a character allegedly based on Rosati named Esther. Rosati sued Żuławski and the book&#x27;s publisher for violating her right to privacy and dignity as a woman as the book included intimate details about her. Żuławski lost the case in 2015.

== Filmography ==

===Feature films===
===Short films and television===
== References ==
== External links ==
* Andrzej Żuławski at Culture.pl
* Andrzej Żuławski, 1940–2016 at Sight &amp; Sound
*Jérôme d&#x27;Estais, Possession, Tentatives d&#x27;exorcisme, Editions Rouge profond, 2019 ()
*Jérome d&#x27;Estais, Andrzej Zulawski, sur le fil, LettMotif [archive], 2015 ( and )</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q515904" start="0" end="16" title="Andrzej Żuławski" label="Andrzej Żuławski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526255" start="70" end="83" title="film director" label="film director"/>
<link wikidata="Q36180" start="88" end="94" title="writer" label="writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773078" start="130" end="140" title="Possession (1981 film)" label="Possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q565720" start="187" end="200" title="commercialism" label="commercialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="256" end="265" title="art-house" label="art-house"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270146" start="352" end="361" title="The Devil (1972 film)" label="The Devil"/>
<link wikidata="" start="464" end="495" title="That Most Important Thing: Love" label="That Most Important Thing: Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988165" start="571" end="590" title="On the Silver Globe (film)" label="On the Silver Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773078" start="815" end="825" title="Possession (1981 film)" label="Possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q78469" start="901" end="915" title="Romy Schneider" label="Romy Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q106383" start="917" end="932" title="Isabelle Adjani" label="Isabelle Adjani"/>
<link wikidata="Q162753" start="937" end="951" title="Sophie Marceau" label="Sophie Marceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6874403" start="1293" end="1310" title="Mirosław Żuławski" label="Mirosław Żuławski"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="1425" end="1447" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="1483" end="1518" title="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106685" start="1573" end="1586" title="Andrzej Wajda" label="Andrzej Wajda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664782" start="1618" end="1663" title="Institut des hautes études cinématographiques" label="Institut des hautes études cinématographiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="1724" end="1732" title="University of Paris" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270146" start="1762" end="1771" title="The Devil (1972 film)" label="The Devil"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1850" end="1881" title="That Most Important Thing: Love" label="That Most Important Thing: Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q78469" start="1900" end="1914" title="Romy Schneider" label="Romy Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373117" start="2097" end="2111" title="Jerzy Żuławski" label="Jerzy Żuławski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053351" start="2639" end="2678" title="28th Moscow International Film Festival" label="28th Moscow International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q515087" start="2722" end="2739" title="Andrzej Korzyński" label="Andrzej Korzyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q64148" start="2760" end="2787" title="The Third Part of the Night" label="The Third Part of the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879566" start="2841" end="2847" title="Cosmos (2015 film)" label="Cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="2957" end="2963" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q127600357" start="3029" end="3047" title="Barbara Baranowska" label="Barbara Baranowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141441" start="3065" end="3089" title="Polish School of Posters" label="Polish School of Posters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773078" start="3163" end="3185" title="Possession (1981 film)" label="&amp;quot;Possession&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713071" start="3206" end="3220" title="Adolf Rudnicki" label="Adolf Rudnicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q274277" start="3354" end="3372" title="Małgorzata Braunek" label="Małgorzata Braunek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570840" start="3426" end="3432" title="Xawery Żuławski" label="Xawery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3494" end="3506" title="Hanna Wolska" label="Hanna Wolska"/>
<link wikidata="Q162753" start="3594" end="3608" title="Sophie Marceau" label="Sophie Marceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609724" start="3686" end="3705" title="L&amp;#x27;Amour braque" label="L&amp;#x27;Amour braque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807786" start="3719" end="3762" title="My Nights Are More Beautiful Than Your Days" label="My Nights Are More Beautiful Than Your Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619466" start="3803" end="3811" title="Fidelity (2000 film)" label="Fidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789894" start="3910" end="3925" title="Weronika Rosati" label="Weronika Rosati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166062" start="3957" end="3971" title="Dariusz Rosati" label="Dariusz Rosati"/>
</links>
</doc>
