<doc id="42636" wikidata="Q209989" url="?curid=42636" title="Hubert Humphrey">
<text>Hubert Horatio Humphrey Jr. (May 27, 1911 – January 13, 1978) was an American politician and statesman who served as the 38th vice president of the United States from 1965 to 1969. He twice served in the United States Senate, representing Minnesota from 1949 to 1964 and again from 1971 to 1978. As a senator he was a major leader of modern liberalism in the United States. As President Lyndon B. Johnson&#x27;s vice president, he supported the controversial Vietnam War. An intensely divided Democratic Party nominated him in the 1968 presidential election, which he lost to Republican nominee Richard Nixon.

Born in Wallace, South Dakota, Humphrey attended the University of Minnesota. In 1943, he became a professor of political science at Macalester College and ran a failed campaign for mayor of Minneapolis. He helped found the Minnesota Democratic–Farmer–Labor Party (DFL) in 1944; the next year he was elected mayor of Minneapolis, serving until 1948 and co-founding the left-wing non-communist group Americans for Democratic Action in 1947. In 1948, he was elected to the U.S. Senate and successfully advocated for the inclusion of a proposal to end racial segregation in the 1948 Democratic National Convention&#x27;s party platform.

Humphrey served three terms in the Senate from 1949 to 1964, and was the Senate Majority Whip for the last four years of his tenure. During this time, he was the lead author of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, introduced the first initiative to create the Peace Corps, and chaired the Select Committee on Disarmament. He unsuccessfully sought his party&#x27;s presidential nomination in 1952 and 1960. After Lyndon B. Johnson acceded to the presidency, he chose Humphrey as his running mate, and the Democratic ticket won a landslide victory in the 1964 election.

In March 1968, Johnson made his surprise announcement that he would not seek reelection, and Humphrey launched his campaign for the presidency. Loyal to the Johnson administration&#x27;s policies on the Vietnam War, he received opposition from many within his own party and avoided the primaries to focus on winning the delegates of non-primary states at the Democratic National Convention. His delegate strategy succeeded in clinching the nomination, and he chose Senator Edmund Muskie as his running mate. In the general election, he nearly matched Nixon&#x27;s tally in the popular vote but lost the electoral vote by a wide margin. After the defeat, he returned to the Senate and served from 1971 until his death in 1978. He ran again in the 1972 Democratic primaries but lost to George McGovern and declined to be McGovern&#x27;s running mate. From 1977 to 1978, he served as Deputy President pro tempore of the United States Senate.

==Early life and education==
Humphrey was born in a room over his father&#x27;s drugstore in Wallace, South Dakota. He was the son of Ragnild Kristine Sannes (1883–1973), a Norwegian immigrant, and Hubert Horatio Humphrey Sr. (1882–1949). Humphrey spent most of his youth in Doland, South Dakota, on the Dakota prairie; the town&#x27;s population was about 600. His father was a licensed pharmacist and merchant who served as mayor and a town council member. The father also served briefly in the South Dakota state legislature and was a South Dakota delegate to the 1944 and 1948 Democratic National Conventions. In the late 1920s, a severe economic downturn hit Doland; both banks in the town closed and Humphrey&#x27;s father struggled to keep his store open.
After his son graduated from Doland&#x27;s high school, Hubert Sr. left Doland and opened a new drugstore in the larger town of Huron, South Dakota (population 11,000), where he hoped to improve his fortunes. Because of the family&#x27;s financial struggles, Humphrey had to leave the University of Minnesota after just one year. He earned a pharmacist&#x27;s license from the Capitol College of Pharmacy in Denver, Colorado (completing a two-year licensure program in just six months), and helped his father run his store from 1931 to 1937. Both father and son were innovative in finding ways to attract customers: &quot;to supplement their business, the Humphreys had become manufacturers ... of patent medicines for both hogs and humans. A sign featuring a wooden pig was hung over the drugstore to tell the public about this unusual service. Farmers got the message, and it was Humphrey&#x27;s that became known as the farmer&#x27;s drugstore.&quot; One biographer noted, &quot;while Hubert Jr. minded the store and stirred the concoctions in the basement, Hubert Sr. went on the road selling &#x27;Humphrey&#x27;s BTV&#x27; (Body Tone Veterinary), a mineral supplement and dewormer for hogs, and &#x27;Humphrey&#x27;s Chest Oil&#x27; and &#x27;Humphrey&#x27;s Sniffles&#x27; for two-legged sufferers.&quot; Humphrey later wrote, &quot;we made &#x27;Humphrey&#x27;s Sniffles&#x27;, a substitute for Vick&#x27;s Nose Drops. I felt ours were better. Vick&#x27;s used mineral oil, which is not absorbent, and we used a vegetable-oil base, which was. I added benzocaine, a local anesthetic, so that even if the sniffles didn&#x27;t get better, you felt it less.&quot; The various &quot;Humphrey cures ... worked well enough and constituted an important part of the family income ... the farmers that bought the medicines were good customers.&quot; Over time Humphrey&#x27;s Drug Store became a profitable enterprise and the family again prospered. While living in Huron, Humphrey regularly attended Huron&#x27;s largest Methodist church and became scoutmaster of the church&#x27;s Boy Scout Troop 6. He &quot;started basketball games in the church basement ... although his scouts had no money for camp in 1931, Hubert found a way in the worst of that summer&#x27;s dust-storm grit, grasshoppers, and depression to lead an overnight [outing].&quot;

Humphrey did not enjoy working as a pharmacist, and his dream remained to earn a doctorate in political science and become a college professor. His unhappiness was manifested in &quot;stomach pains and fainting spells&quot;, though doctors could find nothing wrong with him. In August 1937, he told his father that he wanted to return to the University of Minnesota. Hubert Sr. tried to convince his son not to leave by offering him a full partnership in the store, but Hubert Jr. refused and told his father &quot;how depressed I was, almost physically ill from the work, the dust storms, the conflict between my desire to do something and be somebody and my loyalty to him ... he replied &#x27;Hubert, if you aren&#x27;t happy, then you ought to do something about it&#x27;.&quot; Humphrey returned to the University of Minnesota in 1937 and earned a Bachelor of Arts in 1939. He was a member of Phi Delta Chi, a pharmacy fraternity. He also earned a master&#x27;s degree from Louisiana State University in 1940, serving as an assistant instructor of political science there. One of his classmates was Russell B. Long, a future U.S. Senator from Louisiana.

He then became an instructor and doctoral student at the University of Minnesota from 1940 to 1941 (joining the American Federation of Teachers), and was a supervisor for the Works Progress Administration (WPA). Humphrey was a star on the university&#x27;s debate team; one of his teammates was future Minnesota Governor and US Secretary of Agriculture Orville Freeman. In the 1940 presidential campaign Humphrey and future University of Minnesota president Malcolm Moos debated the merits of Franklin D. Roosevelt, the Democratic nominee, and Wendell Willkie, the Republican nominee, on a Minneapolis radio station. Humphrey supported Roosevelt. Humphrey soon became active in Minneapolis politics, and as a result never finished his PhD.

==Marriage and early career==
In 1934, Humphrey began dating Muriel Buck, a bookkeeper and graduate of local Huron College. They were married from 1936 until Humphrey&#x27;s death nearly 42 years later. They had four children: Nancy Faye, Skip Humphrey, Robert Andrew, and Douglas Sannes. Money was an issue that plagued the Humphreys consistently. One biographer noted, &quot;For much of his life he was short of money to live on, and his relentless drive to attain the White House seemed at times like one long, losing struggle to raise enough campaign funds to get there.&quot; To help boost his salary, Humphrey frequently took paid outside speaking engagements. Through most of his years as a U.S. senator and vice president, he lived in a middle-class suburban housing development in Chevy Chase, Maryland. In 1958, the Humphreys used their savings and his speaking fees to build a lakefront home in Waverly, Minnesota, about 40 miles west of Minneapolis.

During World War II, Humphrey tried three times to join the armed forces but failed. His first two attempts were to join the Navy, first as a commissioned officer and then as an enlisted man. He was rejected both times for color blindness. He then tried to enlist in the Army in December 1944 but failed the physical exam because of a double hernia, color blindness, and calcification of the lungs. Despite his attempts to join the military, one biographer would note that &quot;all through his political life, Humphrey was dogged by the charge that he was a draft dodger&quot; during the war.

Humphrey led various wartime government agencies and worked as a college instructor. In 1942, he was the state director of new production training and reemployment and chief of the Minnesota war service program. In 1943 he was the assistant director of the War Manpower Commission. From 1943 to 1944, Humphrey was a professor of political science at Macalester College in Saint Paul, Minnesota, where he headed the university&#x27;s recently created international debate department, which focused on the international politics of World War II and the creation of the United Nations. After leaving Macalester in the spring of 1944, Humphrey worked as a news commentator for a Minneapolis radio station until 1945.

In 1943, Humphrey made his first run for elective office, for mayor of Minneapolis. He lost, but his poorly funded campaign still captured over 47% of the vote. In 1944, Humphrey was one of the key players in the merger of the Democratic and Farmer-Labor parties of Minnesota to form the Minnesota Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party (DFL). He also worked on President Roosevelt&#x27;s 1944 reelection campaign. When Minnesota Communists tried to seize control of the new party in 1945, Humphrey became an engaged anticommunist and led the successful fight to oust the Communists from the DFL.

==Mayor of Minneapolis (1945–1948)==
After the war, Humphrey again ran for mayor of Minneapolis; this time, he won the June 1945 general election with 61% of the vote. As mayor, he helped ensure the appointment of a friend and previous neighbor, Edwin Ryan, as head of the police department, as he needed a &quot;police chief whose integrity and loyalty would be above reproach.&quot; Though they had differing views of labor unions, Ryan and Humphrey worked together to crack down on crime in Minneapolis. Humphrey told Ryan, &quot;I want this town cleaned up and I mean I want it cleaned up now, not a year from now or a month from now, right now&quot;, and &quot;You take care of the law enforcement. I&#x27;ll take care of the politics.&quot; Humphrey served as mayor from 1945 to 1948, winning reelection in 1947 by the largest margin in the city&#x27;s history to that time. Humphrey gained national fame by becoming one of the founders of the liberal anticommunist Americans for Democratic Action (ADA), and he served as chairman from 1949 to 1950. He also reformed the Minneapolis police force. The city had been named the &quot;anti-Semitism capital&quot; of the country, and its small African-American population also faced discrimination. Humphrey&#x27;s mayoralty is noted for his efforts to fight all forms of bigotry. He formed the Council on Human Relations and established a municipal version of the Fair Employment Practice Committee, making Minneapolis one of only a few cities in the United States to prohibit racial discrimination in the workforce. Humphrey and his publicists were proud that the Council on Human Relations brought together individuals of varying ideologies. In 1960, Humphrey told journalist Theodore H. White, &quot;I was mayor once, in Minneapolis ... a mayor is a fine job, it&#x27;s the best job there is between being a governor and being the President.&quot;

A 1993 survey of historians, political scientists and urban experts by Melvin G. Holli of the University of Illinois at Chicago ranked Humphrey as the 28th-best American big-city mayor to have served between 1820 and 1993.

==1948 Democratic National Convention==
The Democratic Party of 1948 was split between those, mainly Northerners, who thought the federal government should actively protect civil rights for racial minorities, and those, mainly Southerners, who believed that states should be able to enforce racial segregation within their borders.

At the 1948 Democratic National Convention, the party platform reflected the division by containing only platitudes supporting civil rights. The incumbent president, Harry S. Truman, had shelved most of his 1946 Commission on Civil Rights&#x27;s recommendations to avoid angering Southern Democrats. But Humphrey had written in &quot;The Progressive&quot; magazine, &quot;The Democratic Party must lead the fight for every principle in the report. It is all or nothing.&quot;
A diverse coalition opposed the convention&#x27;s tepid civil rights platform, including anticommunist liberals like Humphrey, Paul Douglas and John F. Shelley, all of whom would later become known as leading progressives in the Democratic Party. They proposed adding a &quot;minority plank&quot; to the party platform that would commit the Democratic Party to more aggressive opposition to racial segregation. The minority plank called for federal legislation against lynching, an end to legalized school segregation in the South, and ending job discrimination based on skin color. Also strongly backing the minority plank were Democratic urban bosses like Ed Flynn of the Bronx, who promised the votes of northeastern delegates to Humphrey&#x27;s platform, Jacob Arvey of Chicago, and David Lawrence of Pittsburgh. Although seen as conservatives, the urban bosses believed that Northern Democrats could gain many black votes by supporting civil rights, with only comparatively small losses from Southern Democrats. Although many scholars have suggested that labor unions were leading figures in this coalition, no significant labor leaders attended the convention, except for the heads of the Congress of Industrial Organizations Political Action Committee (CIO-PAC), Jack Kroll and A.F. Whitney.

Despite Truman&#x27;s aides&#x27; aggressive pressure to avoid forcing the issue on the Convention floor, Humphrey spoke for the minority plank. In a renowned speech, Humphrey passionately told the convention, &quot;To those who say, my friends, to those who say that we are rushing this issue of civil rights, I say to them we are 172 years (too) late! To those who say this civil rights program is an infringement on states&#x27; rights, I say this: the time has arrived in America for the Democratic Party to get out of the shadow of states&#x27; rights and walk forthrightly into the bright sunshine of human rights!&quot; Humphrey and his allies succeeded: the convention adopted the pro-civil-rights plank by a vote of to .

After the convention&#x27;s vote, the Mississippi delegation and half of the Alabama delegation walked out of the hall. Many Southern Democrats were so enraged at this affront to their &quot;way of life&quot; that they formed the Dixiecrat party and nominated their own presidential candidate, Governor Strom Thurmond of South Carolina. The Dixiecrats&#x27; goal was to take Southern states away from Truman and thus cause his defeat. They reasoned that after such a defeat, the national Democratic Party would never again aggressively pursue a pro-civil rights agenda. The move backfired: although the civil rights plank cost Truman the Dixiecrats&#x27; support, a significant number of black voters switched their support from Henry A. Wallace to him. As a result, Truman won an upset victory over his Republican opponent, Thomas E. Dewey. The result demonstrated that the Democratic Party could win presidential elections without the &quot;Solid South&quot; and weakened Southern Democrats. Pulitzer Prize-winning historian David McCullough has written that Humphrey probably did more to get Truman elected in 1948 than anyone other than Truman himself.

==United States Senate (1949–1964)==
Humphrey was elected to the United States Senate in 1948 on the DFL ticket, defeating James M. Shields in the DFL primary with 89% of the vote, and unseating incumbent Republican Joseph H. Ball in the general election with 60% of the vote. He took office on January 3, 1949, becoming the first Democrat elected senator from Minnesota since before the Civil War. Humphrey wrote that the victory heightened his sense of self, as he had beaten the odds of defeating a Republican with statewide support. Humphrey&#x27;s father died that year, and Humphrey stopped using the &quot;Jr.&quot; suffix on his name. He was reelected in 1954 and 1960. His colleagues selected him as majority whip in 1961, a position he held until he left the Senate on December 29, 1964, to assume the vice presidency. Humphrey served from the 81st to the 87th sessions of Congress, and in a portion of the 88th Congress.

Initially, Humphrey&#x27;s support of civil rights led to his being ostracized by Southern Democrats, who dominated Senate leadership positions and wanted to punish him for proposing the civil rights platform at the 1948 Convention. Senator Richard Russell Jr. of Georgia, a leader of Southern Democrats, once remarked to other senators as Humphrey walked by, &quot;Can you imagine the people of Minnesota sending that damn fool down here to represent them?&quot; Humphrey was reportedly &quot;crushed&quot;, so hurt by the remark that he broke into tears while driving home. But he refused to be intimidated and stood his ground; his integrity, passion and eloquence eventually earned him the respect of even most of the Southerners. The Southerners were also more inclined to accept Humphrey after he became a protégé of Senate Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas. Humphrey became known for his advocacy of liberal causes (such as civil rights, arms control, a nuclear test ban, food stamps, and humanitarian foreign aid), and for his long and witty speeches.

Humphrey was a liberal leader who fought to uphold Truman&#x27;s veto of the McCarran Act of 1950. The bill was designed to suppress the American Communist Party. With a small group of liberals he supported the Kilgore substitute that would allow the president to lock up subversives, without trial, in a time of national emergency. The model was the internment of West Coast Japanese in 1942. The goal was to split the McCarran coalition. For years critics charged that Humphrey supported concentration camps. The ploy failed to stop the new law; the Senate voted 57 to 10 to overturn Truman&#x27;s veto. In 1954 he proposed to make membership in the Communist Party a felony. It was another ploy to derail a bill that would hurt labor unions. Humphrey&#x27;s proposal did not pass.

Humphrey was the author of the first humane slaughter bill introduced in the U.S. Congress and chief Senate sponsor of the Humane Slaughter Act of 1958.

Humphrey chaired the Select Committee on Disarmament (84th and 85th Congresses). In February 1960 he introduced a bill to establish a National Peace Agency. With another former pharmacist, Representative Carl Durham, Humphrey cosponsored the Durham-Humphrey Amendment, which amended the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, defining two specific categories for medications, legend (prescription) and over-the-counter (OTC).

As Democratic whip in the Senate in 1964, Humphrey was instrumental in the passage of the Civil Rights Act that year. He was a lead author of its text, alongside Senate Republican Minority Leader Everett Dirksen of Illinois. Humphrey&#x27;s consistently cheerful and upbeat demeanor, and his forceful advocacy of liberal causes, led him to be nicknamed &quot;The Happy Warrior&quot; by many of his Senate colleagues and political journalists.

While President John F. Kennedy is often credited for creating the Peace Corps, Humphrey introduced the first bill to create the Peace Corps in 1957—three years before Kennedy&#x27;s University of Michigan speech. A trio of journalists wrote of Humphrey in 1969 that &quot;few men in American politics have achieved so much of lasting significance. It was Humphrey, not Senator [Everett] Dirksen, who played the crucial part in the complex parliamentary games that were needed to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964. It was Humphrey, not John Kennedy, who first proposed the Peace Corps. The Food for Peace program was Humphrey&#x27;s idea, and so was Medicare, passed sixteen years after he first proposed it. He worked for Federal aid to education from 1949, and for a nuclear-test ban treaty from 1956. These are the solid monuments of twenty years of effective work for liberal causes in the Senate.&quot; President Johnson once said that &quot;Most Senators are minnows ... Hubert Humphrey is among the whales.&quot;
In his autobiography, &quot;The Education of a Public Man&quot;, Humphrey wrote:

There were three bills of particular emotional importance to me: the Peace Corps, a disarmament agency, and the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. The President, knowing how I felt, asked me to introduce legislation for all three. I introduced the first Peace Corps bill in 1957. It did not meet with much enthusiasm. Some traditional diplomats quaked at the thought of thousands of young Americans scattered across their world. Many senators, including liberal ones, thought the idea was silly and unworkable. Now, with a young president urging its passage, it became possible and we pushed it rapidly through the Senate. It is fashionable now to suggest that Peace Corps Volunteers gained as much or more, from their experience as the countries they worked. That may be true, but it ought not demean their work. They touched many lives and made them better.

On April 9, 1950, Humphrey predicted that President Truman would sign a $4 billion housing bill and charge Republicans with having removed the bill&#x27;s main middle-income benefits during Truman&#x27;s tours of the Midwest and Northwest the following month.

On January 7, 1951, Humphrey joined Senator Paul Douglas in calling for an $80 billion federal budget to combat Communist aggression along with a stiff tax increase to prevent borrowing.

In a January 1951 letter to President Truman, Humphrey wrote of the necessity of a commission akin to the Fair Employment Practices Commission that would be used to end discrimination in defense industries and predicted that establishing such a commission by executive order would be met with high approval by Americans.

On June 18, 1953, Humphrey introduced a resolution calling for the US to urge free elections in East Germany in response to the recent anti-communist uprising there.

In December 1958, after receiving a message from Nikita Khrushchev during a visit to the Soviet Union, Humphrey returned insisting that the message was not negative toward America. In February 1959, Humphrey said American newspapers should have ignored Khrushchev&#x27;s comments calling him a purveyor of fairy tales. In a September address to the National Stationery and Office Equipment Association, Humphrey called for further inspection of Khrushchev&#x27;s &quot;live and let live&quot; doctrine and maintained the Cold War could be won by using American &quot;weapons of peace&quot;.

In June 1963, Humphrey accompanied his longtime friend labor leader Walter Reuther on a trip to Harpsund, the Swedish Prime Minister&#x27;s summer country retreat, to meet with European socialist leaders for an exchange of ideas. Among the European leaders who met with Humphrey and Reuther were the prime ministers of Britain, Sweden, Denmark, and Norway, as well as future German chancellor Willy Brandt.

==Presidential and vice-presidential ambitions (1952–1964)==

Humphrey ran for the Democratic presidential nomination twice before his election to the vice presidency in 1964. The first time was as Minnesota&#x27;s favorite son in 1952; he received only 26 votes on the first ballot. The second time was in 1960. In between these two bids, Humphrey was part of the free-for-all for the vice-presidential nomination at the 1956 Democratic National Convention, where he received 134.5 votes on the first ballot and 74.5 on the second.

In 1960, Humphrey ran for the nomination against fellow Senator John F. Kennedy in the primaries. Their first meeting was in the Wisconsin primary, where Kennedy&#x27;s well-organized and well-funded campaign overcame Humphrey&#x27;s energetic but poorly funded effort. Humphrey believed defeating Kennedy in Wisconsin would weaken and slow the momentum of the latter&#x27;s campaign. Kennedy&#x27;s attractive brothers, sisters, and wife Jacqueline combed the state for votes. At one point Humphrey memorably complained that he &quot;felt like an independent merchant competing against a chain store&quot;. Humphrey later wrote in his memoirs that &quot;Muriel and I and our &#x27;plain folks&#x27; entourage were no match for the glamour of Jackie Kennedy and the other Kennedy women, for Peter Lawford ... and Frank Sinatra singing their commercial &#x27;High Hopes&#x27;. Jack Kennedy brought family and Hollywood to Wisconsin. The people loved it, and the press ate it up.&quot; Kennedy won the Wisconsin primary, but by a smaller margin than anticipated. Some commentators argued that Kennedy&#x27;s victory margin had come almost entirely from areas with large Roman Catholic populations, and that Protestants had supported Humphrey. As a result, Humphrey refused to quit the race and decided to run against Kennedy again in the West Virginia primary. According to one biographer, &quot;Humphrey thought his chances were good in West Virginia, one of the few states that had backed him in his losing race for vice-president four years earlier ... West Virginia was more rural than urban, [which] seemed to invite Humphrey&#x27;s folksy stump style. The state, moreover, was a citadel of labor. It was depressed; unemployment had hit hard; and coal miners&#x27; families were hungry. Humphrey felt he could talk to such people, who were 95% Protestant (Humphrey was a Congregationalist) and deep-dyed Bible-belters besides.&quot;

Kennedy chose to meet the religion issue head-on. In radio broadcasts, he carefully redefined the issue from Catholic versus Protestant to tolerance versus intolerance. Kennedy&#x27;s appeal placed Humphrey, who had championed tolerance his entire career, on the defensive, and Kennedy attacked him with a vengeance. Franklin D. Roosevelt Jr., the son of the former president, stumped for Kennedy in West Virginia and raised the issue of Humphrey&#x27;s failure to serve in the armed forces in World War II. Roosevelt told audiences, &quot;I don&#x27;t know where he [Humphrey] was in World War Two,&quot; and handed out flyers charging that Humphrey was a draft dodger. Historian Robert Dallek has written that Robert F. Kennedy, who was serving as his brother&#x27;s campaign manager, came into &quot;possession of information that Humphrey may have sought military deferments during World War Two ... he pressed Roosevelt to use this.&quot; Humphrey believed Roosevelt&#x27;s draft-dodger claim &quot;had been approved by Bobby [Kennedy], if not Jack&quot;. The claims that Humphrey was a draft dodger were inaccurate, because during the war Humphrey had &quot;tried and failed to get into the [military] service because of physical disabilities&quot;. After the West Virginia primary, Roosevelt sent Humphrey a written apology and retraction. According to historian Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., Roosevelt &quot;felt that he had been used, blaming [the draft-dodger charge] on Robert Kennedy&#x27;s determination to win at any cost ... Roosevelt said later that it was the biggest political mistake of his career.&quot;

Short on funds, Humphrey could not match the well-financed Kennedy operation. He traveled around the state in a rented bus while Kennedy and his staff flew in a large, family-owned airplane. According to his biographer Carl Solberg, Humphrey spent only $23,000 on the West Virginia primary while Kennedy&#x27;s campaign privately spent $1.5 million, well over their official estimate of $100,000. Unproven accusations claimed that the Kennedys had bought the West Virginia primary by bribing county sheriffs and other local officials to give Kennedy the vote. Humphrey later wrote, &quot;as a professional politician I was able to accept and indeed respect the efficacy of the Kennedy campaign. But underneath the beautiful exterior, there was an element of ruthlessness and toughness that I had trouble either accepting or forgetting.&quot; Kennedy defeated Humphrey soundly in West Virginia with 60.8% of the vote. That evening, Humphrey announced that he was leaving the race. By winning West Virginia, Kennedy overcame the belief that Protestant voters would not elect a Catholic to the presidency and thus sewed up the Democratic nomination.

Humphrey won the South Dakota and District of Columbia primaries, which Kennedy did not enter. At the 1960 Democratic National Convention, he received 41 votes even though he was no longer a candidate.

=== Vice presidential campaign ===
Humphrey&#x27;s defeat in 1960 had a profound influence on his thinking; after the primaries he told friends that, as a relatively poor man in politics, he was unlikely to ever become president unless he served as vice president first. Humphrey believed that only in this way could he attain the funds, nationwide organization, and visibility he would need to win the Democratic nomination. So as the 1964 presidential campaign began, Humphrey made clear his interest in becoming Lyndon Johnson&#x27;s running mate. At the 1964 Democratic National Convention, Johnson kept the three likely vice-presidential candidates, Connecticut Senator Thomas Dodd, fellow Minnesota Senator Eugene McCarthy, and Humphrey, as well as the rest of the nation, in suspense before announcing his choice of Humphrey with much fanfare, praising his qualifications at considerable length before announcing his name.

The following day Humphrey&#x27;s acceptance speech overshadowed Johnson&#x27;s own acceptance address:

In an address before labor leaders in Youngstown, Ohio, on September 7, 1964, Humphrey said the labor movement had &quot;more at stake in this election than almost any other segment of society&quot;. In Jamesburg, New Jersey, on September 10, Humphrey remarked that Goldwater had a &quot;record of retreat and reaction&quot; when it came to issues of urban housing. During a September 12 Denver Democratic rally, Humphrey charged Goldwater with having rejected programs that most Americans and members of his own party supported. At a Santa Fe September 13 rally, Humphrey said the Goldwater-led Republican Party was seeking &quot;to divide America so that they may conquer&quot; and that Goldwater would pinch individuals in his reduction of government. On September 16, Humphrey said the Americans for Democratic Action supported the Johnson administration&#x27;s economic sanctions against Cuba, and that the organization wanted to see a free Cuban government. The following day in San Antonio, Texas, Humphrey said Goldwater opposed programs favored by most Texans and Americans. During a September 27 appearance in Cleveland, Ohio, Humphrey said the Kennedy administration had led America in a prosperous direction and called for voters to issue a referendum with their vote against &quot;those who seek to replace the Statue of Liberty with an iron-padlocked gate.&quot; At an October 1 rally in Tacoma, Washington, Humphrey attacked Goldwater as a radical who opposed the 1960 GOP platform and true conservatism, which in Humphrey&#x27;s opinion meant a balance of tradition and progress.

At Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles, California, on October 2, Humphrey said the general election would give voters a choice between his running mate and a candidate &quot;who curses the darkness and never lights a candle&quot;. During an October 9 Jersey City, New Jersey, appearance, Humphrey responded to critics of the administration, who he called &quot;sick and tired Americans&quot;, by touting the accomplishments of both Kennedy&#x27;s and Johnson&#x27;s presidencies. In Tampa, Florida, on October 18, a week after the resignation of Walter Jenkins amid a scandal, Humphrey said he was unaware of any potential security leaks relating to the case. In Minneapolis on October 24, Humphrey listed the censure vote toward Senator Joseph McCarthy, the civil rights bill, and the nuclear test ban treaty as &quot;three great issues of conscience to come before the United States Senate in the past decade&quot; that Goldwater had voted incorrectly on as a Senator. In an October 26 speech in Chicago, Humphrey called Goldwater &quot;neither a Republican nor a Democrat&quot; and &quot;a radical&quot;.

The Johnson-Humphrey ticket won the election overwhelmingly, with 486 electoral votes out of 538. Only five Southern states and Goldwater&#x27;s home state of Arizona supported the Republican ticket. In October Humphrey had predicted that the ticket would win by a large margin but not carry every state.

=== Vice President-elect of the United States ===

Soon after winning the election, Humphrey and Johnson went to LBJ ranch near Stonewall, Texas. On November 6, 1964, Humphrey traveled to the Virgin Islands for a two-week vacation. News stations aired taped remarks in which Humphrey stated that he had not discussed with Johnson what his role would be as vice president and that national campaigns should be reduced by four weeks. In a November 20 interview, Humphrey announced he would resign his Senate seat midway through the next month so that Walter Mondale could assume the position.

On December 10, 1964, Humphrey met with Johnson in the Oval Office, the latter charging the vice president-elect with &quot;developing a publicity machine extraordinaire and of always wanting to get his name in the paper.&quot; Johnson showed Humphrey a George Reed memo with the allegation that the president would die within six months from an already acquired fatal heart disease. The same day, during a speech in Washington, Johnson announced Humphrey would have the position of giving assistance to governmental civil rights programs.

On January 19, 1965, the day before the inauguration, Humphrey told the Democratic National Committee that the party had unified because of the national consensus established by the presidential election.

==Vice presidency (1965–1969)==

Humphrey took office on January 20, 1965, ending the 14-month vacancy of the vice president of the United States, which had remained empty when then-Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson assumed the presidency after the assassination of John F. Kennedy in November 1963. He was an early skeptic of the then growing Vietnam War. Following a successful Viet Cong hit-and-run attack on a U.S. military installation at Pleiku on February 7, 1965 (where 7 Americans were killed and 109 wounded), Humphrey returned from Georgia to Washington D.C., to attempt to prevent further escalation. He told President Johnson that bombing North Vietnam was not a solution to the problems in South Vietnam, but that bombing would require the injection of US ground forces into South Vietnam to protect the airbases. Presciently, he noted that a military solution in Vietnam would take several years, well beyond the next election cycle. In response to this advice, President Johnson punished Humphrey by treating him coldly and restricting him from his inner circle for a number of months, until Humphrey decided to &quot;get back on the team&quot; and fully support the war effort.

As vice president, Humphrey was criticized for his complete and vocal loyalty to Johnson and the policies of the Johnson administration, even as many of his liberal admirers opposed the president&#x27;s policies with increasing fervor regarding the Vietnam War. Many of Humphrey&#x27;s liberal friends and allies abandoned him because of his refusal to publicly criticize Johnson&#x27;s Vietnam War policies. Humphrey&#x27;s critics later learned that Johnson had threatened Humphrey – Johnson told Humphrey that if he publicly criticized his policies, he would destroy Humphrey&#x27;s chances to become president by opposing his nomination at the next Democratic Convention. However, Humphrey&#x27;s critics were vocal and persistent: even his nickname, &quot;the Happy Warrior&quot;, was used against him. The nickname referred not to his military hawkishness, but rather to his crusading for social welfare and civil rights programs. After his narrow defeat in the 1968 presidential election, Humphrey wrote that &quot;After four years as Vice-President ... I had lost some of my personal identity and personal forcefulness. ... I ought not to have let a man [Johnson] who was going to be a former President dictate my future.&quot;

While he was vice president, Hubert Humphrey was the subject of a satirical song by songwriter/musician Tom Lehrer entitled &quot;Whatever Became of Hubert?&quot; The song addressed how some liberals and progressives felt let down by Humphrey, who had become a much more mute figure as vice president than he had been as a senator. The song goes &quot;&quot;Whatever became of Hubert? Has anyone heard a thing? Once he shone on his own, now he sits home alone and waits for the phone to ring. Once a fiery liberal spirit, ah, but now when he speaks he must clear it. ...&quot; &quot;

During these years Humphrey was a repeated and favorite guest of Johnny Carson on &quot;The Tonight Show&quot;. He also struck up a friendship with Frank Sinatra, who supported his campaign for president in 1968 before his conversion to the Republican party in the early 1970s, and was perhaps most on notice in the fall of 1977 when Sinatra was the star attraction and host of a tribute to a then-ailing Humphrey. He also appeared on &quot;The Dean Martin Celebrity Roast&quot; in 1973.
On April 15, 1965, Humphrey delivered an address to the American Society of Newspaper Editors, pledging the incumbent session of Congress would &quot;do more for the lasting long-term health of this nation&quot; since the initial session in office at the time of Franklin D. Roosevelt assuming the presidency in 1933 and predicting 13 major measures of President Johnson&#x27;s administration would be passed ahead of the session&#x27;s conclusion. In mid-May 1965, Humphrey traveled to Dallas, Texas for an off-the-record discussion with donors of President Johnson&#x27;s campaign. During the visit, Humphrey was imposed tight security as a result of the JFK assassination a year and a half prior and the mother of Lee Harvey Oswald was placed under surveillance by Police Chief Cato Hightower.

During a May 31, 1966, appearance at Huron College, Humphrey said the U.S. should not expect &quot;either friendship or gratitude&quot; in helping poorer countries. At a September 22, 1966 Jamesburg, New Jersey Democratic Party fundraiser, Humphrey said the Vietnam War would be shortened if the US stayed firm and hastened the return of troops: &quot;We are making a decision not only to defend Vietnam, we are defending the United States of America.&quot;

During a May 1967 news conference, Humphrey said American anger toward Vietnam was losing traction and that he could see a growth in popularity for President Johnson since a low point five months prior. During an August 2, 1967, appearance in Detroit, Humphrey proposed each state consider forming peacekeeping councils focused on preventing violence, gaining community cooperation, and listening to &quot;the voices of those who have gone unheard.&quot;

On November 4, 1967, Humphrey cited Malaysia as an example of what Vietnam could resemble post a Viet Cong defeat while in Jakarta, Indonesia.
The following day, Vice President Humphrey requested Indonesia attempt mediation in the Vietnam War during a meeting with Suharto at Merdeka palace. On December 7, Vice President Humphrey said in an interview that the Viet Cong could potentially be the factor in creating a political compromise with the government of Saigon.

=== Civil rights ===
In February 1965, President Johnson appointed Humphrey to the chairmanship of the President&#x27;s Council on Equal Opportunity. The position and board had been proposed by Humphrey, who told Johnson that the board should consist of members of the Cabinet and federal agency leaders and serve multiple roles: assisting agency cooperation, creating federal program consistency, using advanced planning to avoid potential racial unrest, creating public policy, and meeting with local and state level leaders. During his tenure, he appointed Wiley A Branton as executive director. During the first meeting of the group on March 3, Humphrey stated the budget was US$289,000 and pledged to ensure vigorous work by the small staff. Following the Watts riots in August of that year, Johnson downsized Humphrey&#x27;s role as the administration&#x27;s expert on civil rights. Dallek wrote the shift in role was in line with the change in policy the Johnson administration underwent in response to &quot;the changing political mood in the country on aid to African Americans.&quot; In a private meeting with Joseph Califano on September 18, 1965, President Johnson stated his intent to remove Humphrey from the post of &quot;point man&quot; on civil rights within the administration, believing the vice president was tasked with enough work. Days later, Humphrey met with Johnson, Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach, and White House Counsel Lee C. White. Johnson told Humphrey he would shorten his role within the administration&#x27;s civil rights policies and pass a portion to Katzenbach, Califano writing that Humphrey agreed to go along with the plan reluctantly.

In an August 1967 speech at a county officials national convention in Detroit, Humphrey called for the establishment of a Marshall Plan that would curb poverty in the United States as well as address racial violence, and advocated for the creation of civil peace councils that would counter rioting. He said the councils should include representation from all minority groups and religions, state governments, the National Guard, and law enforcement agencies and that the United States would see itself out of trouble only when law and order was reestablished.

=== Foreign trips ===
December 1965 saw the beginning of Humphrey&#x27;s tour of eastern countries, saying he hoped to have &quot;cordial and frank discussions&quot; ahead of the trip beginning when asked about the content of the talks. During a December 29 meeting with Prime Minister of Japan Eisaku Satō, Humphrey asked the latter for support on achieving peace in the Vietnam War and said it was a showing of strength that the United States wanted a peaceful ending rather than a display of weakness.

Humphrey began a European tour in late-March 1967 to mend frazzled relations and indicated that he was &quot;ready to explain and ready to listen.&quot; On April 2, 1967, Vice President Humphrey met with Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Harold Wilson. Ahead of the meeting, Humphrey said they would discuss multiple topics including the nuclear nonproliferation treaty, European events, Atlantic alliance strengthening, and &quot;the situation in the Far East&quot;. White House Press Secretary George Christian said five days later that he had received reports from Vice President Humphrey indicating his tour of the European countries was &quot;very constructive&quot; and said President Johnson was interested in the report as well. While Humphrey was in Florence, Italy on April 1, 1967, 23-year-old Giulio Stocchi threw eggs at the Vice President and missed. He was seized by American bodyguards who turned him in to Italian officers. In Brussels, Belgium on April 9, demonstrators led by communists threw rotten eggs and fruits at Vice President Humphrey&#x27;s car, also hitting several of his bodyguards. In late-December 1967, Vice President Humphrey began touring Africa.

===1968 presidential campaign===
As 1968 began, it looked as if President Johnson, despite the rapidly decreasing approval rating of his Vietnam War policies, would easily win the Democratic nomination for a second time. Humphrey was widely expected to remain as Johnson&#x27;s running mate for reelection in 1968. Johnson was challenged by Senator Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota, who ran on an anti-Vietnam War platform. With the backing of out-of-state anti-war college students and activists while campaigning in the New Hampshire primary, McCarthy, who was not expected to be a serious contender for the Democratic nomination, nearly defeated Johnson, finishing with a surprising 42% of the vote to Johnson&#x27;s 49%. A few days after the New Hampshire primary, after months of contemplation and originally intending to support Johnson&#x27;s bid for reelection, Senator Robert F. Kennedy of New York also entered the race on an anti-war platform. On March 31, a week before the Wisconsin primary, where polls showed a strong standing for McCarthy, Johnson stunned the nation by withdrawing from his race for a second full term.

Humphrey announced his presidential candidacy on April 27. Declaring his candidacy in a speech in Washington, D.C. alongside Senators Fred Harris of Oklahoma and Walter Mondale of Minnesota (who both served as the co-chairs to his campaign), Humphrey stated:

Here we are, just as we ought to be, here we are, the people, here we are the spirit of dedication, here we are the way politics ought to be in America, the politics of happiness, politics of purpose, politics of joy; and that&#x27;s the way it&#x27;s going to be, all the way, too, from here on out. We seek an America able to preserve and nurture all the basic rights of free expression, yet able to reach across the divisions that too often separate race from race, region from region, young from old, worker from scholar, rich from poor. We seek an America able to do this in the higher knowledge that our goals and ideals are worthy of conciliation and personal sacrifice.

Also in his speech, Humphrey supported Johnson&#x27;s Vietnam initiative, which Johnson had proposed during his address to the nation four weeks earlier; partially halting the bombings in North Vietnam, while sending an additional 13,500 troops and increasing the Department of Defense&#x27;s budget by 4% over the next fiscal year. Later in the campaign, Humphrey opposed a proposal by Senators McCarthy and George McGovern of South Dakota to the Democratic Convention&#x27;s Policy Committee, calling for an immediate end to the bombings in Vietnam, an early withdrawal of troops and setting talks for a coalition government with the Viet Cong.
Many people saw Humphrey as Johnson&#x27;s stand-in; he won major backing from the nation&#x27;s labor unions and other Democratic groups troubled by young antiwar protesters and the social unrest around the nation. A group of British journalists wrote that Humphrey, despite his liberal record on civil rights and support for a nuclear test-ban treaty, &quot;had turned into an arch-apologist for the war, who was given to trotting around Vietnam looking more than a little silly in olive-drab fatigues and a forage cap. The man whose name had been a by-word in the South for softness toward Negroes had taken to lecturing black groups ... the wild-eyed reformer had become the natural champion of every conservative element in the Democratic Party.&quot; Humphrey entered the race too late to participate in the Democratic primaries and concentrated on winning delegates in non-primary states by gaining the support of Democratic officeholders who were elected delegates to the Democratic Convention. By June, McCarthy won in Oregon and Pennsylvania, while Kennedy had won in Indiana and Nebraska, though Humphrey was the front runner as he led the delegate count. The California primary was crucial for Kennedy&#x27;s campaign, as a McCarthy victory would have prevented Kennedy from reaching the number of delegates required to secure the nomination. On June 4, Kennedy defeated McCarthy by less than 4% in the winner-take-all California primary. But the nation was shocked yet again when Senator Kennedy was assassinated after his victory speech at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles. After the assassination of Kennedy, Humphrey suspended his campaign for two weeks.

====Chicago riots and party fallout====
Humphrey did not enter any of the 13 state primary elections, but won the Democratic nomination at the party convention in Chicago, even though 80 percent of the primary voters had been for antiwar candidates. The delegates defeated the peace plank by to . Humphrey selected as his running mate U.S. Senator Ed Muskie of Maine. Unfortunately for Humphrey and his campaign, in Grant Park, just five miles south of International Amphitheatre convention hall, and at other sites near downtown Chicago, there were gatherings and protests by thousands of antiwar demonstrators, many of whom favored McCarthy, George McGovern, or other antiwar candidates. Mayor Richard J. Daley&#x27;s Chicago police attacked and beat these protesters, most of them young college students, which amplified the growing feelings of unrest among the public.
Humphrey&#x27;s inaction during these incidents, Johnson&#x27;s and Daley&#x27;s behind-the-scenes maneuvers, public backlash against Humphrey&#x27;s winning the nomination without entering a single primary, and Humphrey&#x27;s refusal to meet McCarthy halfway on his demands, resulting in McCarthy&#x27;s refusal to fully endorse him, highlighted turmoil in the Democratic Party&#x27;s base that proved to be too much for Humphrey to overcome in time for the general election. The combination of Johnson&#x27;s unpopularity, the Chicago demonstrations, and the discouragement of liberals and African-Americans after the assassinations of Robert F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr. that year, all contributed to his loss to former Vice President Nixon. Nevertheless, as Wallace lost support among white union members, Humphrey regained strength and the final polls showed a close race. Humphrey reversed his Vietnam policy, called for peace talks, and won back some of the antiwar Democrats.

Nixon won the electoral college and the election. Humphrey lost the popular vote by less than one percent, with 43.4% for Nixon (31,783,783 votes) to 42.7% (31,271,839) for Humphrey, and 13.5% (9,901,118) for Wallace. Humphrey carried just 13 states and the District of Columbia with 191 electoral college votes, Nixon carried 32 states and 301 electoral votes, and Wallace carried five states and 46 electoral votes. In his concession speech, Humphrey said, &quot;I have done my best. I have lost; Mr. Nixon has won. The democratic process has worked its will.&quot;

==Post-vice presidency (1969–1978)==

===Teaching and return to the Senate===
After leaving the vice presidency, Humphrey taught at Macalester College and the University of Minnesota, and served as chairman of the board of consultants at the Encyclopædia Britannica Educational Corporation.

On February 11, 1969, Humphrey met privately with Mayor Richard J. Daley and denied ever being &quot;at war&quot; with Daley during a press conference later in the day. In March, Humphrey declined to answer questions on the Johnson administration being either involved or privy to the cessation of bombing of North Vietnam during an interview on &quot;Issues and Answers&quot;. At a press conference on June 2, 1969, Humphrey backed Nixon&#x27;s peace efforts, dismissing the notion that he was not seeking an end to the war. In early July, Humphrey traveled to Finland for a private visit. Later that month, Humphrey returned to Washington after visiting Europe, a week after McCarthy declared he would not seek reelection, Humphrey declining to comment amid speculation he intended to return to the Senate. During the fall, Humphrey arranged to meet with President Nixon through United States National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger, Humphrey saying the day after the meeting that Nixon had &quot;expressed his appreciation on my attitude to his effort on Vietnam.&quot; On August 3, Humphrey said that Russia was buying time to develop ballistic missile warheads to catch up with the United States and that security was the &quot;overriding concern&quot; of the Soviet Union. Days later, Humphrey repudiated efforts against Nixon&#x27;s anti-ballistic missile system: &quot;I have a feeling that they [opponents of the ABM] were off chasing rabbits when a tiger is loose.&quot; During October, Humphrey spoke before the AFL-CIO convention delegates, charging Nixon&#x27;s economic policies with &quot;putting Americans out of work without slowing inflation.&quot; On October 10, Humphrey stated his support for Nixon&#x27;s policies in Vietnam and that he believed &quot;the worst thing that we can do is to try to undermine the efforts of the President.&quot; At a December 21 press conference, Humphrey said Nixon was a participant in the &quot;politics of polarization&quot; and could not seek unity on one hand but have divisive agents on the other. On December 26, Humphrey responded to a claim from former President Johnson that Humphrey had been cost the election by his own call for a stop to the bombing in North Vietnam, saying he did what he &quot;thought was right and responsible at Salt Lake City.&quot;

On January 4, 1970, Humphrey said the United States should cease tests of nuclear weapons during the continued conversations for potential strategic arms limitations between the United States and the Soviet Union while speaking to the National Retail Furniture Association. In February, Humphrey predicted Nixon would withdraw 75,000 or more troops prior to the year&#x27;s midterm elections and the main issue would be the economy during an interview: &quot;The issue of 1970 is the economy. Some of my fellow Democrats don&#x27;t believe this. But this is a fact.&quot; On February 23, Humphrey disclosed his recommendation that Larry O&#x27;Brien return as Chair of the Democratic National Committee, a Humphrey spokesman reporting that he wanted the issue of the DNC chairmanship settled quickly. Solberg wrote that Nixon&#x27;s April 1970 Cambodian Campaign quashed Humphrey&#x27;s hopes that the war be taken out of political context. In May, Humphrey pledged to do all he could to provide additional war planes to Israel and stress the issue to American leaders. Amid an August 11 address to an American Bar Association luncheon meeting, Humphrey called for liberals to cease defending campus radicals and militants and align with law and order.

Humphrey had not planned to return to political life, but an unexpected opportunity changed his mind. McCarthy, who was up for reelection in 1970, realized that he had only a slim chance of winning even re-nomination for the Minnesota seat because he had angered his party by opposing Johnson and Humphrey for the 1968 presidential nomination, and declined to run. Humphrey won the nomination, defeated Republican Congressman Clark MacGregor, and returned to the U.S. Senate on January 3, 1971. Ahead of resuming his duties, Humphrey had a November 16, 1970, White House meeting with Nixon as part of a group of newly elected senators. He was reelected in 1976, and remained in office until his death. In a rarity in politics, Humphrey held both Senate seats from his state (Class I and Class II) at different times. During his return to the Senate he served in the 92nd, 93rd, 94th, and a portion of the 95th Congress. He served as chairman of the Joint Economic Committee in the 94th Congress.

=== Fourth Senate term ===
L. Edward Purcell wrote that upon returning to the Senate, Humphrey found himself &quot;again a lowly junior senator with no seniority&quot; and that he resolved to create credibility in the eyes of liberals. On May 3, 1971, after the Americans for Democratic Action adopted a resolution demanding Nixon&#x27;s impeachment, Humphrey said they were acting &quot;more out of emotion and passion than reason and prudent judgment&quot; and that the request was irresponsible. On May 21, Humphrey said ending hunger and malnutrition in the U.S. was &quot;a moral obligation&quot; during a speech to International Food Service Manufacturers Association members. In June, Humphrey delivered the commencement address at the University of Bridgeport and days later said that he believed Nixon was interested in seeing a peaceful end to the Vietnam War &quot;as badly as any senator or anybody else.&quot; On July 14, testifying before the Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on Arms Control, Humphrey proposed amending the defense procurement bill to place in escrow all funds for creation and usage of multiple‐missile warheads in the midst of continued arms limitations talks. Humphrey said members of the Nixon administration needed to remember &quot;when they talk of a tough negotiating position, they are going to get a tough response.&quot; On September 6, Humphrey rebuked the Nixon administration&#x27;s wage price freeze, saying it was based on trickle-down policies and advocating &quot;percolate up&quot; as a replacement, while speaking at a United Rubber Workers gathering. On October 26, Humphrey stated his support for removing barriers to voting registration and authorizing students to establish voting residences in their college communities, rebuking the refusal of United States Attorney General John N. Mitchell the previous month to take a role in shaping voter registration laws as applicable to new voters. On December 24, 1971, Humphrey accused the Nixon administration of turning its back on the impoverished in the rural U.S., citing few implementations of the relief recommendations of the 1967 National Advisory Commission; in another statement he said only three of the 150 recommendations had been implemented. On December 27, responding to antiwar protesters in Philadelphia, Humphrey said the Nixon administration was responsible for an escalation of the Southeast Asia war and requested complete cessation of North Vietnam bombing.

In January 1972, Humphrey said the U.S. would have been out of Vietnam by that point had he been elected president, saying Nixon was taking longer to withdraw American troops from the country than it took to defeat Adolf Hitler. On May 20, Humphrey said Nixon&#x27;s proposal to limit schoolchildren busing was &quot;insufficient in the amount of aid needed for our children, deceptive to the American people, and insensitive to the laws and the Constitution of this nation&quot;, in a reversal of his prior stance, while in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. During a May 30 appearance in Burbank, California, Humphrey stated his support for an immediate withdrawal of American forces from South Vietnam despite an invasion by North Vietnam.

In January 1973, Humphrey said the Nixon administration was plotting to eliminate a school milk program in the upcoming fiscal year budget during a telephone interview. On February 18, 1973, Humphrey said the Middle East could possibly usher in peace following the Vietnam War ending along with American troops withdrawing from Indochina during an appearance at the New York Hilton. In August 1973, Humphrey called on Nixon to schedule a meeting with nations exporting and importing foods as part of an effort to both create a worldwide policy on food and do away with food hoarding. After Nixon&#x27;s dismissal of Archibald Cox, Humphrey said he found &quot;the whole situation entirely depressing.&quot; Three days after Cox&#x27;s dismissal, during a speech to the AFL-CIO convention on October 23, Humphrey declined to say whether he believed Nixon should be impeached, saying that his congressional position would likely cause him to play a role in determining Nixon&#x27;s fate. On December 21, Humphrey disclosed his request of federal tax deductions of $199,153 for the donation of his vice-presidential papers to the Minnesota State Historical Society.

In early January 1974, Humphrey checked into the Bethesda Naval Hospital for tests regarding a minute tumor of the bladder. His physician Edgar Berman said the next day that Humphrey &quot;looks fine and feels fine&quot; and was expected to leave early the following week. In an interview conducted on March 29, 1974, Humphrey concurred with Senator Mike Mansfield&#x27;s assessment from the prior day that the House of Representatives had enough votes to impeach Nixon. Humphrey was reportedly pleased by Nixon&#x27;s resignation.

In an April 1975 news conference at the spring education conference of the United Federation of Teachers, Humphrey cited the need for a national department of education, a national education trust fund, and a federal government provision for a third of America&#x27;s educational expenses. He said the Ford administration had no educational policy and noted the United States was the only industrialized country without a separate national education department. In May, Humphrey testified at the trial of his former campaign manager Jack L. Chestnut, admitting that as a candidate he sought the support of Associated Milk Producers, Inc., but saying he was not privy to the illegal contributions Chestnut was accused of taking from the organization. Later that month, Humphrey was one of 19 senators to originate a letter stating the expectation of 75 senators that Ford would submit a foreign aid request to Congress meeting the &quot;urgent military and economic needs&quot; of Israel. In August, after the United States Court of Appeals ruled that Ford had no authority to continue levying fees of $2 a barrel on imported oil, Humphrey hailed the decision as &quot;the best news we&#x27;ve heard on the inflation front in a long time&quot; and urged Ford to accept the decision because the price reduction on oil and oil‐related products would benefit the national economy. In October, after Sara Jane Moore attempted to assassinate Ford, Humphrey joined former presidential candidates Barry Goldwater, Edmund Muskie, and George McGovern in urging Ford and other presidential candidates to restrain their campaigning the following year to prevent future attempts on their lives.

In October 1976, Humphrey was admitted to a hospital for the removal of a cancerous bladder, predicted his victory in his reelection bid, and advocated for members of his party to launch efforts to increase voter turnout upon his release.

=== 1972 presidential campaign ===

On November 4, 1970, shortly after being reelected to the Senate, Humphrey stated his intention to take on the role of a &quot;harmonizer&quot; within the Democratic Party to minimize the possibility of potential presidential candidates within the party lambasting each other prior to deciding to run in the then-upcoming election, dismissing that he was an active candidate at that time. In December 1971, Humphrey made his second trip to New Jersey in under a month, talking with a plurality of county leaders at the Robert Treat Hotel: &quot;I told them I wanted their support. I said I&#x27;d rather work with them than against them.&quot;

In 1972, Humphrey once again ran for the Democratic nomination for president, announcing his candidacy on January 10, 1972, during a twenty-minute speech in Philadelphia. At the time of the announcement, Humphrey said he was running on a platform of the removal of troops from Vietnam and a revitalization of the United States economy. He drew upon continuing support from organized labor and the African-American and Jewish communities, but remained unpopular with college students because of his association with the Vietnam War, even though he had altered his position in the years since his 1968 defeat. Humphrey initially planned to skip the primaries, as he had in 1968. Even after he revised this strategy he still stayed out of New Hampshire, a decision that allowed McGovern to emerge as the leading challenger to Muskie in that state. Humphrey did win some primaries, including those in Ohio, Indiana and Pennsylvania, but was defeated by McGovern in several others, including the crucial California primary. Humphrey also was out-organized by McGovern in caucus states and was trailing in delegates at the 1972 Democratic National Convention in Miami Beach, Florida. His hopes rested on challenges to the credentials of some of the McGovern delegates. For example, the Humphrey forces argued that the winner-take-all rule for the California primary violated procedural reforms intended to produce a better reflection of the popular vote, the reason that the Illinois delegation was bounced. The effort failed, as several votes on delegate credentials went McGovern&#x27;s way, guaranteeing his victory. After his primary win, McGovern asked Humphrey to be his running mate, but Humphrey declined. After the election, Humphrey called Nixon and the two had an amicable conversation in which Humphrey implied that he preferred Nixon to McGovern, and had tried to keep McGovern from winning.

=== 1976 presidential election activities ===

On April 22, 1974, Humphrey said that he would not enter the upcoming Democratic presidential primary for the 1976 presidential election. Humphrey said at the time that he was urging fellow Senator and Minnesotan Walter Mondale to run, despite believing that Ted Kennedy would enter the race as well. Leading up to the election cycle, Humphrey also said, &quot;Here&#x27;s a time in my life when I appear to have more support than at any other time in my life. But it&#x27;s too financially, politically, and physically debilitating – and I&#x27;m just not going to do it.&quot; In December 1975, a Gallup poll was released showing Humphrey and Ronald Reagan as the leading Democratic and Republican candidates for the following year&#x27;s presidential election.

On April 12, 1976, Chairman of the New Jersey Democratic Party State Senator James P. Dugan said the selection of a majority of uncommitted delegates could be interpreted as a victory for Humphrey, who had indicated his availability as a presidential candidate for the convention. Humphrey announced his choice to not enter the New Jersey primary nor authorize any committees to work to support him during an April 29, 1976, appearance in the Senate Caucus Room. Even after Jimmy Carter had won enough delegates to clinch the nomination, many still wanted Humphrey to announce his availability for a draft. However, he did not do so, and Carter easily secured the nomination on the first round of balloting. Humphrey had learned that he had terminal cancer, prompting him to sit the race out.

Humphrey attended the November 17, 1976, meeting between President-elect Carter and Democratic congressional leaders in which Carter sought out support for a proposal to have the president&#x27;s power to reorganize the government reinstated with potential to be vetoed by Congress.

=== Fifth Senate term ===
Humphrey attended the May 3, 1977, White House meeting on legislative priorities. Humphrey told President Carter that the U.S. would enter a period of high unemployment without an economic stimulus and noted that in &quot;every period in our history, a rise in unemployment has been accompanied by a rise in inflation&quot;. Humphrey stated a preventative health care program would be the only way for the Carter administration to not have to fund soaring health costs. In July 1977, after the Senate began debating approval for funding of the neutron bomb, Humphrey stated that the White House had agreed to release the impact statement, a requirement for congressional funding of a new weapon.

===Deputy President pro tempore of the Senate (1977–1978)===
In 1974, along with Rep. Augustus Hawkins of California, Humphrey authored the Humphrey-Hawkins Full Employment Act, the first attempt at full employment legislation. The original bill proposed to guarantee full employment to all citizens over 16 and set up a permanent system of public jobs to meet that goal. A watered-down version called the &quot;Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act&quot; passed the House and Senate in 1978. It set the goal of 4 percent unemployment and 3 percent inflation and instructed the Federal Reserve Board to try to produce those goals when making policy decisions.

Humphrey ran for Majority Leader after the 1976 election but lost to Robert Byrd of West Virginia. The Senate honored Humphrey by creating the post of Deputy President pro tempore of the Senate for him. On August 16, 1977, Humphrey revealed he was suffering from terminal bladder cancer. On October 25 of that year, he addressed the Senate, and on November 3, Humphrey became the first person other than a member of the House or the President of the United States to address the House of Representatives in session. President Carter honored him by giving him command of Air Force One for his final trip to Washington on October 23. One of Humphrey&#x27;s final speeches contained the lines &quot;It was once said that the moral test of Government is how that Government treats those who are in the dawn of life, the children; those who are in the twilight of life, the elderly; and those who are in the shadows of life, the sick, the needy and the handicapped&quot;, which is sometimes described as the &quot;liberals&#x27; mantra&quot;.

==Death and funeral==

Humphrey spent his last weeks calling old political acquaintances. One call was to Richard Nixon, inviting him to his upcoming funeral, which Nixon accepted. Staying in the hospital, Humphrey went from room to room, cheering up other patients by telling them jokes and listening to them. On January 13, 1978, he died of bladder cancer at his home in Waverly, Minnesota, at the age of 66.

Humphrey&#x27;s body lay in state in the rotundas of the U.S. Capitol and the Minnesota State Capitol before being interred at Lakewood Cemetery in Minneapolis. His death overshadowed the death of his colleague from Montana, Senator Lee Metcalf, who had died the day before Humphrey. Old friends and opponents of Humphrey, from Gerald Ford and Richard Nixon to President Carter and Vice President Walter Mondale, paid their final respects. &quot;He taught us how to live, and finally he taught us how to die&quot;, said Mondale.

Humphrey&#x27;s wife Muriel was appointed by Minnesota governor Rudy Perpich to serve in the U.S. Senate until a special election to fill the term was held; she did not seek election to finish her husband&#x27;s term in office. In 1981, she married Max Brown and took the name Muriel Humphrey Brown. Upon her death in 1998 she was interred next to Humphrey at Lakewood Cemetery.

The epitaph on Humphrey&#x27;s gravestone reads: &quot;I have enjoyed my life, its disappointments outweighed by its pleasures. I have loved my country in a way that some people consider sentimental and out of style. I still do, and I remain an optimist, with joy, without apology, about this country and about the American experiment in democracy.&quot;

==Honors and legacy==
In 1965, Humphrey was made an &quot;Honorary Life Member&quot; of Alpha Phi Alpha, a historically African American fraternity.

In 1978, Humphrey received the U.S. Senator John Heinz Award for Greatest Public Service by an Elected or Appointed Official, an award given out annually by Jefferson Awards.

He was awarded posthumously the Congressional Gold Medal on June 13, 1979, and the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1980.

He was honored by the United States Postal Service with a 52¢ Great Americans series (1980–2000) postage stamp.

There is a statue of him in front of the Minneapolis City Hall.

Humphrey&#x27;s legacy is bolstered by his early leadership in civil rights, and undermined by his long support of the Vietnam War. His leading biographer Arnold A. Offner says he was &quot;the most successful legislator in the nation&#x27;s history and a powerful voice for equal justice for all.&quot; Offner writes that Humphrey was:
A major force for nearly every important liberal policy initiative...putting civil rights on his party&#x27;s and the nation&#x27;s agenda [in 1948] for decades to come. As senator he proposed legislation to effect national health insurance, for aid to poor nations, immigration and income tax reform, a Job Corps, the Peace Corps, the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, and the path breaking 1963 Limited Test Ban Treaty...[He provided] masterful stewardship of the historic 1964 Civil Rights Act through the Senate.

While acknowledging his accomplishments, some historians emphasize that Humphrey was &quot;a flawed, and not entirely likeable, figure who talked too much and neglected his family while pursuing a politics of compromise that owed as much to his vaunting personal ambition as to political pragmatism.&quot;

===Namesakes===
====Fellowship====
* The Hubert H. Humphrey Fellowship Program, which fosters an exchange of knowledge and mutual understanding throughout the world.

====Buildings and institutions====
* The Hubert H. Humphrey Terminal at Minneapolis-Saint Paul International Airport
* The former Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome domed stadium in Minneapolis which was home to the Minnesota Vikings of the National Football League and the Minnesota Twins of Major League Baseball.
* The Hubert H. Humphrey Job Corps Center in St. Paul, Minnesota.
* The Hubert H. Humphrey School of Public Affairs at the University of Minnesota and its building, the Hubert H. Humphrey Center (formerly Hubert H. Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs; changed in January 2011)
* The Hubert H. Humphrey Building of the Department of Health and Human Services in Washington, D.C.
* The Hubert H. Humphrey Bridge carrying FL S.R. 520 over the Indian River Lagoon between Cocoa and Merritt Island in Brevard County, Florida
* The Hubert H. Humphrey Middle School in Bolingbrook, Illinois.
* The Hubert H. Humphrey Comprehensive Health Center of the Los Angeles County Department of Health Services in Los Angeles, California.
* The Hubert H. Humphrey Recreation Center of the City of Los Angeles Department of Recreation and Parks in Pacoima, CA.
* The Hubert H. Humphrey Auditorium at Doland High School in Doland, South Dakota.
* The Hubert H. Humphrey Elementary School in Albuquerque, New Mexico
* The Hubert H. Humphrey Elementary School in Waverly, Minnesota
* The Hubert H. Humphrey Cancer Center in Robbinsdale, Minnesota

== Portrayals ==
* Franklin Cover in the 1982 television film &quot;A Woman Called Golda&quot;.
* Bradley Whitford in the 2016 television film &quot;All the Way&quot;.
* Doug McKeon in the 2017 film &quot;LBJ&quot;.

==Electoral history==
== See also ==
* Politics of Minnesota
* Humphrey&#x27;s son, Skip Humphrey and grandson Buck Humphrey are also Minnesotan politicians.
* List of United States Congress members who died in office (1950–99)
* Humphrey objection

==Notes==
==References and further reading==
* 
* Chester, Lewis, Hodgson, Godfrey, Page, Bruce. &quot;An American Melodrama: The Presidential Campaign of 1968.&quot; New York: The Viking Press, 1969. online
* Cohen, Dan. &quot;Undefeated: The Life of Hubert H. Humphrey&quot;. Minneapolis: Lerner Publications, 1978.
* Dallek, Robert. &quot;An Unfinished Life: John F. Kennedy, 1917–1963&quot;. New York: Little, Brown and Company, 2003.
* Freedman, Samuel G. &quot;Into the Bright Sunshine: Young Hubert Humphrey and the Fight for Civil Rights&quot; (New York: Oxford University Press, 2023);
* Garrettson, Charles L. III. &quot;Hubert H. Humphrey: The Politics of Joy&quot;. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1993.
* Gould, Lewis L. &quot;1968: The Election That Changed America&quot; (Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 1993). online
* Humphrey, Hubert H. &quot;The Education of a Public Man: My Life and Politics&quot;. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1976, a primary source. online
* Johns, Andrew L. &quot;The Price of Loyalty: Hubert Humphrey&#x27;s Vietnam Conflict&quot; (Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2020).
* Mann, Robert. &quot;The Walls of Jericho: Lyndon Johnson, Hubert Humphrey, Richard Russell and the Struggle for Civil Rights&quot;. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1996. online
* Offner, Arnold. &quot;Hubert Humphrey: The Conscience of the Country&quot; (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2018).
* Ross, Irwin. &quot;The Loneliest Campaign: The Truman Victory of 1948&quot;. New York: New American Library, 1968.
* Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr. &quot;Robert Kennedy and His Times&quot;. New York: Ballantine Books, 1996.
* Taylor, Jeff. &quot;Where Did the Party Go? William Jennings Bryan, Hubert Humphrey, and the Jeffersonian Legacy&quot;. Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 2006.
* Thurber, Timothy N. &quot;The Politics of Equality: Hubert H. Humphrey and the African American Freedom Struggle.&quot; (NY: Columbia University Press, 1999).
* Traub, James. &quot;True Believer: Hubert Humphrey’s Quest for a More Just America&quot; (New York: Basic Books, 2024) online book review
* White, Theodore H. &quot;The Making of the President 1960.&quot; New York: Barnes &amp; Noble Books, 2004. (Reprint)

===Primary sources===
* Berman, Edgar. &quot;Hubert: The Triumph And Tragedy Of The Humphrey I Knew&quot;. (New York: G.P. Putnam&#x27;s &amp; Sons, 1979) A physician&#x27;s personal account of his friendship with Humphrey from 1957 to 1978.
* Humphrey, Hubert H. &quot;The Education of a Public Man: My Life and Politics&quot; (1976), autobiography. online
* Humphrey, Hubert H. &quot;The cause is mankind; a liberal program for modern America&quot; (NY: Praeger, 1964) online
* Wilson, Paula, ed. &quot;The civil rights rhetoric of Hubert H. Humphrey : 1948-1964&quot; (1996) online

==External links==
* University of Texas biography
* Hubert H. Humphrey Papers are available for research use at the Minnesota Historical Society.
* Humphrey&#x27;s complete speech texts and a broad sample of his speech sound recordings have been digitzed by the Minnesota Historical Society under a grant from the National Historical Publications and Records Commission.
* Complete text and audio of Humphrey&#x27;s 1948 speech at the Democratic National Convention – from AmericanRhetoric.com
* Complete text and audio of Humphrey&#x27;s 1964 speech at the Democratic National Convention – from AmericanRhetoric.com
* Account of 1948 presidential campaign – includes text of Humphrey&#x27;s speech at the Democratic National Convention
* Oral History Interviews with Hubert H. Humphrey, from the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library
* Information on Humphrey&#x27;s thought and influence, including quotations from his speeches and writings.
* Hubert H. Humphrey at the Macedonian Baptist Church, San Francisco, May 23, 1972 Photographs by Bruce Jackson of Humphrey on his last campaign.
* Radio airchecks/recordings of Hubert H. Humphrey from 1946 to 1978 including interviews, radio appearances, newscasts, 1968 election concession speech, etc.
* 
** &quot;Hubert Humphrey, Presidential Contender&quot; from C-SPAN&#x27;s &quot;The Contenders&quot;



|-




|-



|-




|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="0" end="27" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Horatio Humphrey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="126" end="161" title="vice president of the United States" label="vice president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="204" end="224" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="239" end="248" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="334" end="372" title="modern liberalism in the United States" label="modern liberalism in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="387" end="404" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="459" end="470" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="493" end="509" title="History of the Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255743" start="510" end="519" title="1968 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="nominated"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="531" end="557" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870609" start="576" end="586" title="History of the Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="595" end="608" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572693" start="619" end="640" title="Wallace, South Dakota" label="Wallace, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="664" end="687" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141571" start="744" end="762" title="Macalester College" label="Macalester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627609" start="793" end="813" title="List of mayors of Minneapolis" label="mayor of Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937395" start="835" end="874" title="Minnesota Democratic–Farmer–Labor Party" label="Minnesota Democratic–Farmer–Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379869" start="980" end="989" title="Progressivism in the United States" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774292" start="990" end="1003" title="Anti-Stalinist left" label="non-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745611" start="1010" end="1041" title="Americans for Democratic Action" label="Americans for Democratic Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="1160" end="1178" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566248" start="1186" end="1221" title="1948 Democratic National Convention" label="1948 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813203" start="1319" end="1339" title="Senate Majority Whip" label="Senate Majority Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="1427" end="1451" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q458620" start="1499" end="1510" title="Peace Corps" label="Peace Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891347" start="1528" end="1559" title="United States Senate Select Committee on Disarmament" label="Select Committee on Disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255738" start="1630" end="1634" title="Democratic Party presidential primaries, 1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255739" start="1639" end="1643" title="Democratic Party presidential primaries, 1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="1792" end="1805" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q127698512" start="1870" end="1895" title="Withdrawal of Lyndon B. Johnson from the 1968 United States presidential election" label="would not seek reelection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927358" start="1919" end="1950" title="Hubert Humphrey 1968 presidential campaign" label="his campaign for the presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="2011" end="2022" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255743" start="2094" end="2103" title="Democratic Party presidential primaries, 1968" label="primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q83516" start="2167" end="2197" title="1968 Democratic National Convention" label="Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q319867" start="2281" end="2294" title="Edmund Muskie" label="Edmund Muskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="2411" end="2425" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="electoral vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q42916379" start="2465" end="2487" title="1970 United States Senate election in Minnesota" label="returned to the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255744" start="2554" end="2579" title="Democratic Party presidential primaries, 1972" label="1972 Democratic primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="2592" end="2607" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140848" start="2689" end="2745" title="Deputy President pro tempore of the United States Senate" label="Deputy President pro tempore of the United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572693" start="2841" end="2862" title="Wallace, South Dakota" label="Wallace, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193808" start="2921" end="2930" title="Norwegian American" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305305" start="3023" end="3043" title="Doland, South Dakota" label="Doland, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565382" start="3315" end="3319" title="1944 Democratic National Convention" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566248" start="3324" end="3328" title="1948 Democratic National Convention" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988967" start="3639" end="3658" title="Huron, South Dakota" label="Huron, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="3796" end="3819" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="3919" end="3925" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q910740" start="4914" end="4925" title="Vicks" label="Vick&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q422745" start="5070" end="5080" title="benzocaine" label="benzocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="6438" end="6449" title="Dust Bowl" label="dust storms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181519" start="6759" end="6772" title="Phi Delta Chi" label="Phi Delta Chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521725" start="6840" end="6866" title="Louisiana State University" label="Louisiana State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385418" start="6965" end="6980" title="Russell B. Long" label="Russell B. Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="7009" end="7018" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="7054" end="7070" title="Doctorate of philosophy" label="doctoral student"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743760" start="7133" end="7164" title="American Federation of Teachers" label="American Federation of Teachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="7196" end="7225" title="Works Progress Administration" label="Works Progress Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q888636" start="7374" end="7389" title="Orville Freeman" label="Orville Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q699416" start="7398" end="7424" title="1940 United States presidential election" label="1940 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843847" start="7479" end="7491" title="Malcolm Moos" label="Malcolm Moos"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="7514" end="7535" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q698714" start="7565" end="7580" title="Wendell Willkie" label="Wendell Willkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q468291" start="7823" end="7834" title="Muriel Buck" label="Muriel Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707847" start="7838" end="7848" title="bookkeeper" label="bookkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535685" start="8001" end="8014" title="Skip Humphrey" label="Skip Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q754478" start="8552" end="8573" title="Chevy Chase, Maryland" label="Chevy Chase, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574339" start="8625" end="8637" title="speaking fee" label="speaking fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926770" start="8668" end="8686" title="Waverly, Minnesota" label="Waverly, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8732" end="8744" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566218" start="9577" end="9600" title="War Manpower Commission" label="War Manpower Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141571" start="9670" end="9688" title="Macalester College" label="Macalester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="9692" end="9713" title="Saint Paul, Minnesota" label="Saint Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627609" start="10096" end="10116" title="List of mayors of Minneapolis" label="mayor of Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="10261" end="10271" title="United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q811236" start="10276" end="10288" title="Minnesota Farmer-Labor Party" label="Farmer-Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937395" start="10322" end="10361" title="Minnesota Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party" label="Minnesota Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="10397" end="10406" title="Franklin Roosevelt" label="Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="10455" end="10464" title="Communist" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="10542" end="10555" title="anticommunist" label="anticommunist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745611" start="11595" end="11626" title="Americans for Democratic Action" label="Americans for Democratic Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="11760" end="11773" title="anti-Semitism" label="anti-Semitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429779" start="12039" end="12073" title="Fair Employment Practice Committee" label="Fair Employment Practice Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392601" start="12353" end="12370" title="Theodore H. White" label="Theodore H. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q955764" start="12621" end="12654" title="University of Illinois at Chicago" label="University of Illinois at Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="12924" end="12936" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="13042" end="13060" title="racial segregation in the United States" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566248" start="13091" end="13126" title="1948 Democratic National Convention" label="1948 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501855" start="13132" end="13146" title="political party platform" label="party platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="13250" end="13265" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372141" start="13687" end="13699" title="Paul Douglas (Illinois politician)" label="Paul Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701740" start="13704" end="13719" title="John F. Shelley" label="John F. Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="13951" end="13969" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="14029" end="14037" title="lynching" label="lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="14234" end="14239" title="Bronx" label="Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118304" start="14319" end="14330" title="Jacob Arvey" label="Jacob Arvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q203275" start="14347" end="14361" title="David L. Lawrence" label="David Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="14365" end="14375" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q39050571" start="14820" end="14827" title="CIO-PAC" label="CIO-PAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q39075530" start="14830" end="14840" title="Jack Kroll (labor leader)" label="Jack Kroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="15192" end="15201" title="American Revolution" label="172 years"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="15629" end="15640" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="15668" end="15675" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231756" start="15821" end="15830" title="Dixiecrat" label="Dixiecrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q324719" start="15894" end="15908" title="Strom Thurmond" label="Strom Thurmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="15912" end="15926" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q251666" start="16320" end="16336" title="Henry A. Wallace" label="Henry A. Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="16395" end="16405" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q320061" start="16416" end="16431" title="Thomas E. Dewey" label="Thomas E. Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="16585" end="16599" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q374610" start="16618" end="16634" title="David McCullough" label="David McCullough"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="16814" end="16834" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348006" start="16838" end="16842" title="1948 U.S. Senate election" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937395" start="16850" end="16853" title="Minnesota Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party" label="DFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672420" start="16965" end="16979" title="Joseph H. Ball" label="Joseph H. Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="17137" end="17146" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348078" start="17412" end="17416" title="1954 U.S. Senate election" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348020" start="17421" end="17425" title="1960 U.S. Senate election" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813203" start="17458" end="17471" title="Majority Whip of the United States Senate" label="majority whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="17518" end="17524" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644572" start="17603" end="17607" title="81st United States Congress" label="81st"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645016" start="17615" end="17619" title="87th United States Congress" label="87th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645092" start="17666" end="17679" title="88th United States Congress" label="88th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q718415" start="17923" end="17942" title="Richard Russell Jr." label="Richard Russell Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6738431" start="18512" end="18527" title="Majority Leader" label="Majority Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="18549" end="18554" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="18622" end="18634" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q364056" start="18636" end="18648" title="arms control" label="arms control"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="18652" end="18668" title="nuclear testing" label="nuclear test ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q556318" start="18670" end="18681" title="Food Stamp Program" label="food stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827815" start="18700" end="18711" title="foreign aid" label="foreign aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800168" start="18829" end="18849" title="McCarran Internal Security Act" label="McCarran Act of 1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="18889" end="18913" title="Communist Party USA" label="American Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q368666" start="18963" end="18981" title="Harley M. Kilgore" label="Kilgore substitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="19103" end="19144" title="Internment of Japanese Americans" label="internment of West Coast Japanese in 1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="19404" end="19419" title="CPUSA" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891347" start="19712" end="19743" title="U.S. Senate Select Committee on Disarmament" label="Select Committee on Disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644820" start="19745" end="19749" title="84th United States Congress" label="84th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644880" start="19754" end="19758" title="85th United States Congress" label="85th"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040749" start="19895" end="19906" title="Carl T. Durham" label="Carl Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316451" start="19933" end="19958" title="Durham-Humphrey Amendment" label="Durham-Humphrey Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067874" start="19978" end="20014" title="Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act" label="Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643563" start="20074" end="20086" title="prescription drug" label="prescription"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154971" start="20092" end="20108" title="over-the-counter drug" label="over-the-counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433693" start="20131" end="20135" title="whip (politics)" label="whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="20207" end="20223" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382002" start="20313" end="20328" title="Everett Dirksen" label="Everett Dirksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="20577" end="20592" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q458620" start="20628" end="20639" title="Peace Corps" label="Peace Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="21050" end="21074" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465473" start="21151" end="21165" title="Food for Peace" label="Food for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q559392" start="21211" end="21219" title="Medicare (United States)" label="Medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q458620" start="21732" end="21743" title="Peace Corps" label="Peace Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372141" start="22819" end="22831" title="Paul Douglas (Illinois politician)" label="Paul Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429779" start="23069" end="23105" title="Fair Employment Practices Commission" label="Fair Employment Practices Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="23381" end="23393" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q157682" start="23420" end="23443" title="East German uprising of 1953" label="anti-communist uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="23501" end="23518" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055932" start="24112" end="24126" title="Walter Reuther" label="Walter Reuther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140280" start="24140" end="24148" title="Harpsund" label="Harpsund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514" start="24437" end="24449" title="Willy Brandt" label="Willy Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438638" start="24667" end="24679" title="favorite son" label="favorite son"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568685" start="24874" end="24909" title="1956 Democratic National Convention" label="1956 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255739" start="24989" end="24993" title="1960 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="25050" end="25065" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34821" start="25371" end="25435" title="Kennedy family" label="Kennedy&amp;#x27;s attractive brothers, sisters, and wife Jacqueline"/>
<link wikidata="Q345517" start="25777" end="25790" title="Peter Lawford" label="Peter Lawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="25799" end="25812" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="26154" end="26168" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="26191" end="26202" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="26860" end="26877" title="Congregationalist" label="Congregationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="27048" end="27058" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q275876" start="27240" end="27265" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt Jr." label="Franklin D. Roosevelt Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q513338" start="27604" end="27617" title="Robert Dallek" label="Robert Dallek"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="27635" end="27652" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q435195" start="28293" end="28316" title="Arthur Schlesinger, Jr." label="Arthur Schlesinger, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4569935" start="29793" end="29828" title="1960 Democratic National Convention" label="1960 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="30330" end="30356" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571498" start="30452" end="30487" title="1964 Democratic National Convention" label="1964 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619366" start="30569" end="30580" title="Thomas J. Dodd" label="Thomas Dodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q380550" start="30607" end="30622" title="Eugene McCarthy" label="Eugene McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216820" start="30968" end="30984" title="Youngstown, Ohio" label="Youngstown, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q773400" start="31133" end="31154" title="Jamesburg, New Jersey" label="Jamesburg, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="31318" end="31324" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="31465" end="31473" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745611" start="31720" end="31751" title="Americans for Democratic Action" label="Americans for Democratic Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="31915" end="31926" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="32050" end="32059" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q199797" start="32332" end="32338" title="Tacoma" label="Tacoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="32776" end="32799" title="Jersey City, New Jersey" label="Jersey City, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="33008" end="33022" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544946" start="33071" end="33085" title="Walter Jenkins" label="Walter Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="33188" end="33199" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="33263" end="33278" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q637458" start="34053" end="34062" title="LBJ Ranch" label="LBJ ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q975048" start="34068" end="34084" title="Stonewall, Texas" label="Stonewall, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262" start="34132" end="34146" title="Virgin Islands" label="Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="34489" end="34503" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185863" start="35145" end="35174" title="Democratic National Committee" label="Democratic National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="35527" end="35559" title="assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="assassination of John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="35622" end="35633" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="35658" end="35667" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281540" start="35680" end="35728" title="Attack on Camp Holloway" label="attack on a U.S. military installation at Pleiku"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="35930" end="35943" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="35982" end="35995" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q369724" start="37815" end="37825" title="Tom Lehrer" label="Tom Lehrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="37915" end="37927" title="progressivism" label="progressives"/>
<link wikidata="Q310819" start="38361" end="38374" title="Johnny Carson" label="Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338655" start="38384" end="38400" title="The Tonight Show" label="The Tonight Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="38444" end="38457" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729388" start="38737" end="38768" title="The Dean Martin Celebrity Roast" label="The Dean Martin Celebrity Roast"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="39047" end="39068" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="39271" end="39277" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q48745" start="39501" end="39518" title="Lee Harvey Oswald" label="Lee Harvey Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q773400" start="39771" end="39792" title="Jamesburg, New Jersey" label="Jamesburg, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="40284" end="40291" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="40533" end="40541" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="40620" end="40638" title="Jakarta, Indonesia" label="Jakarta, Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44819" start="40762" end="40769" title="Suharto" label="Suharto"/>
<link wikidata="Q63409947" start="41527" end="41542" title="Wiley A Branton" label="Wiley A Branton"/>
<link wikidata="Q377682" start="41728" end="41739" title="Watts riots" label="Watts riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376143" start="42377" end="42396" title="Nicholas Katzenbach" label="Nicholas Katzenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296423" start="42402" end="42421" title="White House Counsel" label="White House Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19359605" start="42422" end="42434" title="Lee C. White" label="Lee C. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="42773" end="42786" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q274948" start="43484" end="43507" title="Prime Minister of Japan" label="Prime Minister of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179871" start="43508" end="43519" title="Eisaku Satō" label="Eisaku Satō"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="43923" end="43959" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="43960" end="43973" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537895" start="44218" end="44234" title="George Christian (journalist)" label="George Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="44481" end="44489" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="44666" end="44683" title="Brussels, Belgium" label="Brussels, Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q380550" start="45255" end="45270" title="Eugene McCarthy" label="Eugene McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="45299" end="45315" title="Opposition to the U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War" label="anti-Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899221" start="45424" end="45445" title="New Hampshire primary" label="New Hampshire primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="45780" end="45797" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127698512" start="45988" end="46036" title="Withdrawal of Lyndon B. Johnson from the 1968 United States presidential election" label="withdrawing from his race for a second full term"/>
<link wikidata="Q533214" start="46173" end="46184" title="Fred R. Harris" label="Fred Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="46188" end="46196" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="46201" end="46215" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="47242" end="47270" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="47387" end="47402" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="47406" end="47418" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="47584" end="47604" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255743" start="48439" end="48459" title="Democratic Party presidential primaries, 1968" label="Democratic primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344194" start="48831" end="48854" title="Robert F. Kennedy presidential campaign, 1968" label="Kennedy&amp;#x27;s campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187550" start="49118" end="49150" title="Robert F. Kennedy assassination" label="Senator Kennedy was assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q456685" start="49183" end="49199" title="Ambassador Hotel (Los Angeles)" label="Ambassador Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q83516" start="49443" end="49459" title="1968 Democratic National Convention" label="party convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q319867" start="49648" end="49657" title="Ed Muskie" label="Ed Muskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="49661" end="49666" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q159085" start="49716" end="49726" title="Grant Park (Chicago)" label="Grant Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666325" start="49753" end="49779" title="International Amphitheatre" label="International Amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381720" start="49850" end="49873" title="1968 Democratic National Convention protest activity" label="gatherings and protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="49890" end="49911" title="Opposition to the Vietnam War" label="antiwar demonstrators"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="49944" end="49959" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q295267" start="49996" end="50012" title="Richard J. Daley" label="Richard J. Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="50834" end="50856" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="51236" end="51248" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="popular vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141571" start="51869" end="51887" title="Macalester College" label="Macalester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="51896" end="51919" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="51979" end="52002" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q295267" start="52085" end="52101" title="Richard J. Daley" label="Richard J. Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130024" start="52381" end="52399" title="Issues and Answers" label="Issues and Answers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414246" start="52910" end="52949" title="United States National Security Advisor" label="United States National Security Advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="52950" end="52965" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q164463" start="54984" end="55002" title="Larry O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Larry O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185863" start="55026" end="55055" title="Democratic National Committee" label="Democratic National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994973" start="55197" end="55215" title="Cambodian Campaign" label="Cambodian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q42916379" start="55748" end="55752" title="1970 United States Senate election in Minnesota" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095726" start="56033" end="56048" title="Clark MacGregor" label="Clark MacGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348265" start="56263" end="56267" title="1976 U.S. Senate election" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645850" start="56473" end="56477" title="92nd United States Congress" label="92nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645925" start="56479" end="56483" title="93rd United States Congress" label="93rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147858" start="56485" end="56489" title="94th United States Congress" label="94th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646042" start="56512" end="56525" title="95th United States Congress" label="95th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673148" start="56556" end="56580" title="United States Congress Joint Economic Committee" label="Joint Economic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745611" start="56866" end="56897" title="Americans for Democratic Action" label="Americans for Democratic Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055874" start="57347" end="57371" title="University of Bridgeport" label="University of Bridgeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q112811013" start="58179" end="58200" title="United Rubber Workers" label="United Rubber Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="58410" end="58440" title="United States Attorney General" label="United States Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347566" start="58441" end="58457" title="John N. Mitchell" label="John N. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="58919" end="58931" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="59307" end="59319" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="59617" end="59637" title="Milwaukee, Wisconsin" label="Milwaukee, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="59669" end="59688" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="60151" end="60160" title="Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q633113" start="60439" end="60452" title="Archibald Cox" label="Archibald Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457886" start="61036" end="61059" title="Bethesda Naval Hospital" label="Bethesda Naval Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889152" start="61337" end="61351" title="Mike Mansfield" label="Mike Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q535779" start="62915" end="62930" title="Sara Jane Moore" label="Sara Jane Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350459" start="63998" end="64016" title="Robert Treat Hotel" label="Robert Treat Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575004" start="65241" end="65276" title="1972 Democratic National Convention" label="1972 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q201516" start="65280" end="65300" title="Miami Beach, Florida" label="Miami Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="66284" end="66298" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="66330" end="66341" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="66716" end="66729" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980731" start="66871" end="66898" title="New Jersey Democratic Party" label="New Jersey Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="67310" end="67322" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038574" start="67436" end="67441" title="draft (politics)" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q719349" start="68484" end="68496" title="neutron bomb" label="neutron bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q561547" start="68718" end="68739" title="Augustus F. Hawkins" label="Rep. Augustus Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941737" start="68777" end="68813" title="Humphrey-Hawkins Full Employment Act" label="Humphrey-Hawkins Full Employment Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440396" start="69217" end="69238" title="Federal Reserve Board" label="Federal Reserve Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813203" start="69317" end="69332" title="Party leaders of the United States Senate" label="Majority Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q276524" start="69369" end="69380" title="Robert Byrd" label="Robert Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="69384" end="69397" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140848" start="69451" end="69479" title="Deputy President pro tempore of the United States Senate" label="Deputy President pro tempore"/>
<link wikidata="Q504775" start="69572" end="69586" title="bladder cancer" label="bladder cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="69779" end="69803" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q179969" start="69870" end="69883" title="Air Force One" label="Air Force One"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="70445" end="70458" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926770" start="70712" end="70730" title="Waverly, Minnesota" label="Waverly, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70772" end="70784" title="Lying in state#United States" label="lay in state"/>
<link wikidata="Q918708" start="70792" end="70820" title="United States Capitol rotunda" label="rotundas of the U.S. Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789816" start="70829" end="70852" title="Minnesota State Capitol" label="Minnesota State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801158" start="70878" end="70895" title="Lakewood Cemetery" label="Lakewood Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="70967" end="70974" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288076" start="70984" end="70995" title="Lee Metcalf" label="Lee Metcalf"/>
<link wikidata="Q346570" start="71345" end="71357" title="Rudy Perpich" label="Rudy Perpich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839513" start="72105" end="72120" title="Alpha Phi Alpha" label="Alpha Phi Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175374" start="72324" end="72340" title="Jefferson Awards for Public Service" label="Jefferson Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q721743" start="72375" end="72399" title="Congressional Gold Medal" label="Congressional Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="72426" end="72455" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="72488" end="72516" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598651" start="72528" end="72550" title="Great Americans series" label="Great Americans series"/>
<link wikidata="Q56641609" start="72799" end="72815" title="Arnold A. Offner" label="Arnold A. Offner"/>
<link wikidata="Q875749" start="74048" end="74092" title="Minneapolis-Saint Paul International Airport" label="Minneapolis-Saint Paul International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072186" start="74106" end="74134" title="Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome" label="Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="74186" end="74203" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="74211" end="74235" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q604879" start="74244" end="74259" title="Minnesota Twins" label="Minnesota Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="74263" end="74284" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927315" start="74358" end="74401" title="Hubert H. Humphrey School of Public Affairs" label="Hubert H. Humphrey School of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="74409" end="74432" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q15226468" start="74570" end="74597" title="Hubert H. Humphrey Building" label="Hubert H. Humphrey Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="74605" end="74644" title="United States Department of Health and Human Services" label="Department of Health and Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820349" start="74671" end="74696" title="Hubert H. Humphrey Bridge" label="Hubert H. Humphrey Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432847" start="74706" end="74717" title="Florida State Road 520" label="FL S.R. 520"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060726" start="74727" end="74746" title="Indian River Lagoon" label="Indian River Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q986168" start="74755" end="74760" title="Cocoa, Florida" label="Cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q991010" start="74765" end="74779" title="Merritt Island" label="Merritt Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q488517" start="74783" end="74806" title="Brevard County, Florida" label="Brevard County, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q891359" start="74849" end="74870" title="Bolingbrook, Illinois" label="Bolingbrook, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682073" start="74932" end="74980" title="Los Angeles County Department of Health Services" label="Los Angeles County Department of Health Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="75259" end="75282" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926770" start="75329" end="75347" title="Waverly, Minnesota" label="Waverly, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045704" start="75390" end="75412" title="Robbinsdale, Minnesota" label="Robbinsdale, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356530" start="75433" end="75447" title="Franklin Cover" label="Franklin Cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658625" start="75482" end="75502" title="A Woman Called Golda" label="A Woman Called Golda"/>
<link wikidata="Q352180" start="75512" end="75528" title="Bradley Whitford" label="Bradley Whitford"/>
<link wikidata="Q21527454" start="75563" end="75574" title="All the Way (2016 film)" label="All the Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q20973982" start="75584" end="75595" title="Doug McKeon" label="Doug McKeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010864" start="75619" end="75622" title="LBJ (2016 film)" label="LBJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907430" start="75670" end="75691" title="Politics of Minnesota" label="Politics of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535685" start="75715" end="75728" title="Skip Humphrey" label="Skip Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="75765" end="75774" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715535" start="75791" end="75858" title="List of United States Congress members who died in office (1950–99)" label="List of United States Congress members who died in office (1950–99)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176997" start="75861" end="75879" title="Humphrey objection" label="Humphrey objection"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139713" start="76091" end="76101" title="Dan Cohen (politician)" label="Cohen, Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q513338" start="76201" end="76215" title="Dallek, Robert" label="Dallek, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q101115991" start="77505" end="77517" title="Jeff Taylor (politician)" label="Taylor, Jeff"/>
<link wikidata="Q16011841" start="78116" end="78129" title="Edgar Berman" label="Berman, Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727459" start="80003" end="80017" title="The Contenders" label="The Contenders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42640" wikidata="Q11132" url="?curid=42640" title="Sandra Day O'Connor">
<text>Sandra Day O&#x27;Connor (March 26, 1930 – December 1, 2023) was an American attorney, politician, and jurist who served as an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States from 1981 to 2006. Nominated by President Ronald Reagan, O&#x27;Connor was the first woman to serve as a U.S. Supreme Court justice. A moderate conservative, she was considered a swing vote. Before O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s tenure on the Court, she was an Arizona state judge and earlier an elected legislator in Arizona, serving as the first female majority leader of a state senate as the Republican leader in the Arizona Senate. Upon her nomination to the Court, O&#x27;Connor was confirmed unanimously by the United States Senate.

O&#x27;Connor usually sided with the Court&#x27;s conservative bloc but on occasion sided with the Court&#x27;s liberal members. She often wrote concurring opinions that sought to limit the reach of the majority holding. Her majority opinions in landmark cases include &quot;Grutter v. Bollinger&quot; and &quot;Hamdi v. Rumsfeld&quot;. In 2000, she wrote in part the &quot;per curiam&quot; majority opinion in &quot;Bush v. Gore&quot; and in 1992 was one of three co-authors of the lead opinion in &quot;Planned Parenthood v. Casey&quot; that preserved legal access to abortion in the United States. On July 1, 2005, O&#x27;Connor announced her retirement, effective upon the confirmation of a successor. At the time of her death, O&#x27;Connor was the last living member of the Burger Court. Samuel Alito was nominated to take her seat in October 2005, and joined the Supreme Court on January 31, 2006.

During her term on the Court, O&#x27;Connor was regarded as among the most powerful women in the world. After retiring, she succeeded Henry Kissinger as the chancellor of the College of William &amp; Mary. In 2009, she was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Barack Obama.

==Early life and education==

Sandra Day was born on March 26, 1930, in El Paso, Texas, the daughter of Harry Alfred Day, a rancher, and Ada Mae (Wilkey). She grew up on a 198,000-acre family cattle ranch near Duncan, Arizona and in El Paso, where she attended school. Her home was nine miles from the nearest paved road, and did not have running water or electricity until Sandra was seven years old. As a youth she owned a .22-caliber rifle, and would shoot coyotes and jackrabbits. She began driving as soon as she could see over the dashboard, and had to learn to change flat tires herself. Sandra had two younger siblings, a sister and a brother, respectively eight and ten years her junior. Her sister Ann Day was a member of the Arizona Legislature from 1990 to 2000. Her brother was H. Alan Day, a lifelong rancher, with whom she wrote &quot;Lazy B: Growing up on a Cattle Ranch in the American Southwest&quot; (2002), about their childhood experiences on the ranch. For most of her early schooling, Day lived in El Paso with her maternal grandmother, and attended school at the Radford School for Girls, a private school, as the family ranch was very distant from any school, although Day was able to return to the ranch for holidays and the summer. Day did spend her eighth-grade year living at the ranch and riding a bus 32 miles to school. She graduated sixth in her class at Austin High School in El Paso in 1946.

When she was 16 years old, Day enrolled at Stanford University and later graduated &quot;magna cum laude&quot; with a B.A. in economics in 1950. She continued at Stanford Law School for her law degree in 1952. There, she served on the &quot;Stanford Law Review&quot; whose then presiding editor-in-chief was future Supreme Court chief justice William Rehnquist. Day and Rehnquist also dated in 1950. The relationship ended upon Rehnquist&#x27;s graduation and move to Washington, D.C.; however, in 1951, he proposed marriage in a letter, but Day did not accept the proposal (which was one of four she received while a student at Stanford). Day achieved the Order of the Coif, indicating she was in the top 10 percent of her class.

== Early career and marriage ==

While in her final year at Stanford Law School, Day began dating John Jay O&#x27;Connor III, who was one class year behind her. On December 20, 1952, six months after her graduation, O&#x27;Connor and Day married at her family&#x27;s ranch.

Upon graduation from law school in 1952, O&#x27;Connor had difficulty finding a paying job as an attorney in a law firm because of her gender. O&#x27;Connor found employment as a deputy county attorney in San Mateo, California, after she offered to work for no salary and without an office, sharing space with a secretary. After a few months, she began drawing a small salary as she performed legal research and wrote memos. She worked with San Mateo County District Attorney Louis Dematteis and deputy district attorney Keith Sorensen.

When her husband was drafted, O&#x27;Connor decided to go with him to work in Germany as a civilian attorney for the Army&#x27;s Quartermaster Corps. They remained there for three years before returning to the States where they settled in Maricopa County, Arizona, to begin their family. They had three sons: Scott (born 1958), Brian (born 1960), and Jay (born 1962). Following Brian&#x27;s birth, O&#x27;Connor took a five-year hiatus from the practice of law.

She volunteered in various political organizations, such as the Maricopa County Young Republicans, and served on Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater&#x27;s presidential campaign in 1964.

O&#x27;Connor served as assistant Attorney General of Arizona from 1965 to 1969. In 1969, the governor of Arizona appointed O&#x27;Connor to fill a vacancy in the Arizona Senate. She ran for and won the election for the seat the following year. By 1973, she became the first woman to serve as Arizona&#x27;s or any state&#x27;s majority leader. She developed a reputation as a skilled negotiator and a moderate. After serving two full terms, O&#x27;Connor decided to leave the Senate.

In 1974, O&#x27;Connor was appointed to the Maricopa County Superior Court, serving from 1975 to 1979 when she was elevated to the Arizona Court of Appeals. 

In late 1977 and early 1978, she presided over an aggravated assault case against Clarence Dixon, a 22-year-old Arizona State University student who had attacked a 15-year-old girl with a metal pipe. O&#x27;Connor would find Dixon not guilty by reason of insanity and have him remanded to a state hospital. In the four-day period between O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s ruling and Dixon&#x27;s remanding to hospital, Dixon would rape and murder one of his seniors, 21-year-old Deana Lynne Bowdoin; he would not be arrested until 2001 when DNA evidence identified him, and he was executed for Bowdoin&#x27;s murder in 2022.

She served on the Court of Appeals-Division One until 1981 when she was appointed to the Supreme Court by President Ronald Reagan.

==Supreme Court career==

===Nomination and confirmation===

On July 7, 1981, Reagan – who had pledged during his 1980 presidential campaign to appoint the first woman to the Court – announced he would nominate O&#x27;Connor as an associate justice of the Supreme Court to replace the retiring Potter Stewart. O&#x27;Connor received notification from President Reagan of her nomination on the day prior to the announcement and did not know that she was a finalist for the position.

Reagan wrote in his diary on July 6, 1981: &quot;Called Judge O&#x27;Connor and told her she was my nominee for supreme court. Already the flak is starting and from my own supporters. Right to Life people say she is pro abortion. She declares abortion is personally repugnant to her. I think she&#x27;ll make a good justice.&quot; O&#x27;Connor told Reagan she did not remember whether she had supported repealing Arizona&#x27;s law banning abortion. However, she had cast a preliminary vote in the Arizona State Senate in 1970 in favor of a bill to repeal the state&#x27;s criminal-abortion statute. In 1974, O&#x27;Connor had opined against a measure to prohibit abortions in some Arizona hospitals. Anti-abortion and religious groups opposed O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s nomination because they suspected, correctly, she would not be willing to overturn &quot;Roe v. Wade.&quot; U.S. Senate Republicans, including Don Nickles of Oklahoma, Steve Symms of Idaho, and Jesse Helms of North Carolina called the White House to express their discontent over the nomination; Nickles said he and &quot;other profamily Republican senators would not support O&#x27;Connor&quot;. Helms, Nickles, and Symms nevertheless reluctantly voted for confirmation.

Reagan formally nominated O&#x27;Connor on August 19, 1981. Conservative activists such as the Reverend Jerry Falwell, Howard Phillips, and Peter Gemma also spoke out against the nomination. Gemma called the nomination &quot;a direct contradiction of the Republican platform to everything that candidate Reagan said and even President Reagan has said in regard to social issues.&quot; Gemma, the executive director of the National Pro-Life Political Action Committee, had sought to delay O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s confirmation by challenging her record, including support for the Equal Rights Amendment.

O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s confirmation hearing before the Senate Judiciary Committee began on September 9, 1981. It was the first televised confirmation hearing for a Supreme Court justice. The confirmation hearing lasted three days and largely focused on the issue of abortion. When asked, O&#x27;Connor refused to telegraph her views on abortion, and she was careful not to leave the impression that she supported abortion rights. The Judiciary Committee approved O&#x27;Connor with seventeen votes in favor and one vote of present.

On September 21, O&#x27;Connor was confirmed by the U.S. Senate with a vote of 99–0. Only Senator Max Baucus of Montana was absent from the vote. He sent O&#x27;Connor a copy of &quot;A River Runs Through It&quot; by way of apology. In her first year on the Court, she received over 60,000 letters from the public, more than any other justice in history.

=== Tenure ===
O&#x27;Connor said she felt a responsibility to demonstrate women could do the job of justice. She faced some practical concerns, including the lack of a women&#x27;s restroom near the Courtroom.

Two years after O&#x27;Connor joined the Court, &quot;The New York Times&quot; published an editorial that mentioned the &quot;nine men&quot; of the &quot;SCOTUS&quot;, or Supreme Court of the United States. O&#x27;Connor responded with a letter to the editor reminding the &quot;Times&quot; that the Court was no longer composed of nine men and referred to herself as FWOTSC (First Woman on the Supreme Court).

O&#x27;Connor was a proponent of collegiality among justices on the court, often insisting that the justices eat lunch together.

In 1993, Ruth Bader Ginsburg became the second female Supreme Court justice. O&#x27;Connor said that she felt relief from the media clamor when she no longer was the only woman on the Court. In May 2010, O&#x27;Connor warned female Supreme Court nominee Elena Kagan about the &quot;unpleasant&quot; process of confirmation hearings.

===Supreme Court jurisprudence===
Initially, O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s voting record aligned closely with the conservative William Rehnquist (voting with him 87% of the time during her first three years at the Court). From that time until 1998, O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s alignment with Rehnquist ranged from 93.4% to 63.2%, hitting above 90% in three of those years. In nine of her first 16 years on the Court, O&#x27;Connor voted with Rehnquist more than with any other justice.

Later on, as the Court&#x27;s make-up became more conservative (e.g., Anthony Kennedy replacing Lewis Powell, and Clarence Thomas replacing Thurgood Marshall), O&#x27;Connor often became the swing vote on the Court. However, she usually disappointed the Court&#x27;s more liberal bloc in contentious 5–4 decisions: from 1994 to 2004, she joined the traditional conservative bloc of Rehnquist, Antonin Scalia, Anthony Kennedy, and Thomas 82 times; she joined the liberal bloc of John Paul Stevens, David Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Stephen Breyer only 28 times.

O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s relatively small shift away from conservatives on the Court seems to have been due at least in part to Thomas&#x27; views. When Thomas and O&#x27;Connor were voting on the same side, she would typically write a separate opinion of her own, refusing to join his. In the 1992 term, O&#x27;Connor did not join a single one of Thomas&#x27;s dissents.

Some notable cases in which O&#x27;Connor joined the majority in a 5–4 decision were:
* &quot;McConnell v. FEC&quot;, , upholding the constitutionality of most of the McCain-Feingold campaign-finance bill regulating &quot;soft money&quot; contributions.
* &quot;Grutter v. Bollinger&quot;, and &quot;Gratz v. Bollinger&quot;, , O&#x27;Connor wrote the opinion of the Court in &quot;Grutter&quot; and joined the majority in &quot;Gratz&quot;. In this pair of cases, the University of Michigan&#x27;s undergraduate admissions program was held to have engaged in unconstitutional reverse discrimination, but the more limited type of affirmative action in the University of Michigan Law School&#x27;s admissions program was held to have been constitutional.
* &quot;Lockyer v. Andrade&quot;, : O&#x27;Connor wrote the majority opinion, with the four conservative justices concurring, that a 50-year to life sentence without parole for petty shoplifting a few children&#x27;s videotapes under California&#x27;s three strikes law was not cruel and unusual punishment under the Eighth Amendment because there was no &quot;clearly established&quot; law to that effect. Leandro Andrade, a Latino nine-year Army veteran and father of three, will be eligible for parole in 2046 at age 87.
* &quot;Zelman v. Simmons-Harris&quot;, , O&#x27;Connor joined the majority holding that the use of school vouchers for religious schools did not violate the First Amendment&#x27;s Establishment Clause.
* &quot;United States v. Lopez&quot;, : O&#x27;Connor joined a majority holding unconstitutional the Gun-Free School Zones Act as beyond Congress&#x27; Commerce Clause power.
* &quot;Bush v. Gore&quot;, , O&#x27;Connor joined with four other justices on December 12, 2000, to rule on the &quot;Bush v. Gore&quot; case that ceased challenges to the results of the 2000 presidential election (ruling to stop the ongoing Florida election recount and to allow no further recounts). This case effectively ended Al Gore&#x27;s hopes to become president. Some legal scholars have argued that she should have recused herself from this case, citing several reports that she became upset when the media initially announced that Gore had won Florida, with her husband explaining that they would have to wait another four years before retiring to Arizona. O&#x27;Connor expressed surprise that the decision became controversial. Some people in Washington stopped shaking her hand after the decision, and Arthur Miller confronted her about it at the Kennedy Center.

O&#x27;Connor played an important role in other notable cases, such as:
* &quot;Webster v. Reproductive Health Services&quot;, : This decision upheld as constitutional state restrictions on second trimester abortions that are not necessary to protect maternal health, contrary to the original trimester requirements in &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot;. Although O&#x27;Connor joined the majority, which also included Rehnquist, Scalia, Kennedy, and Byron White, in a concurring opinion she refused to explicitly overturn &quot;Roe&quot;.

On February 22, 2005, with Rehnquist and Stevens (who were senior to her) absent, she became the senior justice presiding over oral arguments in the case of &quot;Kelo v. City of New London&quot; and becoming the first woman to do so before the Court.

====First Amendment====
O&#x27;Connor was unpredictable in many of her court decisions, especially those regarding First Amendment Establishment Clause issues. Barry Lynn, executive director of Americans United for Separation of Church and State, said, &quot;O&#x27;Connor was a conservative, but she saw the complexity of church-state issues and tried to choose a course that respected the country&#x27;s religious diversity&quot; (Hudson 2005). O&#x27;Connor voted in favor of religious institutions, such as in &quot;Rosenberger v. University of Virginia&quot; (1995), &quot;Mitchell v. Helms&quot; (2000), and &quot;Zelman v. Simmons-Harris&quot; (2002). Conversely, in &quot;Lee v. Weisman&quot; she was part of the majority in the case that saw religious prayer and pressure to stand in silence at a graduation ceremony as part of a religious act that coerced people to support or participate in religion, which the Establishment Clause strictly prohibits. This is consistent with a similar case, &quot;Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe&quot;, involving prayer at a school football game. In this case, O&#x27;Connor joined the majority opinion that stated prayer at school football games violates the Establishment Clause. O&#x27;Connor was the first justice to articulate the &quot;no endorsement&quot; standard for the Establishment Clause. In &quot;Lynch v. Donnelly&quot;, O&#x27;Connor signed onto a five-justice majority opinion holding that a nativity scene in a public Christmas display did not violate the First Amendment. She penned a concurrence in that case, opining that the crèche did not violate the Establishment Clause because it did not express an endorsement or disapproval of any religion. In &quot;Board of County Commissioners, Wabaunsee County, Kansas v Umbehr&quot; (1996) she upheld the application of first amendment free speech rights to independent contractors working for public bodies, being unpersuaded &quot;that there is a &#x27;difference of constitutional magnitude&#x27; ... between independent contractors and employees&quot; in circumstances where a contractor has been critical of a governing body.

==== Fourth Amendment ====
According to law professor Jeffrey Rosen, &quot;O&#x27;Connor was an eloquent opponent of intrusive group searches that threatened privacy without increasing security. In a 1983 opinion upholding searches by drug-sniffing dogs, she recognized that a search is most likely to be considered constitutionally reasonable if it is very effective at discovering contraband without revealing &quot;innocent but embarrassing&quot; information.&quot; Washington College of Law professor Andrew Taslitz, referencing O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s dissent in a 2001 case, said of her Fourth Amendment jurisprudence: &quot;O&#x27;Connor recognizes that needless humiliation of an individual is an important factor in determining Fourth Amendment reasonableness.&quot; O&#x27;Connor once quoted the social contract theory of John Locke as influencing her views on the reasonableness and constitutionality of government action.

====Cases involving race====
In &quot;McCleskey v. Kemp&quot; (1987), O&#x27;Connor joined a 5–4 majority that voted to uphold the death penalty for an African American man, Warren McCleskey, convicted of killing a white police officer, despite statistical evidence that Black defendants were more likely to receive the death penalty than others both in Georgia and in the U.S. as a whole.

In the 1990 and 1995 &quot;Missouri v. Jenkins&quot; rulings, O&#x27;Connor voted with the majority that Federal district courts had no authority to require the state of Missouri to increase school funding to counteract racial inequality. In the 1991 case &quot;Freeman v. Pitts&quot;, O&#x27;Connor joined a concurring opinion in a plurality, agreeing that a school district that had formerly been under judicial review for racial segregation could be freed of this review, even though not all desegregation targets had been met. Law professor Herman Schwartz criticized these rulings, writing that in both cases &quot;both the fact and effects of segregation were still present&quot;.

In 1996&#x27;s &quot;Shaw v. Hunt&quot; and &quot;Shaw v. Reno&quot;, O&#x27;Connor joined a Rehnquist opinion, following an earlier precedent from an opinion she authored in 1993, in which the Court struck down an electoral districting plan designed to facilitate the election of two Black representatives out of 12 from North Carolina, a state that had not had any Black representative since Reconstruction, despite being approximately 20% Blackthe Court held that the districts were unacceptably gerrymandered and O&#x27;Connor called the odd shape of the district in question, North Carolina&#x27;s 12th, &quot;bizarre&quot;.

Law professor Herman Schwartz called O&#x27;Connor &quot;the Court&#x27;s leader in its assault on racially oriented affirmative action&quot;, although she joined with the Court in upholding the constitutionality of limited race-based admissions to universities.

In 2003, O&#x27;Connor authored a majority Supreme Court opinion (&quot;Grutter v. Bollinger&quot;) saying racial affirmative action should not be constitutional permanently, but long enough to correct past discriminationwith an approximate limit of around 25 years.

====Abortion====
The Christian right element in the Reagan coalition strongly supported him in 1980, in the belief that he would appoint Supreme Court justices to overturn &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot;. They were astonished and dismayed when his first appointment was O&#x27;Connor, who they feared would tolerate abortion. They worked hard to defeat her confirmation but failed. In her confirmation hearings and early days on the Court, O&#x27;Connor was carefully ambiguous on the issue of abortion, as some conservatives questioned her anti-abortion credentials based on some of her votes in the Arizona legislature. O&#x27;Connor generally dissented from 1980s opinions which took an expansive view of &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot;; she criticized that decision&#x27;s &quot;trimester approach&quot; sharply in her dissent in &quot;City of Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health.&quot; (1983) She criticized &quot;Roe&quot; in &quot;Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists&quot; (1986): &quot;... I dispute not only the wisdom but also the legitimacy of the Court&#x27;s attempt to discredit and pre-empt state abortion regulation regardless of the interests it serves and the impact it has.&quot; In 1989, O&#x27;Connor stated during the deliberations over the &quot;Webster&quot; case that she would not overrule &quot;Roe&quot;. While on the Court, O&#x27;Connor did not vote to strike down any restrictions on abortion until &quot;Hodgson v. Minnesota&quot; in 1990.

O&#x27;Connor allowed certain limits to be placed on access to abortion, but supported the right to abortion established by &quot;Roe&quot;. In the landmark ruling &quot;Planned Parenthood v. Casey&quot; (1992), O&#x27;Connor used a test she had originally developed in &quot;City of Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health&quot; to limit the holding of &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot;, opening up a legislative portal where a State could enact measures so long as they did not place an &quot;undue burden&quot; on a woman&#x27;s right to an abortion. &quot;Casey&quot; revised downward the standard of scrutiny federal courts would apply to state abortion restrictions, a major departure from &quot;Roe&quot;. However, it preserved &quot;Roe&quot;&#x27;s core constitutional precept: that the Fourteenth Amendment implies and protects a woman&#x27;s fundamental right to control the outcomes of her reproductive actions. Writing the plurality opinion for the Court, O&#x27;Connor, along with Kennedy and Souter, famously declared: &quot;At the heart of liberty is the right to define one&#x27;s own concept of existence, of meaning, of the universe, and of the mystery of human life. Beliefs about these matters could not define the attributes of personhood were they formed under compulsion of the State.&quot;

====Commentary and analysis====
O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s case-by-case approach routinely placed her in the center of the Court and drew both criticism and praise. &quot;Washington Post&quot; columnist Charles Krauthammer, for example, described her as lacking a judicial philosophy and instead displaying &quot;political positioning embedded in a social agenda.&quot; Conservative commentator Ramesh Ponnuru wrote that, even though O&#x27;Connor &quot;has voted reasonably well&quot;, her tendency to issue very case-specific rulings &quot;undermines the predictability of the law and aggrandizes the judicial role.&quot;

Law clerks serving the Court in 2000 speculated that the decision she reached in &quot;Bush v. Gore&quot; was based on a desire to appear fair, rather than on any legal rationale, pointing to a memo she sent out the night before the decision was issued that used entirely different logic to reach the same result. They also characterized her approach to cases as deciding on &quot;gut feelings&quot;.

=== Other activities while serving on the Court ===

In 2003, she wrote a book titled &quot;The Majesty of the Law: Reflections of a Supreme Court Justice&quot; (). In 2005, she wrote a children&#x27;s book, &quot;Chico: A True Story from the Childhood of the First Woman Supreme Court Justice&quot;, named for her favorite horse, which offered an autobiographical depiction of her childhood.

==Retirement==
On December 12, 2000, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; reported that O&#x27;Connor was reluctant to retire with a Democrat in the presidency: &quot;At an Election Night party at the Washington, D.C., home of Mary Ann Stoessel, widow of former Ambassador Walter Stoessel, the justice&#x27;s husband, John O&#x27;Connor, mentioned to others her desire to step down, according to three witnesses. But Mr. O&#x27;Connor said his wife would be reluctant to retire if a Democrat were in the White House and would choose her replacement. Justice O&#x27;Connor declined to comment.&quot;

By 2005, the composition of the Court had been unchanged for eleven years, the second-longest period in American history without any such change. Rehnquist was widely expected to be the first justice to retire during Bush&#x27;s term, owing to his age and his battle with cancer, although rumors of O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s possible retirement circulated as well.

On July 1, 2005, O&#x27;Connor announced her intention to retire. In her letter to Bush, she stated that her retirement from active service would take effect upon the confirmation of her successor. Her letter did not provide a reason for her departure; however, a Supreme Court spokeswoman confirmed O&#x27;Connor was leaving to spend time with her husband.

On July 19, Bush nominated D.C. Circuit Judge John Roberts to succeed O&#x27;Connor. O&#x27;Connor heard the news over the car radio on the way back from a fishing trip. She described Roberts soon after the nomination as &quot;good in every way, except he&#x27;s not a woman&quot;.

O&#x27;Connor had expected to leave the Court before the next term started on October 3, 2005. However, Rehnquist died on September 3, creating an immediate vacancy on the Court. Two days later, Bush withdrew Roberts as his nominee for her seat and instead appointed him to fill the vacant office of Chief Justice. O&#x27;Connor agreed to stay on the Court until her replacement was named and confirmed. She spoke at the late chief justice&#x27;s funeral. On October 3, Bush nominated White House Counsel Harriet Miers to replace O&#x27;Connor. After much criticism and controversy over her nomination, on October 27, Miers asked Bush to withdraw her nomination. Bush accepted, reopening the search for O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s successor.

The continued delays in confirming a successor further extended O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s time on the Court. She continued to hear oral argument on cases, including cases dealing with controversial issues such as physician-assisted suicide and abortion. O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s last Court opinion, &quot;Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of New England&quot;, written for a unanimous court, was a procedural decision that involved a challenge to a New Hampshire abortion law.

On October 31, Bush nominated Third Circuit Judge Samuel Alito to replace O&#x27;Connor; Alito was confirmed by a 58–42 vote and was sworn in on January 31, 2006. After retiring, she continued to hear cases and rendered over a dozen opinions in federal appellate courts across the country, filling in as a substitute judge when vacations or vacancies left their three-member panels understaffed. On Alito&#x27;s nomination, O&#x27;Connor said, &quot;I&#x27;ve often said, it&#x27;s wonderful to be the first to do something but I didn&#x27;t want to be the last. If I didn&#x27;t do a good job, it might&#x27;ve been the last and indeed when I retired, I was not replaced, then, by a woman which gives one pause to think &#x27;Oh, what did I do wrong that led to this.

==Post-Supreme Court career==
In her retirement, O&#x27;Connor continued to speak and organize conferences on the issue of judicial independence. During a March 2006 speech at Georgetown University, O&#x27;Connor said some political attacks on the independence of the courts pose a direct threat to the constitutional freedoms of Americans. She said &quot;Any reform of the system is debatable as long as it is not motivated by retaliation for decisions that political leaders disagree with&quot;, also noting that she was &quot;against judicial reforms driven by nakedly partisan reasoning.&quot; &quot;Courts interpret the law as it was written, not as the congressmen might have wished it was written&quot;, and &quot;it takes a lot of degeneration before a country falls into dictatorship, but we should avoid these ends by avoiding these beginnings.&quot;

On November 19, 2008, O&#x27;Connor published an introductory essay on a themed judicial accountability issue in the &quot;Denver University Law Review&quot;. She called for a better public understanding of judicial accountability. On November 7, 2007, at a conference on her landmark opinion in &quot;Strickland v. Washington&quot; (1984) sponsored by the Constitution Project, O&#x27;Connor highlighted the lack of proper legal representation for many of the poorest defendants. O&#x27;Connor also urged the creation of a system for &quot;merit selection for judges&quot;, a cause for which she had frequently advocated.

On August 7, 2008, O&#x27;Connor and Abdurrahman Wahid, former President of Indonesia, wrote an editorial in the &quot;Financial Times&quot; stating concerns about the threatened imprisonment of Malaysian opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim.

In October 2008, O&#x27;Connor spoke on racial equality in education at a conference hosted by the Charles Hamilton Houston Institute for Race and Justice at Harvard Law School. Later in the conference, she was awarded the Charles Hamilton Houston Justice Award alongside Desmond Tutu and Dolores Huerta.

Following the Court&#x27;s &quot;Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission&quot; decision on corporate political spending, O&#x27;Connor offered measured criticism of the decision, telling Georgetown law students and lawyers, &quot;that the Court has created an unwelcome new path for wealthy interests to exert influence on judicial elections.&quot;

O&#x27;Connor argued in favor of President Barack Obama naming the replacement for Antonin Scalia in February 2016, mere days after Scalia&#x27;s death, opposing Republican arguments that the next president should get to fill the vacancy. She said, &quot;I think we need somebody there to do the job now and let&#x27;s get on with it&quot;; and that &quot;[y]ou just have to pick the best person you can under the circumstances, as the appointing authority must do. It&#x27;s an important position and one that we care about as a nation and as a people. And I wish the president well as he makes choices and goes down that line. It&#x27;s hard.&quot;

Judge William H. Pryor Jr., a conservative jurist, has criticized O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s speeches and op-eds for hyperbole and factual inaccuracy, based in part on O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s opinions as to whether judges face a rougher time in the public eye today than in the past.

O&#x27;Connor reflected on her time on the Supreme Court by saying that she regretted the Court hearing the &quot;Bush v. Gore&quot; case in 2000 because it &quot;stirred up the public&quot; and &quot;gave the Court a less-than-perfect reputation.&quot; She told the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; that &quot;Maybe the Court should have said, &#x27;We&#x27;re not going to take it, goodbye,&#x27; ... It turned out the election authorities in Florida hadn&#x27;t done a real good job there and kind of messed it up. And probably the Supreme Court added to the problem at the end of the day.&quot;

===Activities and memberships===

As a retired Supreme Court justice, O&#x27;Connor continued to receive a full salary, maintained a staffed office with at least one law clerk, and heard cases on a part-time basis in federal district courts and courts of appeals as a visiting judge. By 2008, O&#x27;Connor had sat for cases with the 2nd, 8th, and 9th Circuits. O&#x27;Connor heard an Arizona voting rights case which the Supreme Court later reviewed. In &quot;Arizona v. Inter Tribal Council of Arizona&quot;, a 7–2 majority affirmed O&#x27;Connor and the rest of 9th Circuit panel, and struck down a provision of Arizona&#x27;s voting registration law. O&#x27;Connor hired a law clerk for the October 2015 term, but did not hire a law clerk for the subsequent term.
O&#x27;Connor was elected as an honorary fellow of the National Academy of Public Administration in 2005. In October that year, O&#x27;Connor accepted the largely ceremonial role of becoming the 23rd Chancellor of the College of William &amp; Mary. O&#x27;Connor continued in the role until 2012. O&#x27;Connor was a member of the 2006 Iraq Study Group, appointed by the U.S. Congress. From 2006, she was a trustee on the board of the Rockefeller Foundation. O&#x27;Connor chaired the Jamestown 2007 celebration, commemorating the 400th anniversary of the founding of the colony at Jamestown, Virginia, in 1607. The Sandra Day O&#x27;Connor Project on the State of the Judiciary, named for O&#x27;Connor, held annual conferences from 2006 through 2008 on the independence of the judiciary. O&#x27;Connor was a member of both the American Philosophical Society and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.

==== Teaching ====
In 2006, O&#x27;Connor taught a course on the Supreme Court at the University of Arizona&#x27;s James E. Rogers College of Law as a distinguished jurist in residence. On April 5, 2006, Arizona State University named its law school the Sandra Day O&#x27;Connor College of Law in her honor.

==== Publishing ====

O&#x27;Connor wrote the 2013 book &quot;Out of Order: Stories from the History of the Supreme Court&quot;.

==== Public speaking engagements ====
On May 15, 2006, O&#x27;Connor gave the commencement address at the William &amp; Mary School of Law, where she said that judicial independence is &quot;under serious attack at both the state and national level&quot;. In 2008, O&#x27;Connor was named an inaugural Harry Rathbun Visiting Fellow by the Office for Religious Life at Stanford University. On April 22, 2008, she gave &quot;Harry&#x27;s Last Lecture on a Meaningful Life&quot; in honor of the former Stanford Law professor who shaped her undergraduate and law careers. On September 17, 2014, O&#x27;Connor appeared on the television show &quot;Jeopardy!&quot; and provided a couple of video answers to the category &#x27;Supreme Court&#x27; which appeared on the show. On the same day in Concord, New Hampshire, she gave a talk alongside her former colleague Justice David Souter about the importance of meaningful civics education in the United States.

==== Non-profits and philanthropic activity ====
In February 2009, O&#x27;Connor launched Our Courts, a website she created to offer interactive civics lessons to students and teachers because she was concerned about the lack of knowledge among most young Americans about how their government works. She also served as a co-chair with Lee H. Hamilton for the Campaign for the Civic Mission of Schools. On March 3, 2009, O&#x27;Connor appeared on the satirical television program &quot;The Daily Show&quot; with Jon Stewart to promote the website. In August 2009, the website added two online interactive games. The initiative expanded, becoming iCivics in May 2010 offering free lesson plans, games, and interactive videogames for middle and high school educators. By 2015, the iCivics games had 72,000 teachers as registered users and its games had been played 30 million times.

O&#x27;Connor served on the board of trustees of the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia, a museum dedicated to the U.S. Constitution. By November 2015, O&#x27;Connor had transitioned to being a trustee emeritus for the center. In April 2013, the board of directors of Justice at Stake, a national judicial reform advocacy organization, announced that O&#x27;Connor would be joining the organization as honorary chair.

In 2009, O&#x27;Connor founded the 501(c)(3) non-profit organization now known as the Sandra Day O&#x27;Connor Institute. Its programs are dedicated to promoting civil discourse, civic engagement, and civics education. In 2019, her former adobe residence in Arizona, curated by the O&#x27;Connor Institute, was listed on the National Register of Historic Places. In 2022, the Institute launched Civics for Life, its multigenerational digital platform.

O&#x27;Connor was a member and president of the Junior League of Phoenix.

O&#x27;Connor was a founding co-chair of the National Advisory Board at the National Institute for Civil Discourse (NICD). The institute was created at the University of Arizona after the 2011 shooting of former Congresswoman Gabby Giffords that killed six people and wounded 13 others.

==Personal life, illness and death==
Upon her appointment to the Supreme Court, O&#x27;Connor and her husband moved to the Kalorama area of Washington, D.C. The O&#x27;Connors became active in the Washington, D.C., social scene. O&#x27;Connor played tennis and golf in her spare time. She was a baptized member of the Episcopal Church.

O&#x27;Connor was successfully treated for breast cancer in 1988, and she also had her appendix removed that year. That same year, John O&#x27;Connor left the Washington, D.C., law firm of Miller &amp; Chevalier for a practice that required him to split his time between Washington, D.C., and Phoenix.

Her husband suffered from Alzheimer&#x27;s disease for nearly 20 years, until his death in 2009, and she became involved in raising awareness of the disease. After retiring from the Court, O&#x27;Connor moved back to Phoenix, Arizona.

Around 2013, O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s friends and colleagues noticed that she was becoming more forgetful and less talkative. By 2017, back problems led to her needing to use a wheelchair, and to her moving to an assisted living facility. In October 2018, O&#x27;Connor announced her effective retirement from public life after disclosing that she had been diagnosed with the early stages of Alzheimer&#x27;s-like dementia.

On May 7, 2016, her younger sister, Ann Day, was killed in a car accident in Tucson, Arizona, as a result of a collision with a drunk driver.

On December 1, 2023, O&#x27;Connor died in Phoenix, at the age of 93, due to complications related to advanced dementia and a respiratory illness. After her death, Chief Justice John Roberts called her &quot;an eloquent advocate for civil education&quot; and a &quot;fiercely independent defender of the rule of law&quot; in a public statement. President Joe Biden said she was an &quot;American icon&quot;, dedicated to public service and the &quot;bedrock American principle of an independent judiciary.&quot; iCivics board chairman Larry Kramer said that O&#x27;Connor was &quot;kind and generous&quot; and relayed that iCivics was her &quot;brainchild&quot;.

O&#x27;Connor lay in repose in the Great Hall of the Supreme Court on December 18, 2023. She was memorialized the following day in a funeral service held at the Washington National Cathedral.

==Legacy and awards==
O&#x27;Connor was particularly remembered for being the first woman on the Court, and for functioning as the swing vote in the 5–4 decision in &quot;Bush v. Gore&quot;, which handed the presidency to George W. Bush.
Overall, she began her tenure on the court as a Reaganite but would later attempt to steer the court toward decisions that better aligned with public opinion. Some argue that O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s jurisprudential legacy was largely undone by the appointment of Samuel Alito as her successor.

==See also==
* List of justices of the Supreme Court of the United States
* List of law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States (Seat 8)
* List of United States Supreme Court justices by time in office
* List of United States federal judges by longevity of service
* United States Supreme Court cases during the Burger Court
* United States Supreme Court cases during the Rehnquist Court
* United States Supreme Court cases during the Roberts Court
* List of female state supreme court justices
==Explanatory notes==
==References==
=== Citations ===
===Bibliography===


==Further reading==
* Biskupic, Joan. &quot;Sandra Day O&#x27;Connor: How the First Woman on the Supreme Court Became Its Most Influential Justice&quot; (2005), biography
* Flowers, Prudence. A Prolife Disaster&#x27;: The Reagan Administration and the Nomination of Sandra Day O&#x27;Connor&quot;. &quot;Journal of Contemporary History&quot; 53.2 (2018): 391–414. .
* Montini, E. J. (2005). &quot;Rehnquist is No. 1, O&#x27;Connor is No. 3, Baloney is No. 2&quot;. &quot;The Arizona Republic&quot;. Retrieved March 5, 2013.
* , a primary source
* Thomas, Evan. &quot;First: Sandra Day O&#x27;Connor&quot; (2019) Random House, authorized biography

==External links==

* Issue positions and quotes at OnTheIssues</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11132" start="0" end="24" title="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="127" end="186" title="associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="229" end="242" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q116859677" start="322" end="343" title="moderate conservative" label="moderate conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184751" start="366" end="376" title="swing vote" label="swing vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178713" start="438" end="457" title="Courts of Arizona" label="Arizona state judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="495" end="502" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="573" end="583" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q250949" start="598" end="612" title="Arizona Senate" label="Arizona Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="695" end="715" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087840" start="863" end="881" title="concurring opinion" label="concurring opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738447" start="943" end="959" title="majority opinion" label="majority opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612369" start="993" end="1013" title="Grutter v. Bollinger" label="Grutter v. Bollinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644418" start="1030" end="1047" title="Hamdi v. Rumsfeld" label="Hamdi v. Rumsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070065" start="1092" end="1102" title="per curiam" label="per curiam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065434" start="1135" end="1147" title="Bush v. Gore" label="Bush v. Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107009" start="1223" end="1250" title="Planned Parenthood v. Casey" label="Planned Parenthood v. Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q283681" start="1288" end="1317" title="abortion in the United States" label="abortion in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q23019957" start="1498" end="1510" title="Burger Court" label="Burger Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410750" start="1512" end="1538" title="Samuel Alito Supreme Court nomination" label="Samuel Alito was nominated"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="1758" end="1773" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070795" start="1781" end="1828" title="chancellor of the College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="chancellor of the College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="1859" end="1888" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="1902" end="1914" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="1989" end="2003" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="2041" end="2046" title="ranch" label="ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="2109" end="2121" title="cattle ranch" label="cattle ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q985303" start="2127" end="2142" title="Duncan, Arizona" label="Duncan, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="2377" end="2384" title="coyotes" label="coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="2389" end="2400" title="jackrabbits" label="jackrabbits"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039859" start="2625" end="2632" title="Ann Day" label="Ann Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747172" start="2653" end="2672" title="Arizona Legislature" label="Arizona Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3004" end="3028" title="Radford School for Girls" label="Radford School for Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823126" start="3305" end="3323" title="Austin High School (El Paso, Texas)" label="Austin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="3327" end="3334" title="El Paso" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="3388" end="3407" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581478" start="3434" end="3449" title="magna cum laude" label="magna cum laude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="3463" end="3467" title="B.A." label="B.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q8012895" start="3507" end="3526" title="Stanford Law School" label="Stanford Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598765" start="3586" end="3605" title="Stanford Law Review" label="Stanford Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="3660" end="3687" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Supreme Court chief justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q311562" start="3688" end="3705" title="William Rehnquist" label="William Rehnquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100653" start="4002" end="4019" title="Order of the Coif" label="Order of the Coif"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241719" start="4175" end="4201" title="John Jay O&amp;#x27;Connor III" label="John Jay O&amp;#x27;Connor III"/>
<link wikidata="Q169943" start="4557" end="4578" title="San Mateo, California" label="San Mateo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q108101" start="4793" end="4809" title="San Mateo County" label="San Mateo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="4810" end="4827" title="District Attorney" label="District Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269323" start="5019" end="5038" title="Quartermaster Corps (United States Army)" label="Quartermaster Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q58691" start="5129" end="5153" title="Maricopa County, Arizona" label="Maricopa County, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="5482" end="5497" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864266" start="5505" end="5526" title="Barry Goldwater 1964 presidential campaign" label="presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791244" start="5571" end="5598" title="Attorney General of Arizona" label="Attorney General of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q250949" start="5700" end="5714" title="Arizona Senate" label="Arizona Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738431" start="5865" end="5880" title="majority leader" label="majority leader"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6067" end="6097" title="Maricopa County Superior Court" label="Maricopa County Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791283" start="6154" end="6178" title="Arizona Court of Appeals" label="Arizona Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="6232" end="6250" title="aggravated assault" label="aggravated assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q111676935" start="6264" end="6278" title="Clarence Dixon" label="Clarence Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="6294" end="6318" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q705920" start="6413" end="6445" title="not guilty by reason of insanity" label="not guilty by reason of insanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="6911" end="6924" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="7041" end="7067" title="1980 United States presidential election" label="1980 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359993" start="7221" end="7235" title="Potter Stewart" label="Potter Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q25822" start="7594" end="7607" title="Right to Life" label="Right to Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876903" start="7824" end="7859" title="Arizona&amp;#x27;s law banning abortion" label="Arizona&amp;#x27;s law banning abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="8112" end="8125" title="Anti-abortion" label="Anti-abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322213" start="8130" end="8146" title="Christian right" label="religious groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="8265" end="8276" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239374" start="8319" end="8330" title="Don Nickles" label="Don Nickles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="8334" end="8342" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q529753" start="8344" end="8355" title="Steve Symms" label="Steve Symms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="8359" end="8364" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q503426" start="8370" end="8381" title="Jesse Helms" label="Jesse Helms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="8385" end="8399" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="8411" end="8422" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q313896" start="8753" end="8766" title="Jerry Falwell" label="Jerry Falwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q977175" start="8768" end="8783" title="Howard Phillips (activist)" label="Howard Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501855" start="8915" end="8923" title="Party platform" label="platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242907" start="9071" end="9115" title="United States pro-life movement" label="National Pro-Life Political Action Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q429923" start="9224" end="9246" title="Equal Rights Amendment" label="Equal Rights Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q452532" start="9302" end="9328" title="Senate Judiciary Committee" label="Senate Judiciary Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="9660" end="9675" title="abortion rights" label="abortion rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686796" start="9815" end="9843" title="confirmed by the U.S. Senate" label="confirmed by the U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q470748" start="9878" end="9888" title="Max Baucus" label="Max Baucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686969" start="9964" end="9987" title="A River Runs Through It (novel)" label="A River Runs Through It"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="10402" end="10420" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q11116" start="10900" end="10919" title="Ruth Bader Ginsburg" label="Ruth Bader Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11105" start="11145" end="11156" title="Elena Kagan" label="Elena Kagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q311562" start="11343" end="11360" title="William Rehnquist" label="William Rehnquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11171" start="11766" end="11781" title="Anthony Kennedy" label="Anthony Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q252739" start="11792" end="11804" title="Lewis F. Powell Jr." label="Lewis Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11142" start="11810" end="11825" title="Clarence Thomas" label="Clarence Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q312348" start="11836" end="11853" title="Thurgood Marshall" label="Thurgood Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184751" start="11887" end="11897" title="swing vote" label="swing vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="12089" end="12103" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Antonin Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11171" start="12105" end="12120" title="Anthony Kennedy" label="Anthony Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11109" start="12174" end="12191" title="John Paul Stevens" label="John Paul Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q472547" start="12193" end="12205" title="David Souter" label="David Souter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11116" start="12207" end="12226" title="Ruth Bader Ginsburg" label="Ruth Bader Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11124" start="12232" end="12246" title="Stephen Breyer" label="Stephen Breyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800508" start="12726" end="12742" title="McConnell v. FEC" label="McConnell v. FEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904291" start="12799" end="12836" title="Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act" label="McCain-Feingold campaign-finance bill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12854" end="12864" title="Campaign finance in the United States#Terminology, definitions" label="soft money"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612369" start="12894" end="12914" title="Grutter v. Bollinger" label="Grutter v. Bollinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597739" start="12932" end="12950" title="Gratz v. Bollinger" label="Gratz v. Bollinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="13101" end="13123" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752294" start="13209" end="13231" title="reverse discrimination" label="reverse discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q214244" start="13262" end="13280" title="affirmative action" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q911830" start="13288" end="13321" title="University of Michigan Law School" label="University of Michigan Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665918" start="13394" end="13412" title="Lockyer v. Andrade" label="Lockyer v. Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374304" start="13664" end="13692" title="cruel and unusual punishment" label="cruel and unusual punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q270938" start="13703" end="13719" title="Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Eighth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068821" start="13918" end="13942" title="Zelman v. Simmons-Harris" label="Zelman v. Simmons-Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q173810" start="14010" end="14024" title="school voucher" label="school voucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="14068" end="14083" title="First Amendment" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308297" start="14091" end="14111" title="Establishment Clause" label="Establishment Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q870728" start="14121" end="14143" title="United States v. Lopez" label="United States v. Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618270" start="14214" end="14239" title="Gun-Free School Zones Act" label="Gun-Free School Zones Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="14265" end="14280" title="Commerce Clause" label="Commerce Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065434" start="14296" end="14308" title="Bush v. Gore" label="Bush v. Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="14476" end="14502" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461720" start="14531" end="14555" title="Florida election recount" label="Florida election recount"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="14619" end="14626" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="15105" end="15118" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631981" start="15150" end="15164" title="Kennedy Center" label="Kennedy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="15492" end="15503" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q958904" start="15607" end="15618" title="Byron White" label="Byron White"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386411" start="15860" end="15886" title="Kelo v. City of New London" label="Kelo v. City of New London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308297" start="16081" end="16101" title="Establishment Clause" label="Establishment Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378366" start="16144" end="16195" title="Americans United for Separation of Church and State" label="Americans United for Separation of Church and State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368537" start="16470" end="16507" title="Rosenberger v. University of Virginia" label="Rosenberger v. University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881467" start="16528" end="16545" title="Mitchell v. Helms" label="Mitchell v. Helms"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068821" start="16570" end="16594" title="Zelman v. Simmons-Harris" label="Zelman v. Simmons-Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515708" start="16630" end="16644" title="Lee v. Weisman" label="Lee v. Weisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419535" start="16959" end="17002" title="Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe" label="Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708457" start="17318" end="17335" title="Lynch v. Donnelly" label="Lynch v. Donnelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176240" start="18159" end="18172" title="Jeffrey Rosen (legal academic)" label="Jeffrey Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893439" start="18305" end="18317" title="United States v. Place" label="1983 opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q231304" start="18421" end="18448" title="Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="constitutionally reasonable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758553" start="18488" end="18498" title="contraband" label="contraband"/>
<link wikidata="Q167049" start="18574" end="18599" title="Washington College of Law" label="Washington College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18659" end="18666" title="Atwater v. City of Lago Vista#Dissenting opinion" label="dissent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818842" start="18672" end="18681" title="Atwater v. City of Lago Vista" label="2001 case"/>
<link wikidata="Q231304" start="18695" end="18711" title="Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326430" start="18908" end="18930" title="social contract theory" label="social contract theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="18934" end="18944" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800345" start="19075" end="19092" title="McCleskey v. Kemp" label="McCleskey v. Kemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879917" start="19455" end="19474" title="Missouri v. Jenkins" label="Missouri v. Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="19853" end="19871" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="19923" end="19936" title="desegregation" label="desegregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q123018589" start="20137" end="20149" title="Shaw v. Hunt" label="Shaw v. Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491211" start="20166" end="20178" title="Shaw v. Reno" label="Shaw v. Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="20510" end="20524" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q476310" start="20615" end="20626" title="gerrymander" label="gerrymander"/>
<link wikidata="Q13860457" start="20697" end="20723" title="North Carolina&amp;#x27;s 12th congressional district" label="North Carolina&amp;#x27;s 12th"/>
<link wikidata="Q214244" start="20864" end="20882" title="affirmative action" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612369" start="21083" end="21103" title="Grutter v. Bollinger" label="Grutter v. Bollinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322213" start="21300" end="21315" title="Christian right" label="Christian right"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="21457" end="21468" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="21812" end="21825" title="anti-abortion" label="anti-abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123560" start="22103" end="22156" title="City of Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health" label="City of Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013940" start="22211" end="22276" title="Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists" label="Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5876208" start="22739" end="22759" title="Hodgson v. Minnesota" label="Hodgson v. Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107009" start="22946" end="22973" title="Planned Parenthood v. Casey" label="Planned Parenthood v. Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884058" start="23267" end="23279" title="undue burden" label="undue burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="23568" end="23588" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="24253" end="24268" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065216" start="24285" end="24304" title="Charles Krauthammer" label="Charles Krauthammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289435" start="24477" end="24491" title="Ramesh Ponnuru" label="Ramesh Ponnuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="25546" end="25569" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q822380" start="25775" end="25790" title="Walter Stoessel" label="Walter Stoessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918178" start="26849" end="26861" title="D.C. Circuit" label="D.C. Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11153" start="26868" end="26880" title="John Roberts" label="John Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296423" start="27590" end="27609" title="White House Counsel" label="White House Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q286514" start="27610" end="27623" title="Harriet Miers" label="Harriet Miers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957819" start="27661" end="27686" title="Harriet Miers Supreme Court nomination" label="criticism and controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q689846" start="28049" end="28075" title="Assisted suicide" label="physician-assisted suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831591" start="28137" end="28180" title="Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of New England" label="Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q250438" start="28335" end="28348" title="Third Circuit" label="Third Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11138" start="28355" end="28367" title="Samuel Alito" label="Samuel Alito"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059233" start="29198" end="29219" title="judicial independence" label="judicial independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="29251" end="29272" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623600" start="30239" end="30263" title="Strickland v. Washington" label="Strickland v. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164138" start="30294" end="30314" title="Constitution Project" label="Constitution Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q76167" start="30598" end="30615" title="Abdurrahman Wahid" label="Abdurrahman Wahid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755916" start="30624" end="30646" title="President of Indonesia" label="President of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="30680" end="30695" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q299574" start="30784" end="30797" title="Anwar Ibrahim" label="Anwar Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="30958" end="30976" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q43033" start="31072" end="31084" title="Desmond Tutu" label="Desmond Tutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q468843" start="31089" end="31103" title="Dolores Huerta" label="Dolores Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092602" start="31139" end="31185" title="Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission" label="Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="31506" end="31518" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="31546" end="31560" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Antonin Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010558" start="32121" end="32141" title="William H. Pryor Jr." label="William H. Pryor Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="32664" end="32679" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="33211" end="33226" title="United States district court" label="district courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="33231" end="33248" title="United States court of appeals" label="courts of appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936329" start="33254" end="33268" title="visiting judge" label="visiting judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q250479" start="33320" end="33323" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit" label="2nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q250433" start="33325" end="33328" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit" label="8th"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358778" start="33334" end="33346" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit" label="9th Circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961939" start="33447" end="33489" title="Arizona v. Inter Tribal Council of Arizona, Inc." label="Arizona v. Inter Tribal Council of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970136" start="33809" end="33850" title="National Academy of Public Administration (United States)" label="National Academy of Public Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="33972" end="34001" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q804322" start="34090" end="34106" title="Iraq Study Group" label="Iraq Study Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="34189" end="34211" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146187" start="34239" end="34253" title="Jamestown 2007" label="Jamestown 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="34336" end="34355" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="34583" end="34613" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="34622" end="34659" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q503419" start="34748" end="34769" title="University of Arizona" label="University of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133193" start="34777" end="34807" title="James E. Rogers College of Law" label="James E. Rogers College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="34866" end="34890" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416583" start="34916" end="34955" title="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor College of Law" label="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003845" start="35207" end="35239" title="William &amp;amp; Mary School of Law" label="William &amp;amp; Mary School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157146" start="35403" end="35416" title="Harry Rathbun" label="Harry Rathbun"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="35469" end="35488" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q499767" start="35744" end="35753" title="Jeopardy!" label="Jeopardy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q28249" start="35888" end="35910" title="Concord, New Hampshire" label="Concord, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q472547" start="35959" end="35979" title="Justice David Souter" label="Justice David Souter"/>
<link wikidata="Q984174" start="36390" end="36405" title="Lee H. Hamilton" label="Lee H. Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943864" start="36505" end="36514" title="news satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q824192" start="36540" end="36554" title="The Daily Show" label="The Daily Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q211987" start="36566" end="36577" title="Jon Stewart" label="Jon Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969877" start="36700" end="36707" title="iCivics" label="iCivics"/>
<link wikidata="Q538275" start="36989" end="37017" title="National Constitution Center" label="National Constitution Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317166" start="37214" end="37230" title="Justice at Stake" label="Justice at Stake"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768022" start="37451" end="37485" title="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor Institute" label="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q183496" start="37604" end="37609" title="adobe" label="adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q85799524" start="37610" end="37630" title="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor House" label="residence in Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="37690" end="37726" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q16237794" start="37866" end="37879" title="Junior League" label="Junior League"/>
<link wikidata="Q757986" start="38081" end="38094" title="2011 Tucson shooting" label="2011 shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q193703" start="38119" end="38133" title="Gabby Giffords" label="Gabby Giffords"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060942" start="38304" end="38312" title="Kalorama Heights" label="Kalorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="38476" end="38484" title="baptized" label="baptized"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="38499" end="38515" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661453" start="38549" end="38574" title="Breast cancer management" label="treated for breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9656" start="38605" end="38613" title="Vermiform appendix" label="appendix"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="38847" end="38871" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="39445" end="39461" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="39467" end="39475" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039859" start="39514" end="39521" title="Ann Day" label="Ann Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="39555" end="39570" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286546" start="39747" end="39766" title="respiratory illness" label="respiratory illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q11153" start="39799" end="39811" title="John Roberts" label="John Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="39976" end="39985" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969877" start="40133" end="40140" title="iCivics" label="iCivics"/>
<link wikidata="Q14906318" start="40299" end="40312" title="lay in repose" label="lay in repose"/>
<link wikidata="Q668710" start="40446" end="40475" title="Washington National Cathedral" label="Washington National Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065434" start="40649" end="40661" title="Bush v. Gore" label="Bush v. Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780882" start="41023" end="41081" title="List of justices of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="List of justices of the Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625077" start="41084" end="41153" title="List of law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States (Seat 8)" label="List of law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States (Seat 8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602064" start="41156" end="41218" title="List of United States Supreme Court justices by time in office" label="List of United States Supreme Court justices by time in office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602826" start="41221" end="41281" title="List of United States federal judges by longevity of service" label="List of United States federal judges by longevity of service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602701" start="41284" end="41341" title="List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Burger Court" label="United States Supreme Court cases during the Burger Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602710" start="41344" end="41404" title="List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Rehnquist Court" label="United States Supreme Court cases during the Rehnquist Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602711" start="41407" end="41465" title="List of United States Supreme Court cases by the Roberts Court" label="United States Supreme Court cases during the Roberts Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442740" start="41468" end="41511" title="List of female state supreme court justices" label="List of female state supreme court justices"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204859" start="41610" end="41624" title="Joan Biskupic" label="Biskupic, Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514991" start="42059" end="42079" title="The Arizona Republic" label="The Arizona Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415555" start="42135" end="42147" title="Evan Thomas" label="Thomas, Evan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091389" start="42288" end="42299" title="OnTheIssues" label="OnTheIssues"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42642" wikidata="Q183370" url="?curid=42642" title="16th century BC">
<text>The 16th century BC was a century that lasted from 1600 BC to 1501 BC.

==Events==
* 1700 BC – 1500 BC: Hurrian conquests.
*1601 BC: Sharma-Adad II became the King of Assyria.
*c. 1600 BC: The creation of one of the oldest surviving astronomical documents, a copy of which was found in the Babylonian library of Ashurbanipal: a 21-year record of the appearances of Venus (which the early Babylonians called Nindaranna): Venus tablet of Ammisaduqa.
*c. 1600 BC: The date of the earliest discovered rubber balls.
*c. 1600 BC: Early Mycenaean culture: weapons, Cyclopean walls, and chariots.
*c. 1600 BC: Unetice culture ends in Czech Republic, eastern Europe
*Development of the windmill in Persia.
*c. 1600 BC: Building of El morro del tulcán Pyramid in Colombia.
* 1595 BC: Sack of Babylon by the Hittite king Mursilis I.
*c. 1595 BC: The overthrow of the ruling Amorite dynasty in Aleppo, Syria.
* 1570 BC: Cretan palaces at Knossos and other centres flourish despite disasters.
* 1567 BC: Egypt: End of Fifteenth Dynasty, end of Sixteenth Dynasty, end of Seventeenth Dynasty, start of Eighteenth Dynasty.
* 1558 BC: Shang dynasty of China established (according to the Bamboo Annals).
* 1556 BC: Cecrops I builds or rebuilds Athens following the great flood of Deucalion and the end of the Golden age. He becomes the first of several Kings of Athens whose life account is considered part of Greek mythology.
* c. 1550 BC: The city of Mycenae, located in the northeast Peloponnesus, comes to dominate the rest of Achaea, giving its name to Mycenaean civilization.
* 1550 BC: End of Seventeenth dynasty of Egypt, start of the Eighteenth Dynasty upon the coronation of Ahmose I (Low Chronology).
* 1530 BC: End of the First Dynasty of Babylon and the start of the Kassite dynasty—see History of Iraq.
* 1525 BC: End of Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt.
* c. 1512 BC: The flood of Deucalion, according to O&#x27;Flaherty, Augustine, Eusebius, and Isidore (bishop of Seville).
* 1506 BC: Cecrops I, legendary King of Athens, dies after a reign of 50 years. Having survived his own son, he is succeeded by Cranaus.
* 1504 BC: Egypt started to conquer Nubia and the Levant.
* c. 1500 BC: Many scholars date early parts of the Rig Veda to roughly the 16th century.
* c. 1500 BC: Queen Hatsheput in Egypt (18th Dynasty).
* c. 1500 BC: The element Mercury has been discovered in Egyptian tombs dating from this decade.
* c. 1500 BC: Settlers from Crete, Greece move to Miletus, Turkey.
* c. 1500 BC: Early traces of Maya civilization developing in Belize.
* c. 1500 BC: The Phoenicians develop an alphabet—see Timeline of communication technology.
* c. 1500 BC: Indo-Aryan migration is often dated to the 17th to 16th centuries.
* c. 1500 BC: Birth of Zoroaster (Avestan: &quot;Zarathushtra&quot;).

==Sovereign states==
See: List of sovereign states in the 16th century BC.

==References==
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183370" start="4" end="19" title="16th century BC" label="16th century BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q578" start="26" end="33" title="century" label="century"/>
<link wikidata="Q186728" start="85" end="92" title="1700 BC" label="1700 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851857" start="95" end="102" title="1500 BC" label="1500 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q190394" start="104" end="111" title="Hurrians" label="Hurrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851869" start="124" end="131" title="1600 BC" label="1601 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q217762" start="133" end="147" title="Sharma-Adad II" label="Sharma-Adad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q217762" start="159" end="174" title="King of Assyria" label="King of Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851869" start="180" end="187" title="1600 BC" label="1600 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="290" end="299" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171191" start="312" end="324" title="Ashurbanipal" label="Ashurbanipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="365" end="370" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309635" start="420" end="446" title="Venus tablet of Ammisaduqa" label="Venus tablet of Ammisaduqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851869" start="452" end="459" title="1600 BC" label="1600 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="497" end="503" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851869" start="515" end="522" title="1600 BC" label="1600 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="530" end="537" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851869" start="593" end="600" title="1600 BC" label="1600 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q773818" start="602" end="617" title="Unetice culture" label="Unetice culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="626" end="640" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="642" end="656" title="eastern Europe" label="eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="677" end="685" title="windmill" label="windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="689" end="695" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851869" start="701" end="708" title="1600 BC" label="1600 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050102" start="722" end="741" title="El morro del tulcán" label="El morro del tulcán"/>
<link wikidata="Q12516" start="742" end="749" title="Pyramid" label="Pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="753" end="761" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851870" start="765" end="772" title="1595 BC" label="1595 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="782" end="789" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="797" end="804" title="Hittites" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q222536" start="810" end="820" title="Mursilis I" label="Mursilis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851870" start="826" end="833" title="1595 BC" label="1595 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q203507" start="863" end="870" title="Amorite" label="Amorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="882" end="888" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="890" end="895" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q193700" start="899" end="906" title="1570 BC" label="1570 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q173527" start="926" end="933" title="Knossos" label="Knossos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851866" start="982" end="989" title="1567 BC" label="1567 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="991" end="996" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q728479" start="1005" end="1022" title="Fifteenth dynasty of Egypt" label="Fifteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q737695" start="1031" end="1048" title="Sixteenth dynasty of Egypt" label="Sixteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q642301" start="1057" end="1076" title="Seventeenth dynasty of Egypt" label="Seventeenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q146055" start="1087" end="1105" title="Eighteenth dynasty of Egypt" label="Eighteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q533909" start="1109" end="1116" title="1558 BC" label="1558 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="1118" end="1131" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q805994" start="1171" end="1184" title="Bamboo Annals" label="Bamboo Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q533909" start="1189" end="1196" title="1556 BC" label="1556 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q500739" start="1198" end="1207" title="Cecrops I" label="Cecrops I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="1227" end="1233" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q207715" start="1263" end="1272" title="Deucalion" label="Deucalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q238526" start="1292" end="1302" title="Golden age" label="Golden age"/>
<link wikidata="Q780194" start="1336" end="1351" title="Kings of Athens" label="Kings of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="1393" end="1408" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="1436" end="1443" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="1470" end="1482" title="Peloponnesus" label="Peloponnesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495811" start="1514" end="1520" title="Achaea" label="Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="1541" end="1550" title="Mycenaean Greece" label="Mycenaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q533909" start="1567" end="1574" title="1550 BC" label="1550 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q642301" start="1583" end="1611" title="Seventeenth dynasty of Egypt" label="Seventeenth dynasty of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q146055" start="1626" end="1644" title="Eighteenth dynasty of Egypt" label="Eighteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7222" start="1668" end="1676" title="Ahmose I" label="Ahmose I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851861" start="1697" end="1704" title="1530 BC" label="1530 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q733897" start="1717" end="1741" title="First Dynasty of Babylon" label="First Dynasty of Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q243312" start="1763" end="1778" title="Kassites" label="Kassite dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q695980" start="1783" end="1798" title="History of Iraq" label="History of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851859" start="1802" end="1809" title="1525 BC" label="1525 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q728479" start="1818" end="1844" title="Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt" label="Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="1864" end="1869" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q207715" start="1873" end="1882" title="Deucalion" label="Deucalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q130316347" start="1897" end="1912" title="O&amp;#x27;Flaherty" label="O&amp;#x27;Flaherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="1914" end="1923" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="1925" end="1933" title="Eusebius" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868223" start="1939" end="1946" title="Isidore" label="Isidore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851857" start="1970" end="1977" title="1506 BC" label="1506 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q500739" start="1979" end="1988" title="Cecrops I" label="Cecrops I"/>
<link wikidata="Q780194" start="2000" end="2014" title="King of Athens" label="King of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q928411" start="2096" end="2103" title="Cranaus" label="Cranaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851857" start="2107" end="2114" title="1504 BC" label="1504 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="2116" end="2121" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="2141" end="2146" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="2155" end="2161" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="2215" end="2223" title="Rig Veda" label="Rig Veda"/>
<link wikidata="Q129234" start="2273" end="2282" title="Hatsheput" label="Hatsheput"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="2286" end="2291" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q146055" start="2293" end="2305" title="Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt" label="18th Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="2334" end="2341" title="Mercury (element)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="2365" end="2370" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="2433" end="2438" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="2440" end="2446" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q169460" start="2455" end="2462" title="Miletus" label="Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="2464" end="2470" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="2502" end="2519" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="2534" end="2540" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="2560" end="2569" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9779" start="2583" end="2591" title="alphabet" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633560" start="2596" end="2632" title="Timeline of communication technology" label="Timeline of communication technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q269145" start="2648" end="2668" title="Indo-Aryan migration" label="Indo-Aryan migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q35811" start="2738" end="2747" title="Zoroaster" label="Zoroaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q29572" start="2749" end="2756" title="Avestan" label="Avestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20311292" start="2812" end="2859" title="List of sovereign states in the 16th century BC" label="List of sovereign states in the 16th century BC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42643" wikidata="Q186728" url="?curid=42643" title="17th century BC">
<text>The 17th century BC was the century that lasted from 1700 BC to 1601 BC.
==Events==

*c. 1700 BC: Indus Valley civilisation comes to an end but is continued by the Cemetery H culture.
*1700 BC: Belu-bani became the King of Assyria.
*c. 1700 BC: Minoan Old Palace period ends and Minoan Second Palace period starts in Crete.
*c. 1700 BC: beginning of the Late Minoan period on Crete.
*c. 1700 BC: Aegean metalworkers are producing decorative objects rivaling those of Ancient Near East jewelers, whose techniques they seem to borrow.
*c. 1700 BC: Lila-Ir-Tash started to rule the Elamite Empire.
*c. 1700 BC: 1450 BC: Young girl gathering saffron crocus flowers, detail of wall painting, Room 3 of House Xeste 3, Akrotiri (prehistoric city), Thera, is made. Second Palace period. It is now kept in Thera Foundation, Petros M. Nomikos, Greece.
*c. 1700 BC: Bronze Age starts in China.
*c. 1698 BC: Lila-Ir-Tash the ruler of the Elamite Empire died. Temti-Agun I started to rule the Elamite Empire.
*1691 BC: Belu-bani, the King of Assyria died.
*c. 1690 BC: Temti-Agun I, the ruler of the Elamite Empire, died. Tan-Uli started to rule the Elamite Empire.
*1690 BC: Libaia became the King of Assyria.
*c. 1680 BC: Egypt: Development of leavened bread (date approximate).
*c. 1673 BC: Sharma-Adad I became the King of Assyria.
*c. 1661 BC: Iptar-Sin became the King of Assyria.
*c. 1655 BC: Tan-Uli, the ruler of the Elamite Empire, died.
*c. 1650 BC: Collapse of the 14th Dynasty of Egypt.
*c. 1650 BC: Conquest of Memphis by the Hyksos and collapse of the 13th Dynasty of Egypt.
*c. 1650 BC: Start of the 15th (Hyksos) and 16th Dynasties of Egypt.
*c. 1650 BC: Possibly, start of the Abydos Dynasty in Upper Egypt.
*c. 1646 BC or earlier: Jie of Xia is overthrown by Tang of Shang (ca. 1675-1646 BC) in the Battle of Mingtiao.
*1649 BC: Bazaia became the King of Assyria.
* 1633 BC – May 2 – Lunar Saros 34 begins.
*1627 BC: Beginning of a cooling of world climate lasting several years recorded in tree-rings all over the world. It may have been caused by one, or more, volcanic eruptions e.g. the Minoan eruption of Thera, the Avellino eruption of Mount Vesuvius, and/or the eruption of Mount Aniakchak in Alaska.
*1625 BC: Samsu-Ditana becomes King of Babylon (middle chronology).
*1621 BC: Lullaia becomes the King of Assyria.
*1620 BC: Mursili I becomes King of the Hittite Empire (middle chronology).
*1615 BC: Shu-Ninua became the King of Assyria.
*c. 1600 BC: Tang of Shang established the Shang dynasty.

==Deaths==
* 1684 BC – Heremon, Irish legend

==Extinctions==
* The last known population of woolly mammoth, preserved on Wrangel Island, becomes extinct.

==Sovereign states==
See: List of sovereign states in the 17th century BC.

==References==
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186728" start="4" end="19" title="17th century BC" label="17th century BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q578" start="28" end="35" title="century" label="century"/>
<link wikidata="Q186728" start="89" end="96" title="1700 BC" label="1700 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="98" end="123" title="Indus Valley civilisation" label="Indus Valley civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364797" start="164" end="182" title="Cemetery H culture" label="Cemetery H culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q186728" start="185" end="192" title="1700 BC" label="1700 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881698" start="194" end="203" title="Belu-bani" label="Belu-bani"/>
<link wikidata="Q217762" start="215" end="230" title="King of Assyria" label="King of Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="245" end="251" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="317" end="322" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="359" end="365" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="376" end="381" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q192530" start="396" end="402" title="Aegean civilization" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="467" end="484" title="Ancient Near East" label="Ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q186728" start="537" end="544" title="1700 BC" label="1700 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="579" end="593" title="Elamite Empire" label="Elamite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740667" start="608" end="615" title="1450 BC" label="1450 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q421232" start="712" end="739" title="Akrotiri (prehistoric city)" label="Akrotiri (prehistoric city)"/>
<link wikidata="Q129296" start="741" end="746" title="Santorini" label="Thera"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="834" end="840" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="855" end="865" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="876" end="881" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851901" start="887" end="894" title="1698 BC" label="1698 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="926" end="940" title="Elamite Empire" label="Elamite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="980" end="994" title="Elamite Empire" label="Elamite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851901" start="997" end="1004" title="1691 BC" label="1691 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881698" start="1006" end="1015" title="Belu-bani" label="Belu-bani"/>
<link wikidata="Q217762" start="1021" end="1036" title="King of Assyria" label="King of Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851901" start="1047" end="1054" title="1690 BC" label="1690 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="1087" end="1101" title="Elamite Empire" label="Elamite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="1137" end="1151" title="Elamite Empire" label="Elamite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851901" start="1154" end="1161" title="1690 BC" label="1690 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q217762" start="1181" end="1196" title="King of Assyria" label="King of Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851896" start="1202" end="1209" title="1680 BC" label="1680 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1211" end="1216" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="1242" end="1247" title="bread" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851886" start="1272" end="1279" title="1670 BC" label="1673 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q217762" start="1281" end="1294" title="Sharma-Adad I" label="Sharma-Adad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q217762" start="1306" end="1321" title="King of Assyria" label="King of Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851882" start="1327" end="1334" title="1660 BC" label="1661 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q887833" start="1336" end="1345" title="Iptar-Sin" label="Iptar-Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217762" start="1357" end="1372" title="King of Assyria" label="King of Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999853" start="1378" end="1385" title="1655 BC" label="1655 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="1413" end="1427" title="Elamite Empire" label="Elamite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999853" start="1439" end="1446" title="1650 BC" label="1650 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q650945" start="1464" end="1485" title="Fourteenth Dynasty of Egypt" label="14th Dynasty of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999853" start="1491" end="1498" title="1650 BC" label="1650 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715" start="1512" end="1519" title="Memphis, Egypt" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192319" start="1527" end="1533" title="Hyksos" label="Hyksos"/>
<link wikidata="Q721807" start="1554" end="1575" title="Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt" label="13th Dynasty of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999853" start="1581" end="1588" title="1650 BC" label="1650 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q728479" start="1603" end="1607" title="Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt" label="15th"/>
<link wikidata="Q737695" start="1621" end="1625" title="Sixteenth Dynasty of Egypt" label="16th"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999853" start="1650" end="1657" title="1650 BC" label="1650 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631010" start="1682" end="1696" title="Abydos Dynasty" label="Abydos Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851880" start="1717" end="1724" title="1646 BC" label="1646 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q465081" start="1737" end="1747" title="Jie of Xia" label="Jie of Xia"/>
<link wikidata="Q471820" start="1765" end="1778" title="Tang of Shang" label="Tang of Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q608694" start="1805" end="1823" title="Battle of Mingtiao" label="Battle of Mingtiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851880" start="1826" end="1833" title="1640 BC" label="1649 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q217762" start="1853" end="1868" title="King of Assyria" label="King of Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44235" start="1890" end="1895" title="Lunar eclipse" label="Lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q220397" start="1896" end="1901" title="Saros cycle" label="Saros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851879" start="1914" end="1921" title="1627 BC" label="1627 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q80205" start="1997" end="2007" title="growth ring" label="tree-rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144693" start="2097" end="2112" title="Minoan eruption" label="Minoan eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q129296" start="2116" end="2121" title="Santorini" label="Thera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828024" start="2127" end="2144" title="Avellino eruption" label="Avellino eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q524" start="2148" end="2162" title="Mount Vesuvius" label="Mount Vesuvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q531642" start="2187" end="2202" title="Mount Aniakchak" label="Mount Aniakchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="2206" end="2212" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851879" start="2215" end="2222" title="1620 BC" label="1625 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q391117" start="2224" end="2236" title="Samsu-Ditana" label="Samsu-Ditana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="2253" end="2260" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="2262" end="2279" title="middle chronology" label="middle chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851879" start="2283" end="2290" title="1620 BC" label="1621 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q217762" start="2312" end="2327" title="King of Assyria" label="King of Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851879" start="2330" end="2337" title="1620 BC" label="1620 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q222536" start="2339" end="2348" title="Mursili I" label="Mursili I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="2369" end="2383" title="Hittite Empire" label="Hittite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="2385" end="2402" title="middle chronology" label="middle chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851872" start="2406" end="2413" title="1610 BC" label="1615 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q392620" start="2415" end="2424" title="Shu-Ninua" label="Shu-Ninua"/>
<link wikidata="Q217762" start="2436" end="2451" title="King of Assyria" label="King of Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851869" start="2457" end="2464" title="1600 BC" label="1600 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q471820" start="2466" end="2479" title="Tang of Shang" label="Tang of Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="2496" end="2509" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851896" start="2525" end="2532" title="1684 BC" label="1684 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273540" start="2535" end="2542" title="Heremon" label="Heremon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471505" start="2544" end="2556" title="Irish legend" label="Irish legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699044" start="2605" end="2619" title="woolly mammoth" label="woolly mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q106594" start="2634" end="2648" title="Wrangel Island" label="Wrangel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640229" start="2694" end="2741" title="List of sovereign states in the 17th century BC" label="List of sovereign states in the 17th century BC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42644" wikidata="Q189456" url="?curid=42644" title="18th century BC">
<text>The 18th century BC was the century that lasted from 1800 BC to 1701 BC.

==Events==


*1800 BC: Beginning of the Nordic Bronze Age in the period system devised by Oscar Montelius.
* : Sedentary Mayan communities in Mesoamerica
* : Hyksos start to settle in the Nile Delta. They had the capital at Avaris in northeastern Nile Delta.
* 1800 BC: Adichanallur urn-burial site in Tirunelveli district in Tamil Nadu. In 2004, a number of skeletons dating from around 3,800 years ago.
* 1800 BC: Beginning of the Indo-Aryan migration
*1800 BC – 1700 BC: Decline of the Indus Valley civilisation
*1800 BC – 1300 BC: Troy VI flourishes.
* – 1750 BC: (middle chronology) – Hammurabi rules Babylonia and has to deal with Mari, which he conquers late in his career.
* – 1750 BC: (middle chronology) – Stela of Hammurabi, from Susa (modern Shush, Iran) is made. It is now in Musée du Louvre, Paris.
*1787 BC – 1784 BC: Amorite conquests of Uruk and Isin.
*1786 BC: Egypt: Queen Sobekneferu dies. End of Twelfth Dynasty, start of Thirteenth Dynasty, start of Fourteenth Dynasty.
*1779 BC: Zimrilim, the King of Mari, starts to rule.
*1770 BC: Babylon, capital of Babylonia becomes the largest city of the world, taking the lead from Thebes, capital of Egypt.
*1766 BC: Shang conquest of the Xia dynasty. China.
*1764 BC – 1750 BC: Wars of Hammurabi.
*1757 BC: Mari sacked by Hammurabi. Zimrilim&#x27;s palace is destroyed.
*1757 BC: Zimrilim, the King of Mari, dies.
*1750 BC: Hyksos occupation of Northern Egypt.
*1750 BC: A colossal volcanic eruption at Mount Veniaminof, Alaska.
*: Vedic period starts in India.
*: Investiture of Zimrilim (Zimrilim, King of Mari, before the Goddess Ishtar), facsimile of a wall painting on mud plaster from the Zimrilim palace at Mari (modern Tell Hariri, Syria), Court 106, is made. It is now in Musée du Louvre, Paris.
*: reigns of pharaoh Neferhotep I and his brother Sobekhotep IV, marking the apex of the Egyptian 13th Dynasty.
*1749 BC – 1712 BC: Mesopotamian Rebellions.
*Early Unetice culture, beginning of the Bronze Age in Central Europe.
*Minoan civilization: phase II of the Middle period (MM II).
*: The last species of mammoth became extinct on Wrangel Island.
*: Indus Valley civilization comes to an end but is continued by the Cemetery H culture
*: Minoan Old Palace period ends and Minoan Second Palace (Neopalatial) period starts in Crete.
*: Aegean metalworkers are producing decorative objects rivaling those of Ancient Near East jewelers, whose techniques they seem to borrow.
*: Lila-Ir-Tash started to rule the Elamite Empire.
*: Bronze Age starts in China.
*: Shang dynasty starts in China.

==Deaths==

: Hammurabi (middle chronology)

1764 BC: Yarim Lim 1 The Great King of Yamhad

==Inventions, discoveries, introductions==
*: Median date for the building of the Phaistos Disc. Its purpose and meaning, and even its original geographical place of manufacture remains unknown, making it one of the most famous mysteries of archaeology.

==Sovereign states==
==References==
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189456" start="4" end="19" title="18th century BC" label="18th century BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q578" start="28" end="35" title="century" label="century"/>
<link wikidata="Q605601" start="114" end="131" title="Nordic Bronze Age" label="Nordic Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q312397" start="164" end="179" title="Oscar Montelius" label="Oscar Montelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="195" end="200" title="Maya civilization" label="Mayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="216" end="227" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q192319" start="232" end="238" title="Hyksos" label="Hyksos"/>
<link wikidata="Q179528" start="262" end="272" title="Nile Delta" label="Nile Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q309282" start="298" end="304" title="Avaris" label="Avaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q179528" start="321" end="331" title="Nile Delta" label="Nile Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q15200" start="376" end="396" title="Tirunelveli district" label="Tirunelveli district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="400" end="410" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q269145" start="507" end="527" title="Indo-Aryan migration" label="Indo-Aryan migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="563" end="588" title="Indus Valley civilisation" label="Indus Valley civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994032" start="600" end="607" title="1300 BC" label="1300 BC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="609" end="616" title="Troy#Table of layers" label="Troy VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="643" end="660" title="middle chronology" label="middle chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q36359" start="664" end="673" title="Hammurabi" label="Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="680" end="689" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q244762" start="711" end="715" title="Mari, Syria" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="769" end="786" title="middle chronology" label="middle chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q93304" start="790" end="808" title="Stela of Hammurabi" label="Stela of Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q180773" start="815" end="819" title="Susa" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168823" start="828" end="839" title="Shush, Iran" label="Shush, Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="863" end="878" title="Musée du Louvre" label="Musée du Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q203507" start="907" end="914" title="Amorite" label="Amorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="928" end="932" title="Uruk" label="Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q501259" start="937" end="941" title="Isin" label="Isin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="953" end="958" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q228951" start="966" end="977" title="Sobekneferu" label="Sobekneferu"/>
<link wikidata="Q719639" start="991" end="1006" title="Twelfth dynasty of Egypt" label="Twelfth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q721807" start="1017" end="1035" title="Thirteenth dynasty of Egypt" label="Thirteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q650945" start="1046" end="1064" title="Fourteenth dynasty of Egypt" label="Fourteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q203969" start="1076" end="1084" title="Zimrilim" label="Zimrilim"/>
<link wikidata="Q244762" start="1098" end="1102" title="Mari, Syria" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="1130" end="1137" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="1150" end="1159" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101583" start="1220" end="1226" title="Thebes, Egypt" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1239" end="1244" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="1256" end="1261" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q169705" start="1278" end="1289" title="Xia dynasty" label="Xia dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1291" end="1296" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q36359" start="1326" end="1335" title="Hammurabi" label="Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q244762" start="1347" end="1351" title="Mari, Syria" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q36359" start="1362" end="1371" title="Hammurabi" label="Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q203969" start="1373" end="1381" title="Zimrilim" label="Zimrilim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887409" start="1389" end="1395" title="Royal palace of Mari" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q203969" start="1420" end="1428" title="Zimrilim" label="Zimrilim"/>
<link wikidata="Q244762" start="1442" end="1446" title="Mari, Syria" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q192319" start="1464" end="1470" title="Hyksos" label="Hyksos"/>
<link wikidata="Q463871" start="1485" end="1499" title="Northern Egypt" label="Northern Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139596" start="1543" end="1559" title="Mount Veniaminof" label="Mount Veniaminof"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="1561" end="1567" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="1572" end="1584" title="Vedic period" label="Vedic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1595" end="1600" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q23343" start="1605" end="1628" title="Investiture of Zimrilim" label="Investiture of Zimrilim"/>
<link wikidata="Q203969" start="1630" end="1638" title="Zimrilim" label="Zimrilim"/>
<link wikidata="Q244762" start="1648" end="1652" title="Mari, Syria" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="1673" end="1679" title="Ishtar" label="Ishtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887409" start="1735" end="1750" title="Royal palace of Mari" label="Zimrilim palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q244762" start="1754" end="1758" title="Mari, Syria" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q244762" start="1767" end="1778" title="Tell Hariri" label="Tell Hariri"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="1780" end="1785" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="1821" end="1836" title="Musée du Louvre" label="Musée du Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1838" end="1843" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q355429" start="1866" end="1878" title="Neferhotep I" label="Neferhotep I"/>
<link wikidata="Q373539" start="1895" end="1908" title="Sobekhotep IV" label="Sobekhotep IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1934" end="1942" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q721807" start="1943" end="1955" title="Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt" label="13th Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="1977" end="1988" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q773818" start="2009" end="2024" title="Unetice culture" label="Unetice culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2043" end="2053" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="2057" end="2071" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="2074" end="2093" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q36715" start="2157" end="2164" title="mammoth" label="mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q106594" start="2183" end="2197" title="Wrangel Island" label="Wrangel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="2202" end="2227" title="Indus Valley civilization" label="Indus Valley civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364797" start="2268" end="2286" title="Cemetery H culture" label="Cemetery H culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="2290" end="2296" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="2376" end="2381" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q192530" start="2386" end="2392" title="Aegean civilization" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="2457" end="2474" title="Ancient Near East" label="Ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2526" end="2538" title="Lila-Ir-Tash" label="Lila-Ir-Tash"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="2559" end="2573" title="Elamite Empire" label="Elamite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2578" end="2588" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2599" end="2604" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="2609" end="2622" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2633" end="2638" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q36359" start="2655" end="2664" title="Hammurabi" label="Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="2666" end="2683" title="middle chronology" label="middle chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q617218" start="2725" end="2731" title="Yamhad" label="Yamhad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2815" end="2828" title="Phaistos Disc#Dating" label="Phaistos Disc"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42645" wikidata="Q215983" url="?curid=42645" title="The Grapes of Wrath">
<text>The Grapes of Wrath is an American realist novel written by John Steinbeck and published in 1939. The book won the National Book Award
and Pulitzer Prize for fiction, and it was cited prominently when Steinbeck was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1962.

Set during the Great Depression, the novel focuses on the Joads, a poor family of tenant farmers driven from their Oklahoma home by drought, economic hardship, agricultural industry changes, and bank foreclosures forcing tenant farmers out of work. Due to their nearly hopeless situation, and in part because they are trapped in the Dust Bowl, the Joads set out for California on the &quot;mother road&quot;, along with thousands of other &quot;Okies&quot; seeking jobs, land, dignity, and a future.

&quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; is frequently read in American high school and college literature classes due to its historical context and enduring legacy. A Hollywood film version, starring Henry Fonda and directed by John Ford, was released in 1940.

==Plot==
The narrative begins just after Tom Joad is paroled from McAlester prison, where he had been incarcerated after being convicted of homicide in self-defense. While hitchhiking to his home near Sallisaw, Oklahoma, Tom meets former preacher Jim Casy, whom he remembers from childhood, and the two travel together. Arriving at Tom&#x27;s childhood farm home, they find it deserted. Disconcerted and confused, Tom and Casy meet an old neighbor, Muley Graves, who says the family is at Uncle John Joad&#x27;s home nearby. Graves says the banks have evicted all the farmers. They have moved away, but Muley refuses to leave the area.

The next morning, Tom and Casy go to Uncle John&#x27;s. Tom&#x27;s family is loading their remaining possessions into a Hudson sedan converted into a truck; with the crops destroyed by the Dust Bowl, the family has defaulted on their bank loans and their farm has been repossessed. The family sees no option but to seek work in California, which has been described in handbills as fruitful and offering high pay. The Joads put everything they have into making the journey. Although leaving Oklahoma violates his parole, Tom takes the risk, and invites Casy to join the family.

Traveling west on Route 66, the Joads find the road crowded with other migrants. In makeshift camps, they hear many stories from others, some returning from California. The group worries that California may not be as rewarding as suggested. The family dwindles on the way: Grampa dies and they bury him in a field; Granma dies close to the California state line; and both Noah (the eldest Joad son) and Connie Rivers (the husband of the pregnant Joad daughter, Rose of Sharon) leave the family. Led by Ma, the remaining members continue on, as nothing is left for them in Oklahoma.

Reaching California, they find the state oversupplied with labor; wages are low, and workers are exploited to the point of starvation. The big corporate farmers are in collusion and smaller farmers suffer from collapsing prices. All police and state law enforcement authorities are allied with the growers. At the first migrant Hooverville camp the Joads stop at, Casy is arrested for knocking down a deputy sheriff who is about to shoot a fleeing worker for alerting others that the labor recruiter, travelling with the officer, will not pay the wages he is promising. Weedpatch Camp, one of the clean, utility-supplied camps operated by the Resettlement Administration, a New Deal agency, offers better conditions but does not have enough resources to care for all the needy families, and it does not provide work or food. Nonetheless, as a federal facility, the camp protects the migrants from harassment by local deputies.
In response to the exploitation, Casy becomes a labor organizer and tries to recruit for a labor union. The Joads find work as strikebreakers in a peach orchard. After picking for most of the day, they are only paid enough to buy food for that night&#x27;s supper and some for the next day. The next morning the peach plantation announces that the pay rate for the picked fruit has been reduced by half. Casy is involved in a strike that turns violent. When Tom witnesses Casy being struck and killed with a pickaxe, he kills the attacker and takes flight. The Joads quietly leave the orchard to work at a cotton farm where Tom risks being arrested, and possibly lynched, for the homicide.

Knowing he must leave to avoid capture and protect his family from being blacklisted from working, Tom bids his mother farewell and vows to work for the oppressed. The family continues to pick cotton and pool their daily wages to buy food. Upon its birth, Rose of Sharon&#x27;s baby is stillborn. Ma Joad remains steadfast and forces the family through the bereavement. With the winter rains, the Joads&#x27; dwelling is flooded and the car disabled, and they move to higher ground. In the final chapter of the book, the family takes shelter from the flood in an old barn. Inside they find a young boy and his father, who is dying of starvation. Ma realizes there is only one way to save the man. She looks at Rose of Sharon and a silent understanding passes between them. Rose of Sharon, left alone with the man, goes to him and has him drink her breast milk.

==Characters==
*Tom Joad: the protagonist of the story; the Joad family&#x27;s second son, named after his father. Later, Tom takes leadership of the family, even though he is young.
*Ma Joad: the Joad family matriarch. Practical but warm-spirited, she tries to hold the family together. Her given name is never learned; it is suggested that her maiden name was Hazlett.
*Pa Joad: the Joad family patriarch, also named Tom, age 50. Hardworking sharecropper and family man. Pa becomes a broken man upon losing his livelihood and means of supporting his family, forcing Ma to assume leadership.
*Uncle John: Pa Joad&#x27;s older brother (Tom describes him as &quot;a fella about 60&quot;, but in narrative he is described as 50). He feels guilty about the death of his young wife years before, and is prone to binges involving alcohol and prostitutes, but is generous with his goods.
*Jim Casy: a former preacher who lost his faith and later is murdered by a camp guard. He is a Christ-like figure, based on Steinbeck&#x27;s friend Ed Ricketts.
*Al Joad: the third youngest Joad son, a &quot;smart-aleck sixteen-year-older&quot; who cares mainly for cars and girls; he looks up to Tom, but begins to find his own way.
*Rose of Sharon (said as &quot;Rosasharn&quot;) Joad Rivers: the eldest Joad daughter, a childish and dreamy teenage girl, age 18, who develops into a mature woman. Pregnant at the beginning of the novel, she eventually delivers a stillborn baby, perhaps due to malnutrition, but she is able to use her breast milk to save a man from starvation.
*Connie Rivers: Rose of Sharon&#x27;s husband. Nineteen years old and naïve, he is overwhelmed by marriage and impending fatherhood. He abandons his wife and the Joad family shortly after they arrive in California.
*Noah Joad: the eldest Joad son, he is the first to leave the family, near Needles, California, planning to live off fishing on the Colorado River. Injured at birth and described as &quot;strange&quot;, it is implied he has slight learning difficulties.
*Grampa Joad: Tom&#x27;s grandfather, who expresses his strong desire to stay in Oklahoma. His full name is given as &quot;William James Joad&quot;. Grampa is drugged by his family with &quot;soothin&#x27; syrup&quot; to force him to leave with them for California, but he dies during the first evening on the road. Casy attributes his death to a stroke, but says that Grampa is &quot;just&#x27; staying&#x27; with the lan&#x27;. He couldn&#x27; leave it.&quot;
*Granma Joad: Grampa&#x27;s religious wife; she loses her will to live after his death. She dies while the family is crossing the Mojave Desert.
*Ruthie Joad: the youngest Joad daughter, age 12. She is shown to be reckless and childish. While quarreling with another child, she reveals that Tom is in hiding.
*Winfield Joad: the youngest Joad son, age 10. He is &quot;kid-wild and calfish&quot;.
*Jim Rawley: He manages the camp at Weedpatch and shows the Joads surprising favor.
*Muley Graves: a neighbour of the Joads. He is invited to come along to California with them, but refuses. The family leave two of their dogs with him; a third they take, but it is killed by a car during their travels.
*Ivy and Sairy Wilson: a migrant couple from Kansas who attend the death of Grampa and share the journey as far as the California state line.
*Mr. Wainwright: a fellow laborer on the cotton farm in California; he is the husband of Mrs. Wainwright.
*Mrs. Wainwright: mother to Aggie and wife to Mr. Wainwright. She helps Ma deliver Rose of Sharon&#x27;s baby.
*Aggie Wainwright: the sixteen-year-old daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Wainwright. Late in the novel, she and Al Joad announce their intent to marry.
*Floyd Knowles: a man at the Hooverville, where the Joads first stay in California, who urges Tom and Casy to join labor organizations. His agitation results in Casy being jailed.

==Religious interpretation==

Many scholars have noted Steinbeck&#x27;s use of Christian imagery within &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot;. The largest implications lie with Tom Joad and Jim Casy, who are both interpreted as Christ-like figures at certain intervals within the novel. These two are often interpreted together, with Casy representing Jesus Christ in the early days of his ministry, up until his death, which is interpreted as representing the death of Christ. From there, Tom takes over, rising in Casy&#x27;s place as the Christ figure risen from the dead.

However, the religious imagery is not limited to these two characters. Scholars have regularly inspected other characters and plot points within the novel, including Ma Joad, Rose of Sharon, her stillborn child, and Uncle John. In an article first published in 2009, Ken Eckert even compared the migrants&#x27; movement west as a reversed version of the slaves&#x27; escape from Egypt in Exodus. Many of these extreme interpretations are brought on by Steinbeck&#x27;s own documented beliefs, which Eckert himself refers to as &quot;unorthodox&quot;.

To expand upon previous remarks in a journal, Leonard A. Slade lays out the chapters and how they represent each part of the slaves escaping from Egypt. Slade states “Chapters 1 through 10 correspond to bondage in Egypt (where the bank and land companies fulfill the role of Pharaoh), and the plagues (drought and erosion); chapters 11 through 18 to the Exodus and journey through the wilderness (during which the old people die off); and chapter 19 through 30 to the settlement in the Promised Land-California, whose inhabitants are hostile… formulate ethical codes (in the government camps)”. 

Another religious interpretation that Slade brings up in his writings is the title itself, stating “The title of the novel, of course refers to the line: He is trampling out the vintage where the grapes of wrath are stored in Julia Ward Howe’s famous &#x27;Battle-Hymn of the Republic&#x27;. Apparently, then the title suggests, moreover, &#x27;that story exists in Christian context, indicating that we should expect to find some Christian meaning&#x27;.&quot; These two interpretations by Slade and other scholars show how many religious aspects can be interpreted from the book. Along with Slade, other scholars find interpretations in the characters of Rose of Sharon and her stillborn child.

==Development==

&quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; developed from &quot;The Harvest Gypsies&quot;, a series of seven articles that ran in the &quot;San Francisco News&quot;, from October 5 to 12, 1936. The newspaper commissioned that work on migrant workers from the Midwest in California&#x27;s agriculture industry. (It was later compiled and published separately.)

Steinbeck was known to have borrowed from field notes taken during 1938 by Farm Security Administration worker and author Sanora Babb. While she collected personal stories about the lives of the displaced migrants for a novel she was developing, her supervisor, Tom Collins, shared her reports with Steinbeck, who at the time was working for the &quot;San Francisco News&quot;. Babb&#x27;s own novel, &quot;Whose Names Are Unknown&quot;, was eclipsed in 1939 by the success of &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; and was shelved until it was finally published in 2004, a year before Babb&#x27;s death.

In mid-January 1939, three months before the publication of &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot;, Steinbeck wrote a long letter to Pascal Covici, his editor at Viking Press. He wanted Covici, in particular, to understand this book, to appreciate what he was up to. And so he concluded with a statement that might serve as preface in and of itself: &quot;Throughout I&#x27;ve tried to make the reader participate in the actuality, what he takes from it will be scaled on his own depth and shallowness. There are five layers in this book, a reader will find as many as he can and he won&#x27;t find more than he has in himself.&quot;

===Title===

While writing the novel at his home, 16250 Greenwood Lane, in what is now Monte Sereno, California, Steinbeck had unusual difficulty devising a title. &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot;, suggested by his wife Carol Steinbeck, was deemed more suitable than anything by the author. The title is a reference to lyrics from &quot;The Battle Hymn of the Republic&quot;, by Julia Ward Howe (emphasis added):
These lyrics refer, in turn, to the biblical passage Revelation 14:19–20, an apocalyptic appeal to divine justice and deliverance from oppression in the final judgment. This and other biblical passages had inspired a long tradition of imagery of Christ in the winepress, in various media. The passage reads:
The phrase also appears at the end of Chapter 25 in Steinbeck&#x27;s book, which describes the purposeful destruction of food to keep the price high:
The image invoked by the title serves as a crucial symbol in the development of both the plot and the novel&#x27;s greater thematic concerns: from the terrible winepress of Dust Bowl oppression will come terrible wrath but also the deliverance of workers through their cooperation. This is suggested but not realized within the novel.

==Author&#x27;s note==
When preparing to write the novel, Steinbeck wrote: &quot;I want to put a tag of shame on the greedy bastards who are responsible for this [the Great Depression and its effects].&quot; He famously said, &quot;I&#x27;ve done my damnedest to rip a reader&#x27;s nerves to rags.&quot; His work won a large following among the working class, due to his sympathy for the migrants and workers&#x27; movement, and his accessible prose style.

==Critical reception==
Steinbeck scholar John Timmerman sums up the book&#x27;s influence: &quot;&quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; may well be the most thoroughly discussed novel – in criticism, reviews, and college classrooms – of 20th century American literature.&quot; &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; is referred to as a Great American Novel.

At the time of publication, Steinbeck&#x27;s novel &quot;was a phenomenon on the scale of a national event. It was publicly banned and burned by citizens, it was debated on national radio; but above all, it was read&quot;. According to &quot;The New York Times&quot;, it was the best-selling book of 1939 and 430,000 copies had been printed by February 1940. In that same month, it won the National Book Award, favorite fiction book of 1939, voted by members of the American Booksellers Association. Soon, it won the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction, and its Armed Services Edition went through two printings.

The book was noted for Steinbeck&#x27;s passionate depiction of the plight of the poor, and many of his contemporaries attacked his social and political views. Bryan Cordyack wrote: &quot;Steinbeck was attacked as a propagandist and a socialist from both the left and the right of the political spectrum. The most fervent of these attacks came from the Associated Farmers of California; they were displeased with the book&#x27;s depiction of California farmers&#x27; attitudes and conduct toward the migrants. They denounced the book as a &#x27;pack of lies&#x27; and labeled it &#x27;communist propaganda. Some argued that his novel was filled with inaccuracies. In his book &quot;The Art of Fiction&quot; (1984), John Gardner criticized Steinbeck for not knowing anything about the California ranchers: &quot;Witness Steinbeck&#x27;s failure in &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot;. It should have been one of America&#x27;s great books...[S]teinbeck wrote not a great and firm novel but a disappointing melodrama in which complex good is pitted against unmitigated, unbelievable evil.&quot; Others accused Steinbeck of exaggerating camp conditions to make a political point. He had visited the camps well before publication of the novel and argued their inhumane nature destroyed the settlers&#x27; spirit.

In 1962, the Nobel Prize committee cited &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; as a &quot;great work&quot; and as one of the committee&#x27;s main reasons for granting Steinbeck the Nobel Prize for Literature.

In 1999, French newspaper &quot;Le Monde&quot; of Paris ranked &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; as seventh on its list of the 100 best books of the 20th century. In the UK, it was listed at number 29 among the &quot;nation&#x27;s best loved novels&quot; on the BBC&#x27;s 2003 survey The Big Read. In 2005, &quot;Time&quot; magazine included the novel in its &quot;100 Best English-language Novels from 1923 to 2005&quot;. In 2009, &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; of the United Kingdom included the novel in its &quot;100 novels everyone should read&quot;. 

&quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; has faced a great amount of controversy since publication, including book bans and other challenges on a variety of political and religious grounds in the United States and other countries. The early attempts to suppress and censor the book directly inspired the promulgation of the Library Bill of Rights by the American Library Association.

==Similarities to &quot;Whose Names Are Unknown&quot;==
Sanora Babb&#x27;s &quot;Whose Names Are Unknown&quot; was written in the 1930s and published in 2004. Some scholars noted strong parallels between that work — the notes for which Steinbeck is widely believed to have examined — and &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot;.

Writing in &quot;The Steinbeck Review&quot;, Michael J. Meyer noted numerous &quot;obvious similarities&quot; between the two novels &quot;that even a cursory reading will reveal&quot;, such as Babb&#x27;s account of two still-born babies, mirrored in Steinbeck&#x27;s description of Rose of Sharon&#x27;s baby. Among other scenes and themes repeated in both books: the villainy of banks, corporations, and company stores that charge exorbitant prices; the rejection of religion and the embrace of music as a means of preserving hope; descriptions of the fecundity of nature and agriculture, and the contrast with the impoverishment of the migrants; and the disparity between those willing to extend assistance to the migrants and others who view &quot;Okies&quot; as subhuman. Meyer, a Steinbeck bibliographer, stops short of labeling these parallels as plagiarism but concludes that &quot;Steinbeck scholars would do well to read Babb — if only to see for themselves the echoes of &quot;Grapes&quot; that abound in her prose.&quot;

Steinbeck scholar David M. Wrobel wrote that &quot;the John Steinbeck/Sanora Babb story sounds like a classic smash-and-grab: celebrated California author steals the material of unknown Oklahoma writer, resulting in his financial success and her failure to get her work published ... Steinbeck absorbed field information from many sources, primarily Tom Collins and Eric H. Thomsen, regional director of the federal migrant camp program in California, who accompanied Steinbeck on missions of mercy...if Steinbeck read Babb’s extensive notes as carefully as he did the reports of Collins, he would certainly have found them useful. His interaction with Collins and Thomsen — and their influence on the writing of &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; — is documented because Steinbeck acknowledged both. Sanora Babb went unmentioned.&quot;

Writing in &quot;Broad Street&quot; (magazine), Carla Dominguez described Babb as &quot;devastated and bitter&quot; that Random House cancelled publication of her own novel after &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; was released in 1939. It is clear, she wrote, that &quot;Babb&#x27;s retellings, interactions, and reflections were secretly read over and appropriated by Steinbeck. Babb met Steinbeck briefly and by chance at a lunch counter, but she never thought that he had been reading her notes because he did not mention it.&quot; When Babb&#x27;s novel was finally published in 2004, she declared that she was a better writer than Steinbeck. &quot;His book&quot;, Babb said, &quot;is not as realistic as mine.&quot;

==Adaptations==
===In film===
The book was quickly made into a famed 1940 Hollywood movie of the same name directed by John Ford and starring Henry Fonda as Tom Joad. The first part of the film version follows the book fairly accurately. However, the second half and the ending, in particular, differ significantly from the book. John Springer, author of &quot;The Fondas&quot; (Citadel, 1973), said of Henry Fonda and his role in &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot;: &quot;The Great American Novel made one of the few enduring Great American Motion Pictures.&quot;

The documentary &quot;&quot; (2009) revealed that &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; was the favorite novel of comedian Bill Hicks. He based his famous last words on Tom Joad&#x27;s final speech: &quot;I left in love, in laughter, and in truth, and wherever truth, love and laughter abide, I am there in spirit.&quot;

In July 2013, Steven Spielberg announced his plans to direct a remake of &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; for DreamWorks.

The Japanese animated series &quot;Bungou Stray Dogs&quot; portrays a character based on Steinbeck whose superpower is named &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot;.

===In music===
Woody Guthrie&#x27;s two-part song—&quot;Tom Joad – Parts 1 &amp; 2&quot; – from the album &quot;Dust Bowl Ballads&quot; (1940), explores the protagonist&#x27;s life after being paroled from prison. It was covered in 1988 by Andy Irvine, who recorded both parts as a single song—&quot;Tom Joad&quot;—on Patrick Street&#x27;s second album, &quot;No. 2 Patrick Street&quot;.

The 1981 song &quot;Here Comes that Rainbow Again&quot;, by Kris Kristofferson, is based on the scene in the roadside diner where a man buys a loaf of bread and two candy sticks for his sons.

The band The Mission UK included a song titled &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; on their album &quot;Carved in Sand&quot; (1990).

The progressive rock band Camel released an album, titled &quot;Dust and Dreams&quot; (1991), inspired by the novel.

American rock singer-songwriter Bruce Springsteen named his 11th studio album, &quot;The Ghost of Tom Joad&quot; (1995), after the character; and the first track on the album shares the same title. The song – and to a lesser extent, the others on the album – draws comparisons between the Dust Bowl and modern times.

Rage Against the Machine recorded a version of &quot;The Ghost of Tom Joad&quot; in 1997.

Like Andy Irvine in 1988, Dick Gaughan recorded Woody Guthrie&#x27;s &quot;Tom Joad&quot; on his album &quot;Outlaws &amp; Dreamers&quot; (2001).

An opera based on the novel was co-produced by the Minnesota Opera, and Utah Symphony and Opera, with music by Ricky Ian Gordon and libretto by Michael Korie. The opera made its world premiere in February 2007, to favorable local reviews.

Bad Religion have a song entitled &quot;Grains of Wrath&quot; on their album &quot;New Maps of Hell&quot; (2007). Bad Religion lead vocalist Greg Graffin is a fan of Steinbeck&#x27;s work.

The song &quot;Dust Bowl Dance&quot;, on the Mumford &amp; Sons album &quot;Sigh No More&quot; (2009), is based on the novel.

The Pink Floyd song &quot;Sorrow&quot;, written by front-man David Gilmour and included on the band&#x27;s album &quot;A Momentary Lapse of Reason&quot;, is thematically derived from/based on the novel.

The song &quot;No Good Al Joad&quot;, on the Hop Along album &quot;Get Disowned&quot; takes its title from the novel&#x27;s character Al Joad.

The song &quot;Grapes Of Wrath&quot; by Weezer, written by Rivers Cuomo from their album &quot;OK Human&quot; (2021), takes its title directly from the novel.

===In theatre===
The Steppenwolf Theatre Company produced a stage version of the book, adapted by Frank Galati. Gary Sinise played Tom Joad for its entire run of 188 performances on Broadway in 1990. One of these performances was filmed and shown on PBS the following year.

In 1990, the Illegitimate Players theater company in Chicago produced &quot;Of Grapes and Nuts&quot;, an original, satirical mash-up of &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; and Steinbeck&#x27;s acclaimed novella &quot;Of Mice and Men&quot;.

In 2019, the Oregon Shakespeare Festival in Ashland, Oregon produced &quot;Mother Road&quot; by Octavio Solis, inspired by Steinbeck&#x27;s The Grapes of Wrath. The play is about William Joad who believes that he has no blood kin to inherit the family farm until he finds an unexpected relation: Martín Jodes—a young Mexican-American man descended from Steinbeck&#x27;s original protagonist Tom Joad. The play reverses the Joads’ mythic journey, as these modern-day Joads travel from migrant farm-worker camps in California back to Oklahoma. 
==See also==

*&quot;The Jungle&quot;
*&quot;Le Monde&quot; 100 Books of the Century

==References==
==Bibliography==

* Garcia, Reloy. &quot;The Rocky Road to Eldorado: The Journey Motif in John Steinbeck&#x27;s &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot;.&quot; &quot;Steinbeck Quarterly&quot; 14.03-04 (Summer/Fall 1981): 83-93
* Gregory, James N. &quot;Dust Bowl Legacies: the Okie Impact on California, 1939–1989&quot;. &quot;California History&quot; 1989 68(3): 74–85. 
* Henkel, Scott. &quot;A Seditious Proposal.&quot; &quot;The Grapes of Wrath: A Reconsideration&#x27; &quot;Vol. 1. Ed. Michael J. Meyer. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2009. 219–42. 
*Saxton, Alexander. &quot;In Dubious Battle: Looking Backward&quot;. &quot;Pacific Historical Review&quot; 2004 73(2): 249–262. Fulltext: online at Swetswise, Ingenta, Ebsco
* Sobchack, Vivian C. &quot;The Grapes of Wrath (1940): Thematic Emphasis through Visual Style&quot;. &quot;American Quarterly&quot; 1979 31(5): 596–615. Fulltext: in Jstor. Discusses the visual style of John Ford&#x27;s cinematic adaptation of the novel. Usually the movie is examined in terms of its literary roots or its social protest. But the imagery of the film reveals the important theme of the Joad family&#x27;s coherence. The movie shows the family in closeups, cramped in small spaces on a cluttered screen, isolated from the land and their surroundings. Dim lighting helps abstract the Joad family from the reality of Dust Bowl migrants. The film&#x27;s emotional and aesthetic power comes from its generalized quality attained through this visual style.
* Windschuttle, Keith. &quot;Steinbeck&#x27;s Myth of the Okies&quot;. &quot;The New Criterion&quot;, Vol. 20, No. 10, June 2002.
* Zirakzadeh, Cyrus Ernesto. &quot;John Steinbeck on the Political Capacities of Everyday Folk: Moms, Reds, and Ma Joad&#x27;s Revolt&quot;. &quot;Polity&quot; 2004 36(4): 595–618. 


==External links==
* 
* John Steinbeck in the Santa Cruz Mountains – A history of Steinbeck&#x27;s life living in the Santa Cruz Mountains while writing &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot;
* 2 short radio episodes &quot;Spring in California&quot; and &quot;Route 66&quot; from &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot;, California Legacy Project.
* &quot;&quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot; revisited,&quot; (videos) &quot;The Guardian&quot; [Chris McGreal journeys along Route 66 – following the path of the Joads, of John Steinbeck&#x27;s &quot;The Grapes of Wrath&quot;, to compare that account of the Great Depression with today&#x27;s United States under President Barack Obama.
* Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture – &quot;Grapes of Wrath&quot;
* National Public Radio: &quot;Grapes of Wrath&quot;, Present at the Creation
* Oklahoma Digital Maps Collection at Oklahoma State University
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q667661" start="35" end="42" title="Literary realism" label="realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q39212" start="60" end="74" title="John Steinbeck" label="John Steinbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q572316" start="115" end="134" title="National Book Award" label="National Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q833633" start="139" end="153" title="Pulitzer Prize for Fiction" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="227" end="252" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="278" end="294" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q54639972" start="345" end="358" title="tenant farmer" label="tenant farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="378" end="386" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="596" end="605" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="629" end="639" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q79934" start="653" end="664" title="U.S. Route 66" label="mother road"/>
<link wikidata="Q446406" start="708" end="712" title="Okie" label="Okie"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="923" end="932" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q676039" start="933" end="945" title="The Grapes of Wrath (film)" label="film version"/>
<link wikidata="Q19155" start="956" end="967" title="Henry Fonda" label="Henry Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q51114" start="984" end="993" title="John Ford" label="John Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357120" start="1071" end="1077" title="parole" label="parole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082369" start="1084" end="1100" title="Oklahoma State Penitentiary" label="McAlester prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q149086" start="1158" end="1166" title="homicide" label="homicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984962" start="1219" end="1237" title="Sallisaw, Oklahoma" label="Sallisaw, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313428" start="1775" end="1781" title="Hudson Motor Car Company" label="Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="1844" end="1853" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q79934" start="2251" end="2259" title="U.S. Route 66" label="Route 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662074" start="2857" end="2880" title="reserve army of labor" label="oversupplied with labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516519" start="3144" end="3155" title="Hooverville" label="Hooverville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979360" start="3386" end="3400" title="Weedpatch Camp" label="Weedpatch Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315356" start="3459" end="3486" title="Resettlement Administration" label="Resettlement Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="3490" end="3498" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853443" start="3762" end="3774" title="exploitation of labor" label="exploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="3834" end="3845" title="labor union" label="labor union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340502" start="3870" end="3883" title="strikebreaker" label="strikebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q232254" start="4251" end="4258" title="pickaxe" label="pickaxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q745832" start="4720" end="4729" title="Stillbirth" label="stillborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q853930" start="5068" end="5078" title="starvation" label="starvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098047" start="5740" end="5752" title="sharecropper" label="sharecropper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108947" start="6273" end="6291" title="Christ figure" label="Christ-like figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282471" start="6326" end="6337" title="Ed Ricketts" label="Ed Ricketts"/>
<link wikidata="Q846591" start="7148" end="7167" title="Needles, California" label="Needles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="7205" end="7219" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718409" start="7519" end="7538" title="paregoric" label="soothin&amp;#x27; syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="7919" end="7932" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q628718" start="8221" end="8230" title="Weedpatch" label="Weedpatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="8533" end="8539" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516519" start="9020" end="9031" title="Hooverville" label="Hooverville"/>
<link wikidata="Q9190" start="10131" end="10137" title="Book of Exodus" label="Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20050633" start="11660" end="11679" title="The Harvest Gypsies" label="The Harvest Gypsies"/>
<link wikidata="Q204493" start="12032" end="12060" title="Farm Security Administration" label="Farm Security Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222478" start="12079" end="12090" title="Sanora Babb" label="Sanora Babb"/>
<link wikidata="Q85815473" start="12364" end="12387" title="Whose Names Are Unknown" label="Whose Names Are Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q985343" start="13271" end="13295" title="Monte Sereno, California" label="Monte Sereno, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q583210" start="13520" end="13551" title="The Battle Hymn of the Republic" label="The Battle Hymn of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q241299" start="13562" end="13577" title="Julia Ward Howe" label="Julia Ward Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="13649" end="13659" title="Book of Revelation" label="Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="13749" end="13763" title="final judgment" label="final judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402623" start="13842" end="13865" title="Christ in the winepress" label="Christ in the winepress"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="14227" end="14236" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544219" start="15171" end="15191" title="Great American Novel" label="Great American Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="15436" end="15454" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15584" end="15603" title="List of National Book Award winners#1935 to 1941" label="National Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743232" start="15660" end="15692" title="American Booksellers Association" label="American Booksellers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q833633" start="15711" end="15737" title="Pulitzer Prize for Fiction" label="Pulitzer Prize for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793043" start="15747" end="15769" title="Armed Services Edition" label="Armed Services Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="16034" end="16043" title="Socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381985" start="16514" end="16526" title="John Gardner (American writer)" label="John Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="17118" end="17129" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="17281" end="17307" title="Nobel Prize for Literature" label="Nobel Prize for Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q12461" start="17342" end="17350" title="Le Monde" label="Le Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q40734" start="17435" end="17469" title="Le Monde&amp;#x27;s 100 Books of the Century" label="100 best books of the 20th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="17570" end="17573" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q775274" start="17593" end="17605" title="The Big Read" label="The Big Read"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="17622" end="17626" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="17747" end="17766" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542493" start="18183" end="18205" title="Library Bill of Rights" label="Library Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q465584" start="18213" end="18241" title="American Library Association" label="American Library Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222478" start="18300" end="18311" title="Sanora Babb" label="Sanora Babb"/>
<link wikidata="Q85815473" start="18325" end="18348" title="Whose Names Are Unknown" label="Whose Names Are Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q676039" start="21239" end="21261" title="The Grapes of Wrath (film)" label="movie of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q51114" start="21274" end="21283" title="John Ford" label="John Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q19155" start="21297" end="21308" title="Henry Fonda" label="Henry Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q19155" start="21558" end="21569" title="Henry Fonda" label="Henry Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q676039" start="21592" end="21611" title="The Grapes of Wrath (film)" label="The Grapes of Wrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q35851" start="21835" end="21845" title="Bill Hicks" label="Bill Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q355409" start="21867" end="21877" title="last words" label="last words"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="22048" end="22064" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q192557" start="22143" end="22153" title="DreamWorks Pictures" label="DreamWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17215635" start="22191" end="22208" title="Bungou Stray Dogs" label="Bungou Stray Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4061" start="22330" end="22343" title="Woody Guthrie" label="Woody Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22371" end="22397" title="Woody Guthrie discography#1940, RCA Victor Sessions, Dust Bowl Ballads" label="Tom Joad – Parts 1 &amp;amp; 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q385071" start="22427" end="22444" title="Dust Bowl Ballads" label="Dust Bowl Ballads"/>
<link wikidata="Q73132" start="22555" end="22566" title="Andy Irvine (musician)" label="Andy Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q649114" start="22633" end="22647" title="Patrick Street" label="Patrick Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894784" start="22675" end="22695" title="No. 2 Patrick Street" label="No. 2 Patrick Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q208681" start="22764" end="22782" title="Kris Kristofferson" label="Kris Kristofferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778916" start="22906" end="22920" title="The Mission UK" label="The Mission UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047515" start="22997" end="23011" title="Carved in Sand" label="Carved in Sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q612471" start="23053" end="23058" title="Camel (band)" label="Camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764995" start="23091" end="23106" title="Dust and Dreams" label="Dust and Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="23177" end="23194" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q522561" start="23230" end="23251" title="The Ghost of Tom Joad" label="The Ghost of Tom Joad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630160" start="23320" end="23341" title="The Ghost of Tom Joad (song)" label="shares the same title"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="23434" end="23443" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="23463" end="23487" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630160" start="23516" end="23537" title="The Ghost of Tom Joad (song)" label="The Ghost of Tom Joad"/>
<link wikidata="Q734254" start="23580" end="23592" title="Dick Gaughan" label="Dick Gaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737554" start="23704" end="23728" title="The Grapes of Wrath (opera)" label="opera based on the novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868391" start="23752" end="23767" title="Minnesota Opera" label="Minnesota Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778079" start="23773" end="23796" title="Utah Symphony" label="Utah Symphony and Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332099" start="23812" end="23828" title="Ricky Ian Gordon" label="Ricky Ian Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730993" start="23845" end="23858" title="Michael Korie" label="Michael Korie"/>
<link wikidata="Q201669" start="23941" end="23953" title="Bad Religion" label="Bad Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484678" start="24024" end="24040" title="New Maps of Hell (Bad Religion album)" label="New Maps of Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q437255" start="24082" end="24094" title="Greg Graffin" label="Greg Graffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q953918" start="24176" end="24194" title="Mumford &amp;amp; Sons" label="Mumford &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135191" start="24207" end="24219" title="Sigh No More (Mumford &amp;amp; Sons album)" label="Sigh No More"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="24262" end="24272" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q109214" start="24377" end="24404" title="A Momentary Lapse of Reason" label="A Momentary Lapse of Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q15053442" start="24507" end="24516" title="Hop Along" label="Hop Along"/>
<link wikidata="Q24037498" start="24529" end="24541" title="Get Disowned" label="Get Disowned"/>
<link wikidata="Q209956" start="24646" end="24652" title="Weezer" label="Weezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q343069" start="24665" end="24677" title="Rivers Cuomo" label="Rivers Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q104950881" start="24701" end="24709" title="OK Human" label="OK Human"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611082" start="24787" end="24814" title="Steppenwolf Theatre Company" label="Steppenwolf Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737556" start="24824" end="24851" title="The Grapes of Wrath (play)" label="a stage version of the book"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486761" start="24864" end="24876" title="Frank Galati" label="Frank Galati"/>
<link wikidata="Q180272" start="24878" end="24889" title="Gary Sinise" label="Gary Sinise"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="25016" end="25019" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q457977" start="25254" end="25269" title="Of Mice and Men" label="Of Mice and Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101335" start="25291" end="25318" title="Oregon Shakespeare Festival" label="Oregon Shakespeare Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q23304584" start="25374" end="25387" title="Octavio Solis" label="Octavio Solis"/>
<link wikidata="Q260205" start="25842" end="25852" title="The Jungle" label="The Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40734" start="25860" end="25905" title="Le Monde&amp;#x27;s 100 Books of the Century" label="&amp;quot;Le Monde&amp;quot; 100 Books of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720024" start="26458" end="26475" title="Alexander Saxton" label="Saxton, Alexander"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42646" wikidata="Q1029955" url="?curid=42646" title="United States Secretary of Agriculture">
<text>The United States secretary of agriculture is the head of the United States Department of Agriculture. The position carries similar responsibilities to those of agriculture ministers in other governments

The department includes several organizations. The 297,000 mi2 (770,000 km2) of national forests and grasslands are managed by the United States Forest Service. The safety of food produced and sold in the United States is ensured by the United States Food Safety and Inspection Service. The Food Stamp Program works with the states to provide food to low-income people. 

Secretary of Agriculture is a Level I position in the Executive Schedule, thus earning a salary of US$221,400, as of January 2021.

Since February 13, 2025, the current secretary is Brooke Rollins.

==List of secretaries of agriculture==
When the Department of Agriculture was established in 1862, its executive was a non-Cabinet position called the commissioner of agriculture. The commissioners of agriculture were:

The position of secretary of agriculture was created when the department was elevated to Cabinet status in 1889. The following is a list of secretaries of agriculture, since the creation of the office in 1889.

; Parties
 (14)
 (19)

;Status


==Line of succession==
The line of succession for the secretary of agriculture is as follows:

#Deputy Secretary of Agriculture
#Under Secretary of Agriculture for Farm and Foreign Agriculture Services (this position no longer exists)
#Assistant Secretary of Agriculture for Administration
#Under Secretary of Agriculture for Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services
#Under Secretary of Agriculture for Research, Education, and Economics
#Under Secretary of Agriculture for Food Safety
#Under Secretary of Agriculture for Natural Resources and Environment
#Under Secretary of Agriculture for Rural Development
#Under Secretary of Agriculture for Marketing and Regulatory Programs
#General Counsel of the Department of Agriculture
#Chief of Staff, Office of the Secretary
#State Executive Directors of the Farm Service Agency (in order of seniority by length of unbroken tenure) for the States of: 
#*California
#*Iowa
#*Kansas
#Regional Administrators of the Food and Nutrition Service (in order of seniority by length of unbroken tenure) for the: 
#*Mountain Plains Regional Office (Denver, Colorado)
#*Midwest Regional Office (Chicago, Illinois) 
#*Western Regional Office (San Francisco, California)
#Chief Financial Officer of the Department of Agriculture
#Assistant Secretary of Agriculture for Civil Rights
#Assistant Secretary of Agriculture for Congressional Relations

==References==
==External links==


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1029955" start="4" end="42" title="United States Secretary of Agriculture" label="United States secretary of agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="62" end="101" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15704556" start="161" end="182" title="List of agriculture ministries" label="agriculture ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="336" end="364" title="United States Forest Service" label="United States Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465387" start="442" end="490" title="Food Safety and Inspection Service" label="United States Food Safety and Inspection Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q556318" start="496" end="514" title="Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program" label="Food Stamp Program"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="607" end="649" title="Executive Schedule#Level I" label="Level I position in the Executive Schedule"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="676" end="679" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974474" start="759" end="773" title="Brooke Rollins" label="Brooke Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889748" start="1336" end="1367" title="United States Deputy Secretary of Agriculture" label="Deputy Secretary of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883147" start="1369" end="1441" title="Under Secretary of Agriculture for Farm and Foreign Agricultural Services" label="Under Secretary of Agriculture for Farm and Foreign Agriculture Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883148" start="1531" end="1604" title="Under Secretary of Agriculture for Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services" label="Under Secretary of Agriculture for Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883152" start="1606" end="1675" title="Under Secretary of Agriculture for Research, Education, and Economics" label="Under Secretary of Agriculture for Research, Education, and Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883149" start="1677" end="1723" title="Under Secretary of Agriculture for Food Safety" label="Under Secretary of Agriculture for Food Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883151" start="1725" end="1793" title="Under Secretary of Agriculture for Natural Resources and Environment" label="Under Secretary of Agriculture for Natural Resources and Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883154" start="1795" end="1847" title="Under Secretary of Agriculture for Rural Development" label="Under Secretary of Agriculture for Rural Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883150" start="1849" end="1917" title="Under Secretary of Agriculture for Marketing and Regulatory Programs" label="Under Secretary of Agriculture for Marketing and Regulatory Programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993089" start="2043" end="2062" title="Farm Service Agency" label="Farm Service Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2138" end="2148" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="2151" end="2155" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="2158" end="2164" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465436" start="2197" end="2223" title="Food and Nutrition Service" label="Food and Nutrition Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="2322" end="2328" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="2330" end="2338" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="2367" end="2374" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="2376" end="2384" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2414" end="2427" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42647" wikidata="Q631948" url="?curid=42647" title="Cracker (band)">
<text>Cracker is an American rock band formed in 1990 by lead singer David Lowery and guitarist Johnny Hickman. The band&#x27;s first album &quot;Cracker&quot; was released in 1992 on Virgin Records; it included the single &quot;Teen Angst (What the World Needs Now)&quot;, which went to #1 on the U.S. Modern Rock chart. The band&#x27;s follow-up, the 1993 album &quot;Kerosene Hat&quot; included the hit songs &quot;Low&quot;, &quot;Get Off This&quot;, and &quot;Euro-Trash Girl&quot;.

Cracker has released nine studio albums and several compilations, collaborations, solo projects and live albums. The band mix influences and sounds from rock, punk, grunge, psychedelia, country, blues and folk.

==History==
===1990s===
Shortly after Lowery&#x27;s former group Camper Van Beethoven disbanded in 1990, he began demoing material along with boyhood friend, guitarist Johnny Hickman. After moving from Redlands, California to Richmond, Virginia, Lowery and Hickman recorded a demo tape, later nicknamed &quot;Big Dirty Yellow Demos&quot; by the group&#x27;s fans, which included early versions of songs that appeared on later albums. They eventually chose the name Cracker and teamed up with fellow Redlands bass guitarist Davey Faragher. A brief tour with Virginia drummer Go Weatherford followed.

By 1991, the newly formed band had signed a recording contract with Virgin Records and enlisted the help of several drummers/percussionists (Jim Keltner, Michael Urbano and Phil Jones), issuing its first album, &quot;Cracker&quot;, in 1992. From the album came radio hit &quot;Teen Angst (What the World Needs Now)&quot;, which peaked at No. 1 on Modern Rock Tracks, and a second single entitled &quot;Happy Birthday to Me.&quot; The album went on to sell more than 200,000 copies.

A year later, Cracker issued its best-selling album, &quot;Kerosene Hat&quot;. The album included hit singles &quot;Low&quot; and &quot;Get Off This&quot; (both with official music videos directed by Carlos Grasso), as well as a cover of the Grateful Dead&#x27;s &quot;Loser.&quot; The album sold almost half a million copies that year and eventually almost reached platinum status. Urbano performed on &quot;Kerosene Hat&quot; and toured with Cracker before leaving the band, along with Faragher. After a short spell with Bruce Hughes, Lowery and Hickman added Bob Rupe, formerly of The Silos, as bass guitarist and Charlie Quintana (Bob Dylan, The JuJu Hounds) on drums. In 1993, Cracker contributed the song &quot;Good Times Bad Times&quot; to the &quot;&quot; album. Initially, the band had recorded a rendition of &quot;When the Levee Breaks&quot; but it was deemed &quot;too weird.&quot;

Three years later, &quot;The Golden Age&quot; was released, with &quot;I Hate My Generation&quot; as the lead single. However, the music scene was shifting away from guitar-driven alternative rock, and although critically acclaimed, the album sold only moderately. Following the long-term additions of drummer Frank Funaro and keyboard player Kenny Margolis, the band returned in 1998 with &quot;Gentleman&#x27;s Blues&quot;, with &quot;The Good Life&quot; as the lead single. Although the album received only a lukewarm critical response, it solidified an ever-growing and devout following both in the United States and Europe who referred to themselves as &quot;Crumbs.&quot;

In 1995 the song &quot;Whole Lotta Trouble,&quot; co-written by Hickman and Chris LeRoy, was used in the film &quot;Empire Records&quot;. The same year, Cracker&#x27;s cover of the Flamin&#x27; Groovies song, &quot;Shake Some Action,&quot; was used in the teen romantic-comedy &quot;Clueless&quot;.

Camper Van Beethoven unexpectedly re-formed in 1999, and in 2004 released the critically acclaimed &quot;New Roman Times&quot;. During this time, Hickman released a first solo recording, &quot;Palmhenge&quot;, which received &quot;Voices Choice&quot; accolades in &quot;The Village Voice&quot; by the rock critic Robert Christgau and a positive review in &quot;Blender&quot; magazine. Since then, Lowery has performed in both Cracker and Camper Van Beethoven.

===2000s===
A compilation album called &quot;Garage D&#x27;Or&quot; was released in 2000, with one disc composed of greatest hits and three new songs, and another of out-takes, soundtrack contributions, demos and other obscurities. Rupe departed in January 2000 and was replaced by bass guitarist Brandy Wood. In 2002, the band released its next studio album, &quot;Forever&quot; which, once again, met with limited commercial success.

The group left Virgin in 2003 with the independent release &quot;Countrysides&quot;, composed of eight country and western covers and one new, original song. A collaboration with the bluegrass band Leftover Salmon, &quot;Oh Cracker, Where Art Thou?&quot; (2003), contained bluegrass versions of many Lowery and Hickman compositions. In 2005, Cracker and Camper Van Beethoven started an annual three-night &quot;Campout&quot; at Pappy and Harriet&#x27;s Pioneertown Palace in Pioneertown, California, close to where Lowery and Hickman met, in which they and several other bands perform, including sets by Cracker and Camper band members performing their own music. Previous years&#x27; guests have included Roger Clyne, John Doe, Neko Case, Ike Reilly, Ryan Bingham, Vermillion Lies, Jason Molina and Magnolia Electric Co, Built To Spill, Brant Bjork and the Bros, Clem Snide, Gram Rabbit and The Bellrays.

With Camper Van Beethoven bass guitarist Victor Krummenacher replacing Wood, the band released the studio album &quot;Greenland&quot; on June 6, 2006, and continued to tour extensively. After the departures of Margolis and Krummenacher, the band&#x27;s lineup stabilized in 2007 around Hickman, Lowery, Funaro and new bass guitarist Sal Maida, who had played with Roxy Music.

Cracker released a new studio album entitled &quot;Sunrise in the Land of Milk and Honey&quot; to positive reviews on May 5, 2009. It was the band&#x27;s first chart on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 in more than a decade, after having sold more than 3,000 copies in a week. This was in part due to the Triple A chart success of the album&#x27;s lead single, &quot;Turn On, Tune In, Drop Out With Me,&quot; which was used in the television show &quot;Californication&quot;.

===2010s===
In January 2011, Lowery released his first solo album, &quot;The Palace Guards&quot;, on 429 Records. In March, Cracker announced Campout East, the east coast counterpart to their Campout festival, to be held in Crozet, Virginia. The first Campout East was held at Misty Mountain Camp Resort and was co-hosted by Sons of Bill. The second Campout East took place in Buena Vista, Virginia at Glen Maury Park on June 1–2, 2012.

Johnny Hickman released a second solo album, &quot;Tilting&quot;, in July 2012, while Cracker&#x27;s song &quot;Low&quot; appeared in the 2012 film &quot;The Perks of Being a Wallflower&quot; and again in &quot;The Wolverine&quot; and an episode of &quot;Hindsight&quot;.

Drummer Frank Funaro was unable to tour due to an injury to his arm that sidelined him for all of 2014.

In July 2014, a revival of the &quot;Kerosene Hat&quot; era lineup toured China. Lowery and Hickman were joined on the tour by original bassist Davey Faragher and former drummer Michael Urbano. Faragher and Urbano also joined the band in recording roughly half of the double album &quot;Berkeley to Bakersfield&quot;. The other half was recorded with an entirely new lineup that also became the current touring lineup. The album was released on December 9, 2014, with &quot;Waited My Whole Life&quot; released as a single.

In December 2015, Lowery (along with Camper Van Beethoven) filed a class action lawsuit against music streaming service Spotify, alleging that Spotify knowingly and unlawfully reproduced and distributed copyrighted recordings without obtaining proper music licenses.

== Band members ==
=== Current members ===
* David Lowery – vocals, guitar (1990–present)
* Johnny Hickman – lead guitar, vocals (1990–present)
* Bryan Howard – bass guitar (2014–present)
* Carlton &quot;Coco&quot; Owens – drums (2014–present)

=== Former members ===
* Davey Faragher – bass guitar, vocals (1990–1993, 2014)
* Phil Jones – drums, percussion (1990–1992 – session)
* Go Weatherford – drums (1990–1991 – touring)
* Michael Urbano – drums (1992–1993, 2014)
* Joey Peters – drums (1992 – session)
* Bruce Hughes – bass guitar (1993–1994)
* David Lovering – drums (1993–1994)
* Johnny Hott – drums (1994–1995)
* Bob Rupe – bass guitar, vocals (1994–2000)
* Charlie Quintana – drums (1995–1996; d. 2018)
* Frank Funaro – drums (1996–2014)
* Kenny Margolis – keyboards, accordion (1996–2007)
* Brandy Wood – bass guitar, vocals (2000–2004)
* Victor Krummenacher – bass guitar, vocals (2004–2006)
* Sal Maida – bass guitar (2006–2014; d. 2025)
* Thayer Sarrano – keyboards, vocals (2014–2015)
* Matt &quot;Pistol&quot; Stoessel – pedal steel guitar (2014–2023)
* Paul McHugh – keyboards, organ (2018–2022)

===Timeline===
==Discography==
===Studio albums===
===Compilations, live albums, and EPs===
===Singles===
;Other compilations
* &quot;The Virgin Years&quot; (1995) with Camper Van Beethoven
* &quot;Get On with It: The Best of Cracker&quot; (2006) Virgin Records greatest hits collection (Not authorized by the band)

;Tribute albums
* &quot;If I Were a Carpenter&quot; (1994) – &quot;Rainy Days and Mondays&quot;
* &quot;Encomium: A Tribute to Led Zeppelin&quot; (1995) – &quot;Good Times Bad Times&quot;
* &quot;Eyesore: A Stab at the Residents&quot; (1996) – &quot;Blue Rosebuds&quot;
* &quot;Sweet Relief II: Gravity of the Situation&quot; (1996) – &quot;Withering&quot;
* &quot;Burning London: The Clash Tribute&quot; (1999) – &quot;White Riot&quot;
* &quot;This Is Where I Belong - The Songs of Ray Davies &amp; The Kinks&quot; (2002) – &quot;Victoria&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*
* Audio recordings at the Live Music Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q631948" start="0" end="7" title="Cracker (band)" label="Cracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="23" end="27" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236790" start="63" end="75" title="David Lowery (musician)" label="David Lowery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266902" start="90" end="104" title="Johnny Hickman" label="Johnny Hickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180364" start="140" end="147" title="Cracker (album)" label="Cracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q203059" start="178" end="192" title="Virgin Records" label="Virgin Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022809" start="223" end="260" title="Teen Angst (What the World Needs Now)" label="Teen Angst (What the World Needs Now)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="297" end="308" title="Modern Rock Tracks" label="Modern Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394277" start="364" end="376" title="Kerosene Hat" label="Kerosene Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692800" start="412" end="415" title="Low (Cracker song)" label="Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411495" start="459" end="474" title="Euro-Trash Girl" label="Euro-Trash Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="636" end="640" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="642" end="646" title="punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="648" end="654" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q846119" start="656" end="667" title="psychedelic music" label="psychedelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="669" end="676" title="country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="678" end="683" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="688" end="692" title="folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030927" start="760" end="780" title="Camper Van Beethoven" label="Camper Van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230327" start="1218" end="1232" title="Davey Faragher" label="Davey Faragher"/>
<link wikidata="Q453565" start="1436" end="1447" title="Jim Keltner" label="Jim Keltner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180364" start="1512" end="1519" title="Cracker (album)" label="Cracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022809" start="1572" end="1609" title="Teen Angst (What the World Needs Now)" label="Teen Angst (What the World Needs Now)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="1642" end="1660" title="Modern Rock Tracks" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394277" start="1837" end="1849" title="Kerosene Hat" label="Kerosene Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692800" start="1894" end="1897" title="Low (Cracker song)" label="Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="2020" end="2033" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2301" end="2313" title="Bruce Hughes" label="Bruce Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165801" start="2340" end="2348" title="Bob Rupe" label="Bob Rupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q686360" start="2495" end="2515" title="Good Times Bad Times" label="Good Times Bad Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030118" start="2603" end="2624" title="When the Levee Breaks" label="When the Levee Breaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736980" start="2698" end="2712" title="The Golden Age (Cracker album)" label="The Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486719" start="2983" end="2995" title="Frank Funaro" label="Frank Funaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533703" start="3069" end="3091" title="Gentleman&amp;#x27;s Blues" label="Gentleman&amp;#x27;s Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309994" start="3468" end="3482" title="Empire Records" label="Empire Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571476" start="3533" end="3554" title="Flamin&amp;#x27; Groovies" label="Flamin&amp;#x27; Groovies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481246" start="3567" end="3584" title="Shake Some Action" label="Shake Some Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q931165" start="3635" end="3643" title="Clueless (film)" label="Clueless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011315" start="3757" end="3772" title="New Roman Times" label="New Roman Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="3922" end="3939" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="3965" end="3981" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q804471" start="4013" end="4020" title="Blender (magazine)" label="Blender"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521864" start="4158" end="4174" title="Garage D&amp;#x27;Or" label="Garage D&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469335" start="4479" end="4486" title="Forever (Cracker album)" label="Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177559" start="4615" end="4627" title="Countrysides (album)" label="Countrysides"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="4653" end="4672" title="country and western music" label="country and western"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="4733" end="4742" title="Bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858787" start="4748" end="4763" title="Leftover Salmon" label="Leftover Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071974" start="4771" end="4798" title="Oh Cracker, Where Art Thou? (album)" label="Oh Cracker, Where Art Thou?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196874" start="5025" end="5048" title="Pioneertown, California" label="Pioneertown, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357994" start="5256" end="5267" title="Roger Clyne" label="Roger Clyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181360" start="5269" end="5277" title="John Doe (musician)" label="John Doe"/>
<link wikidata="Q431591" start="5279" end="5288" title="Neko Case" label="Neko Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q16735108" start="5290" end="5300" title="Ike Reilly" label="Ike Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339448" start="5302" end="5314" title="Ryan Bingham" label="Ryan Bingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555931" start="5316" end="5331" title="Vermillion Lies" label="Vermillion Lies"/>
<link wikidata="Q921679" start="5333" end="5345" title="Jason Molina" label="Jason Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003115" start="5372" end="5386" title="Built To Spill" label="Built To Spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q72601" start="5388" end="5399" title="Brant Bjork" label="Brant Bjork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978793" start="5414" end="5424" title="Clem Snide" label="Clem Snide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593581" start="5426" end="5437" title="Gram Rabbit" label="Gram Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q834362" start="5446" end="5454" title="Bellrays" label="Bellrays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926072" start="5498" end="5517" title="Victor Krummenacher" label="Victor Krummenacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604208" start="5575" end="5584" title="Greenland (album)" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q334648" start="5821" end="5831" title="Roxy Music" label="Roxy Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641145" start="5885" end="5922" title="Sunrise in the Land of Milk and Honey" label="Sunrise in the Land of Milk and Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="6007" end="6032" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605852" start="6136" end="6144" title="Triple-A radio" label="Triple A"/>
<link wikidata="Q326143" start="6284" end="6299" title="Californication (TV series)" label="Californication"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120935" start="6409" end="6420" title="429 Records" label="429 Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141856" start="6532" end="6548" title="Crozet, Virginia" label="Crozet, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562293" start="6633" end="6645" title="Sons of Bill" label="Sons of Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q503014" start="6685" end="6706" title="Buena Vista, Virginia" label="Buena Vista, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q675468" start="6900" end="6931" title="The Perks of Being a Wallflower (film)" label="The Perks of Being a Wallflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q197491" start="6957" end="6970" title="The Wolverine (film)" label="The Wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18786444" start="7001" end="7010" title="Hindsight (TV series)" label="Hindsight"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208652" start="7411" end="7434" title="Berkeley to Bakersfield" label="Berkeley to Bakersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030927" start="7685" end="7705" title="Camper Van Beethoven" label="Camper Van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="7768" end="7775" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236790" start="7961" end="7973" title="David Lowery (musician)" label="David Lowery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266902" start="8008" end="8022" title="Johnny Hickman" label="Johnny Hickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230327" start="8186" end="8200" title="Davey Faragher" label="Davey Faragher"/>
<link wikidata="Q105359677" start="8243" end="8253" title="Phil Jones (Musician)" label="Phil Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856292" start="8345" end="8359" title="Michael Urbano" label="Michael Urbano"/>
<link wikidata="Q739636" start="8468" end="8482" title="David Lovering" label="David Lovering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266929" start="8505" end="8516" title="Johnny Hott" label="Johnny Hott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165801" start="8539" end="8547" title="Bob Rupe" label="Bob Rupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666677" start="8584" end="8600" title="Charlie Quintana" label="Charlie Quintana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486719" start="8632" end="8644" title="Frank Funaro" label="Frank Funaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926072" start="8767" end="8786" title="Victor Krummenacher" label="Victor Krummenacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059481" start="8870" end="8884" title="Thayer Sarrano" label="Thayer Sarrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030927" start="9200" end="9220" title="Camper Van Beethoven" label="Camper Van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q262600" start="9372" end="9393" title="If I Were a Carpenter (tribute album)" label="If I Were a Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285002" start="9415" end="9437" title="Rainy Days and Mondays" label="Rainy Days and Mondays"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082949" start="9452" end="9487" title="Encomium (album)" label="Encomium: A Tribute to Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q686360" start="9509" end="9529" title="Good Times Bad Times" label="Good Times Bad Times"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9626" end="9667" title="Sweet Relief II: Gravity of the Situation" label="Sweet Relief II: Gravity of the Situation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9713" end="9746" title="Burning London: The Clash Tribute" label="Burning London: The Clash Tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q967376" start="9768" end="9778" title="White Riot" label="White Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q113518023" start="9793" end="9857" title="This Is Where I Belong - The Songs of Ray Davies &amp;amp; The Kinks" label="This Is Where I Belong - The Songs of Ray Davies &amp;amp; The Kinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043292" start="9879" end="9887" title="Victoria (The Kinks song)" label="Victoria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42648" wikidata="Q1482392" url="?curid=42648" title="Cracker (British TV series)">
<text>Cracker is a British crime drama series produced by Granada Television for ITV, created and principally written by Jimmy McGovern. Set in Manchester, the series follows a criminal psychologist (or &quot;cracker&quot;), Dr Edward &quot;Fitz&quot; Fitzgerald, played by Robbie Coltrane, who works with the Greater Manchester Police (GMP) to help them solve crimes.

The show consists of three series, originally broadcast from 1993 to 1995. A 100-minute special set in Hong Kong followed in 1996 and another two-hour story in 2006. The show won the British Academy Television Award for Best Drama Series in 1995 and 1996, and Coltrane received the British Academy Television Award for Best Actor in three consecutive years (1994 to 1996).

==Overview==
Fitz is Scottish of Irish origin, alcoholic, a chain smoker, obese, sedentary, addicted to gambling, manic, foul-mouthed and sarcastic, yet cerebral and brilliant. He is a genius in his speciality: criminal psychology. As Fitz confesses in &quot;Brotherly Love&quot;: &quot;I drink too much, I smoke too much, I gamble too much. I &quot;am&quot; too much.&quot;

Each case spanned several episodes and cliffhangers were quite often used, but it was not until the end of the second series that a cliffhanger was employed to tie off the series. Some of the plotlines in the cases took as their starting point real events such as the Hillsborough disaster, whilst others were purely fictional with only tangential ties to actual events.

Several different psychotic types were explored during the run of the show with increasingly complex psychological motivations that, as the series entered the middle of the second series, began to expand beyond the criminals being investigated to the regular cast members. As the series moved forward, the storylines became as much about the interactions of the regulars as they were about the crimes. In many later episodes, in fact, the crimes often became background to intense, provocative explorations of the police officers&#x27; reactions to the crimes they investigated.

To emphasise how fine a line the police (and Fitz) walk in their close association with criminals, all three series featured several stories in which the police become victims of crime or themselves commit criminal acts such as murder, rape, obstruction of justice and assault and battery.

==Characters==
===Main cast===
*Robbie Coltrane as Dr Edward &quot;Fitz&quot; Fitzgerald. The character was named after the English poet and writer Edward FitzGerald, according to series creator Jimmy McGovern. Coltrane won three consecutive BAFTA awards for the role, a streak matched only by Michael Gambon, Helen Mirren and Julie Walters.
*Christopher Eccleston as DCI David Billborough
*Ricky Tomlinson as DCI Charlie Wise
*Geraldine Somerville as DS Jane &quot;Panhandle&quot; Penhaligon
*Lorcan Cranitch as DS Jimmy Beck
*Barbara Flynn as Judith Fitzgerald
*Kieran O&#x27;Brien as Mark Fitzgerald
*Tess Thomson as Katy Fitzgerald
*John Evans as James Fitzgerald
*Ian Mercer as DS George Giggs
*Colin Tierney as DC Bobby Harriman
*Robert Cavanah as DC Alan Temple
*Stan Finni as Sgt Smith
*Wil Johnson as PC/DC Michael Skelton
*Clive Russell as Danny Fitzgerald. Russell was cast at Coltrane&#x27;s recommendation.
*Amelia Bullmore (Series 1.5, 1.6) and Isobel Middleton (Series 2.1, 2.3, 3.1) as Catriona Bilborough
*Edward Peel as the Chief Super

===Notable guest stars===
*Adrian Dunbar as Thomas Francis Kelly
*Nicholas Woodeson as Michael Hennessy
*Andrew Tiernan as Sean Kerrigan
*Susan Lynch as Tina Brien
*Christopher Fulford as Nigel Cassidy
*Robert Carlyle as Albie Kinsella
*Samantha Morton as Joanne Barnes
*Jim Carter as Kenneth Trant
*Maureen O&#x27;Brien as Virginia Trant
*James Fleet as Michael Trant
*Cherith Mellor as Norma Trant
*Graham Aggrey as Floyd Malcolm
*Mark Lambert as David Harvey
*Brid Brennan as Maggie Harvey
*John Simm as Bill Nash/Preece
*Liam Cunningham as Stuart Grady
*Paul Barber as Ian McVerry
*Emily Joyce as Janice
*Barnaby Kay as Dennis Philby
*Anthony Flanagan as Kenny Archer

==Episodes==

==Production==
The first two series were written by Jimmy McGovern, excepting the fifth serial, &quot;The Big Crunch&quot;, which was contributed by Ted Whitehead. Claiming that he had &quot;nothing more to write about”, McGovern originally planned to leave after the second series but was allowed to write the controversial rape storyline, &quot;Men Should Weep&quot;, when he agreed to contribute a three-part story to the third series. Two of McGovern&#x27;s stories, &quot;To Say I Love You&quot; and &quot;Brotherly Love&quot; (from the first and third series respectively), received Edgar Awards from the Mystery Writers of America. Each serial had a different director, with the exceptions of &quot;To Be a Somebody&quot; and &quot;True Romance&quot;, both directed by Tim Fywell.

Paul Abbott, who had produced the second series, wrote the remainder of the episodes (including the feature-length special &quot;White Ghost&quot;). Abbott later went on to create several high-profile dramas, including &quot;Touching Evil&quot; (1997), &quot;State of Play&quot; (2003) and &quot;Shameless&quot; (2004). Another crew member, Nicola Shindler, who worked as script editor on the programme, later went on to found Red Production Company.

Of the regular cast, only Coltrane and Tomlinson featured in &quot;White Ghost&quot; (retitled &quot;Lucky White Ghost&quot; for some overseas markets), which was set in Hong Kong. Although the series was still drawing large audiences after &quot;White Ghost&quot;, Coltrane declined to return as Fitz unless McGovern returned to write the series.

&quot;Cracker&quot; returned a decade after &quot;White Ghost&quot; in the 2006 special episode, &quot;Nine Eleven&quot;, written by McGovern and directed by Antonia Bird. Coltrane, Flynn and O&#x27;Brien were the only actors to return in their previous roles. The new roles of DCI Walters, DS Saleh and DS McAllister were played by Richard Coyle, Nisha Nayar and Rafe Spall respectively. The story involved Fitz returning to Manchester after several years of living in Australia with Judith and his son James (who had been born during the third series) to attend his daughter Katy&#x27;s wedding. The murder of an American nightclub comedian sends the police to ask Fitz for his help.

==Influences==
&quot;Cracker&quot; storylines often begin by showing the crime being committed, a format popularised by &quot;Columbo&quot;. Both series feature a lead character who solves crimes while masking an intelligent, perceptive nature behind a slobbish exterior, a debt acknowledged by &quot;Cracker&quot; creator Jimmy McGovern; Fitz delivers his summing-up in &quot;To Say I Love You&quot; while doing a Peter Falk impression.

The series&#x27; conception was also partly a reaction against the police procedural approach of fellow Granada crime serial &quot;Prime Suspect&quot;, placing more emphasis on emotional and psychological truth than on correct police procedure. In an interview with the &quot;NME&quot;, McGovern dismissed &quot;Prime Suspect&quot;, noting that &quot;Good TV writing has narrative simplicity and emotional complexity,&quot; and characterising the series as &quot;A narratively complex story going up its own arse.&quot; Gub Neal, who produced the first series of &quot;Cracker&quot;, is quoted as saying, &quot;That we had adopted the right approach was confirmed for me when Jacky Malton, the senior woman police officer who advised on &quot;Prime Suspect&quot;, said that although the way things happened in &quot;Cracker&quot; was sometimes highly improbable, the relationships between the police were in many ways much more credible than they had been in &quot;Prime Suspect&quot;.&quot;

==Locations==
The series was principally filmed in south Manchester, at locations including Didsbury (where Fitz lived at the fictitious address of &quot;15 Charlotte Road&quot;) and the police station at Longsight. The internals for the police station were filmed in the old &quot;Daily Mirror&quot; offices in central Manchester, now The Printworks retail complex. Other Manchester locations included Victoria Railway Station, St Peter&#x27;s Square, Old Trafford, the Arndale Centre, UMIST, University of Salford, the Ramada Hotel, The Star and Garter (interior and exterior for the &quot;Best Boys&quot; episode) and the Safeway supermarket (now Morrisons) in Chorlton-cum-Hardy. The Hulme Crescents were also used for filming in the first two episodes of series one and the first episode of series two; during which time they were being demolished. The first episode involved several railway scenes which were filmed on the East Lancashire Railway in Bury (north Manchester) both on the trackside and inside the Carriage &amp; Wagon Works, where working volunteers from the railway used crowbars to push the carriage springs up and down to suggest a moving train, while water was poured on the windows to suggest rain between black polythene sheets and the window to indicate darkness.

==Other versions==
In 1997, a short spoof episode, &quot;Prime Cracker&quot;, was produced for the BBC&#x27;s biennial Red Nose Day charity telethon in aid of Comic Relief. A crossover with ITV stablemate crime drama &quot;Prime Suspect&quot;, the spoof starred Coltrane and &quot;Prime Suspect&quot; lead Helen Mirren as their characters from the respective series, sending up both shows.

In 1997, a 16-part US version of &quot;Cracker&quot; — directed by Stephen Cragg and Michael Fields — was made, starring Robert Pastorelli in Coltrane&#x27;s role. The original UK story lines were transferred to Los Angeles. The series finished after the first season. It was broadcast in the UK, retitled &quot;Fitz&quot;.

==Home media==
==References==
*

==External links==
*&quot;Cracker&quot; at the British Film Institute
*
*
*The Unofficial Guide To Cracker</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2476957" start="52" end="70" title="ITV Granada" label="Granada Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="75" end="78" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200774" start="115" end="129" title="Jimmy McGovern" label="Jimmy McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="138" end="148" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139238" start="171" end="192" title="criminal psychology" label="criminal psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q296008" start="268" end="283" title="Robbie Coltrane" label="Robbie Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600651" start="304" end="329" title="Greater Manchester Police" label="Greater Manchester Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054923" start="467" end="476" title="British Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925698" start="547" end="601" title="British Academy Television Award for Best Drama Series" label="British Academy Television Award for Best Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925701" start="646" end="693" title="British Academy Television Award for Best Actor" label="British Academy Television Award for Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070451" start="759" end="783" title="Irish Scottish people" label="Scottish of Irish origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="785" end="794" title="alcoholic" label="alcoholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435005" start="798" end="810" title="chain smoker" label="chain smoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="812" end="817" title="obese" label="obese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349358" start="819" end="828" title="Sedentary lifestyle" label="sedentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q748309" start="830" end="850" title="problem gambling" label="addicted to gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="852" end="857" title="mania" label="manic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191035" start="876" end="885" title="sarcastic" label="sarcastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139238" start="949" end="968" title="criminal psychology" label="criminal psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q665478" start="1153" end="1164" title="cliffhanger" label="cliffhanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q234132" start="1382" end="1403" title="Hillsborough disaster" label="Hillsborough disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q296008" start="2389" end="2404" title="Robbie Coltrane" label="Robbie Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q532457" start="2505" end="2522" title="Edward FitzGerald (poet)" label="Edward FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q203545" start="2651" end="2665" title="Michael Gambon" label="Michael Gambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q349391" start="2667" end="2679" title="Helen Mirren" label="Helen Mirren"/>
<link wikidata="Q228747" start="2684" end="2697" title="Julie Walters" label="Julie Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q312380" start="2700" end="2721" title="Christopher Eccleston" label="Christopher Eccleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736441" start="2748" end="2763" title="Ricky Tomlinson" label="Ricky Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q235572" start="2785" end="2805" title="Geraldine Somerville" label="Geraldine Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613012" start="2851" end="2866" title="Lorcan Cranitch" label="Lorcan Cranitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858886" start="2885" end="2898" title="Barbara Flynn" label="Barbara Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q718193" start="2921" end="2940" title="Kieran O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Kieran O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982386" start="3026" end="3036" title="Ian Mercer" label="Ian Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342834" start="3093" end="3107" title="Robert Cavanah" label="Robert Cavanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000017" start="3152" end="3163" title="Wil Johnson" label="Wil Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102002" start="3190" end="3203" title="Clive Russell" label="Clive Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548368" start="3278" end="3293" title="Amelia Bullmore" label="Amelia Bullmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344805" start="3380" end="3391" title="Edward Peel" label="Edward Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825024" start="3439" end="3452" title="Adrian Dunbar" label="Adrian Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q196080" start="3478" end="3495" title="Nicholas Woodeson" label="Nicholas Woodeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846752" start="3517" end="3531" title="Andrew Tiernan" label="Andrew Tiernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q259816" start="3550" end="3561" title="Susan Lynch" label="Susan Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112369" start="3577" end="3596" title="Christopher Fulford" label="Christopher Fulford"/>
<link wikidata="Q207307" start="3615" end="3629" title="Robert Carlyle" label="Robert Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q230190" start="3649" end="3664" title="Samantha Morton" label="Samantha Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q976829" start="3683" end="3693" title="Jim Carter (actor)" label="Jim Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471011" start="3712" end="3732" title="Maureen O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Maureen O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161081" start="3752" end="3763" title="James Fleet" label="James Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984619" start="3845" end="3857" title="Mark Lambert (Irish actor)" label="Mark Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q913526" start="3875" end="3887" title="Brid Brennan" label="Brid Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q443327" start="3906" end="3915" title="John Simm" label="John Simm"/>
<link wikidata="Q460572" start="3937" end="3952" title="Liam Cunningham" label="Liam Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149216" start="3970" end="3981" title="Paul Barber (actor)" label="Paul Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372236" start="3998" end="4009" title="Emily Joyce" label="Emily Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242591" start="4021" end="4032" title="Barnaby Kay" label="Barnaby Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772518" start="4051" end="4067" title="Anthony Flanagan" label="Anthony Flanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q125885332" start="4248" end="4261" title="Ted Whitehead" label="Ted Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q833154" start="4688" end="4699" title="Edgar Award" label="Edgar Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720621" start="4710" end="4736" title="Mystery Writers of America" label="Mystery Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528634" start="4875" end="4885" title="Tim Fywell" label="Tim Fywell"/>
<link wikidata="Q602828" start="4888" end="4899" title="Paul Abbott" label="Paul Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232733" start="5113" end="5126" title="Touching Evil" label="Touching Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q174390" start="5147" end="5160" title="State of Play (TV series)" label="State of Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q23605" start="5184" end="5193" title="Shameless (British TV series)" label="Shameless"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251793" start="5229" end="5244" title="Nicola Shindler" label="Nicola Shindler"/>
<link wikidata="Q261891" start="5260" end="5273" title="script editor" label="script editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11997302" start="5315" end="5337" title="Red Production Company" label="Red Production Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646013" start="5847" end="5859" title="Antonia Bird" label="Antonia Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q634365" start="6022" end="6035" title="Richard Coyle" label="Richard Coyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190134" start="6053" end="6063" title="Rafe Spall" label="Rafe Spall"/>
<link wikidata="Q371207" start="6502" end="6509" title="Columbo" label="Columbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q484881" start="6791" end="6801" title="Peter Falk" label="Peter Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321734" start="6882" end="6899" title="police procedural" label="police procedural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518758" start="6946" end="6959" title="Prime Suspect" label="Prime Suspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="7091" end="7094" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210672" start="7900" end="7908" title="Didsbury" label="Didsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423211" start="8013" end="8022" title="Longsight" label="Longsight"/>
<link wikidata="Q217623" start="8090" end="8102" title="Daily Mirror" label="Daily Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522324" start="8144" end="8158" title="The Printworks (Manchester)" label="The Printworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859573" start="8211" end="8235" title="Manchester Victoria station" label="Victoria Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595337" start="8237" end="8259" title="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Square, Manchester" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q83457" start="8261" end="8273" title="Old Trafford" label="Old Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794514" start="8279" end="8293" title="Arndale Centres" label="Arndale Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272498" start="8295" end="8300" title="UMIST" label="UMIST"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738622" start="8302" end="8323" title="University of Salford" label="University of Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389610" start="8329" end="8341" title="Ramada International" label="Ramada Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979571" start="8343" end="8362" title="The Star and Garter, Manchester" label="The Star and Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398682" start="8433" end="8440" title="Safeway (UK)" label="Safeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024118" start="8472" end="8490" title="Chorlton-cum-Hardy" label="Chorlton-cum-Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15226718" start="8496" end="8511" title="Hulme Crescents" label="Hulme Crescents"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="9199" end="9202" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="9219" end="9231" title="Red Nose Day" label="Red Nose Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619206" start="9240" end="9248" title="telethon" label="telethon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="9259" end="9271" title="Comic Relief (charity)" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518758" start="9323" end="9336" title="Prime Suspect" label="Prime Suspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q349391" start="9406" end="9418" title="Helen Mirren" label="Helen Mirren"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001962" start="9530" end="9537" title="Cracker (American TV series)" label="Cracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830288" start="9576" end="9590" title="Michael Fields (director)" label="Michael Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q654376" start="9612" end="9629" title="Robert Pastorelli" label="Robert Pastorelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="9896" end="9918" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42649" wikidata="Q154842" url="?curid=42649" title="Max Ernst">
<text>Max Ernst (; 2 April 1891 – 1 April 1976) was a German (naturalised American in 1948 and French in 1958) painter, sculptor, printmaker, graphic artist, and poet. A prolific artist, Ernst was a primary pioneer of the Dada movement and surrealism in Europe. He had no formal artistic training, but his experimental attitude toward the making of art resulted in his invention of frottage—a technique that uses pencil rubbings of textured objects and relief surfaces to create images—and grattage, an analogous technique in which paint is scraped across canvas to reveal the imprints of the objects placed beneath. Ernst is noted for his unconventional drawing methods as well as for creating novels and pamphlets using the method of collages. He served as a soldier for four years during World War I, and this experience left him shocked, traumatised and critical of the modern world. During World War II he was designated an &quot;undesirable foreigner&quot; while living in France.

Ernst was born in Brühl. He began painting in 1909 while studying at the University of Bonn, and later joined the Die Rheinischen Expressionisten group of artists. Ernst&#x27;s work often featured ironic juxtapositions of grotesque elements with cubist and expressionist motifs. He had a fascination with birds, often including his alter ego, Loplop, a bird, in his work. He eventually settled in France and achieved financial success in the 1950s. He died in Paris on 1 April 1976.

==Early life==
Max Ernst was born in Brühl south of Cologne, Germany, the third of nine children of a middle-class Catholic family. His father Philipp was a teacher of the deaf and an amateur painter, a devout Christian and a strict disciplinarian. He inspired in Max a penchant for defying authority, while his interest in painting and sketching in nature influenced Max to take up painting. 

In 1909, Max Ernst enrolled in the University of Bonn in Bonn northwest of Koblenz, Germany to read philosophy, art history, literature, psychology, and psychiatry. He visited asylums and became fascinated with the art work of the mentally ill patients; he also began painting that year, producing sketches in the garden of the Brühl castle, and portraits of his sister and himself. In 1911, Max befriended August Macke and joined his &quot;Die Rheinischen Expressionisten&quot; group of artists, deciding to become an artist.

In 1912, Max Ernst visited the Sonderbund exhibition in Cologne, where works by Pablo Picasso and post-Impressionists such as Vincent van Gogh and Paul Gauguin profoundly influenced him. His work was exhibited that year together with that of the Das Junge Rheinland group, at Galerie Feldman in Cologne, and then in several group exhibitions in 1913. In his paintings of this period, Ernst adopted an ironic style that juxtaposed grotesque elements alongside Cubist and Expressionist motifs.

In 1914, Ernst met Hans Arp in Cologne. The two became friends and their relationship lasted for fifty years. After Ernst completed his studies in the summer, his life was interrupted by World War I. Ernst was drafted and served both on the Western and the Eastern Fronts. The effect of the war on Ernst was devastating; in his autobiography, he wrote of his time in the army thus: &quot;On the first of August 1914 M[ax].E[rnst]. died. He was resurrected on the eleventh of November 1918&quot;. For a brief period on the Western Front, Ernst was assigned to chart maps, which allowed him to continue painting. Several German Expressionist painters died in action during the war, among them August Macke and Franz Marc.

==Dada and surrealism==

In 1918, Ernst was demobilised and returned to Cologne. He soon married art history student Luise Straus, of Jewish ancestry, whom he had met in 1914. In 1919, he visited Paul Klee in Munich and studied paintings by Giorgio de Chirico. In the same year, inspired by de Chirico and mail-order catalogues, teaching-aide manuals and similar sources, he produced his first collages (notably &quot;Fiat modes&quot;, a portfolio of lithographs), a technique which later dominated his artistic pursuits. Also in 1919, Ernst, social activist Johannes Theodor Baargeld and several colleagues founded the Cologne Dada group. In 1919–20, Ernst and Baargeld published various short-lived magazines such as &quot;Der Strom&quot;, &quot;die Schammade&quot; and organised Dada exhibitions.

Ernst and Luise&#x27;s son Ulrich &#x27;Jimmy&#x27; Ernst was born on 24 June 1920; he later would also become a painter. Ernst&#x27;s marriage to Luise was short-lived. In 1921, he met Paul Éluard, who became a lifelong friend. Éluard bought two of Ernst&#x27;s paintings (&quot;Celebes&quot; and &quot;Oedipus Rex&quot;) and selected six collages to illustrate his poetry collection &quot;Répétitions&quot;. A year later the two collaborated on &quot;Les malheurs des immortels&quot; and then with André Breton, whom Ernst met in 1921, on the magazine &quot;Littérature&quot;. In 1922, unable to secure the necessary papers, Ernst entered France illegally and settled into a ménage à trois with Éluard and his wife Gala in the Paris suburb of Saint-Brice, leaving behind his wife and son. During his first two years in Paris, Ernst took various odd jobs to make a living and continued to paint. In 1923, the Éluards moved to a new home in Eaubonne north of Paris, where Ernst painted numerous murals. The same year his works were exhibited at &quot;Salon des Indépendants&quot;.

Although apparently accepting the ménage à trois, Éluard eventually became more concerned about the affair. In 1924, he abruptly left, first for Monaco and then for Saigon, Vietnam. He soon asked his wife and Max Ernst to join him; both had to sell paintings to finance the trip. Ernst went to Düsseldorf and sold a large number of his works to a long-time friend, Johanna Ey, owner of gallery &quot;Das Junge Rheinland&quot;. After a brief time together in Saigon, the trio decided that Gala would remain with Paul. The Éluards returned to Eaubonne in early September, while Ernst followed them some months later, after exploring more of southeast Asia. He returned to Paris in late 1924 and soon signed a contract with Jacques Viot which allowed him to paint full-time. In 1925, Ernst established a studio at 22, rue Tourlaque.

In 1925, Ernst invented a graphic art technique called frottage (see surrealist techniques), which uses pencil rubbings of objects as a source of images. He also created the &#x27;grattage&#x27; technique, in which paint is scraped across canvas to reveal the imprints of the objects placed beneath. He used this technique in his famous painting &quot;Forest and Dove&quot; (as shown at the Tate Modern). The next year he collaborated with Joan Miró on designs for Sergei Diaghilev. With Miró&#x27;s help, Ernst developed grattage, in which he trowelled pigment from his canvases. He also explored with the technique of decalcomania, which involves pressing paint between two surfaces. Ernst was also active, along with fellow surrealists, at the Atelier 17.
Ernst developed a fascination with birds which was prevalent in his work. His alter ego in paintings, which he called Loplop, was a bird. He suggested that this alter-ego was an extension of himself stemming from an early confusion of birds and humans. He said that one night when he was young, he woke up and found that his beloved bird had died; a few minutes later, his father announced that his sister was born. Loplop often appeared in collages of other artists&#x27; work, such as &quot;Loplop presents André Breton&quot;. Ernst drew a great deal of controversy with his 1926 painting &quot;The Virgin Chastises the infant Jesus before Three Witnesses: André Breton, Paul Éluard, and the Painter&quot;. In 1927, he married and it is thought his relationship with her may have inspired the erotic subject matter of &quot;The Kiss&quot; and other works of that year. He appeared in the 1930 film &quot;L&#x27;Âge d&#x27;Or&quot;, directed by the surrealist Luis Buñuel. Ernst began to sculpt in 1934 and spent time with Alberto Giacometti. In 1938, the American heiress and artistic patron Peggy Guggenheim acquired a number of Max Ernst&#x27;s works, which she displayed in her new gallery in London. Ernst and Guggenheim were married from 1942 to 1946.

==World War II and later life==

In September 1939, the outbreak of World War II caused Ernst, being German, to be interned as an &quot;undesirable foreigner&quot; in Camp des Milles, near Aix-en-Provence, along with fellow surrealist, Hans Bellmer, who had recently emigrated to Paris. He had been living with his lover and fellow surrealist painter, Leonora Carrington who, not knowing whether he would return, saw no option but to sell their house to repay their debts and leave for Spain. Thanks to the intercession of Paul Éluard and other friends, including the journalist Varian Fry, he was released a few weeks later. Soon after the German occupation of France, he was arrested again, this time by the Gestapo, but managed to escape to America with the help of Fry and Peggy Guggenheim, a member of a wealthy American art collecting family. Ernst and Peggy Guggenheim arrived in the United States in 1941 and were married at the end of the year. Along with other artists and friends (Marcel Duchamp and Marc Chagall) who had fled from the war and lived in New York City, Ernst helped inspire the development of abstract expressionism.

His marriage to Guggenheim did not last. In October 1946 he married American surrealist painter Dorothea Tanning in a double ceremony with Man Ray and Juliet P. Browner in Beverly Hills, California. The couple made their home in Sedona, Arizona from 1946 to 1953, where the high desert landscapes inspired them and recalled Ernst&#x27;s earlier imagery. Although Sedona was remote and populated by fewer than 400 ranchers, orchard workers, merchants and small Native American communities, their presence helped begin what would become an American artists&#x27; colony. Among the monumental red rocks, Ernst built a small cottage with his own hands on Brewer Road and he and Tanning hosted intellectuals and European artists such as Henri Cartier-Bresson and Yves Tanguy. Sedona proved an inspiration for the artists and for Ernst, who compiled his book &quot;Beyond Painting&quot; and completed his sculptural masterpiece &quot;Capricorn&quot; while living in Sedona. As a result of the book and its publicity, Ernst began to achieve financial success. From the 1950s he lived mainly in France. In 1954 he was awarded the Grand Prize for painting at the Venice Biennale. He died at the age of 84 on 1 April 1976 in Paris and was interred at Père Lachaise Cemetery.

==Legacy==
Ernst&#x27;s son Jimmy Ernst, a well-known German/American abstract expressionist painter, who lived on the south shore of Long Island, New York died in 1984. His memoirs, &quot;A Not-So-Still Life&quot;, were published shortly before his death. Max Ernst&#x27;s grandson Eric and his granddaughter Amy are both artists and writers.

Max Ernst&#x27;s life and career are examined in Peter Schamoni&#x27;s 1991 documentary &quot;Max Ernst&quot;. Dedicated to the art historian Werner Spies, it was assembled from interviews with Ernst, stills of his paintings and sculptures, and the memoirs of his wife Dorothea Tanning and son Jimmy. The 101-minute German film was released on DVD with English subtitles by Image Entertainment.

The Max Ernst Museum opened in 2005 in his home town Brühl, Germany. It is housed in a late-classicist 1844 building integrated with a modern glass pavilion. The historic ballroom was once a popular social venue visited by Ernst in his youth. The collection spans 70 years of his career including paintings, drawings, frottages, collages, nearly the entire lithographic works, over 70 bronze sculptures. and more than 700 documents and photographs by Man Ray, Henri Cartier-Bresson, Lee Miller, and others. The core of the collection dates back to 1969 with works donated to the City of Brühl by the artist. Thirty-six paintings, gifts from the artist to his fourth wife Dorothea Tanning, are on permanent loan from the Kreissparkasse Köln. Some noteworthy works include the sculptures &quot;The King playing with the Queen&quot; (1944) and &quot;Teaching Staff for a School of Murderers&quot; (1967). The museum also host temporary exhibitions by other artist.

The Menil Collection, in Houston houses a significant collection of surrealist art including well over 100 pieces by Max Ernst. Notable paintings include &quot;In Praise of Freedom&quot; (1926), &quot;Loplop Presents Loplop&quot; (1930), &quot;Day and Night&quot; (1941–1942), &quot;Surrealism and Painting&quot; (1942), &quot;Euclid&quot; (1945), &quot;A Swarm of Bees in the Palais de Justice&quot; (1960), &quot;The Marriage of Heaven and Earth&quot; (1964). Ernst&#x27;s work in the Menil Collection is typically exhibited a few pieces at a time along with other surrealist art in the collection on a rotating basis.

===Exhibitions, retrospectives, and honors===
* Venice Biennale, Venice (1954), received Grand Prize for Painting
* Musée National d&#x27;Art Moderne Paris (1959), awarded the Grand Prix national des arts
* Museum of Modern Art, New York (1961)
* Tate Gallery, London (1962)
* Kunsthaus Zürich (1963)
* Moderna Museet, Stockholm (1969)
* A retrospective of 104 works spanning the years 1920–1968, drawn entirely from the Menil Collection, toured Europe from 1970 to 1972 (Hamburger Kunsthalle, Kestnergesellschaft, Frankfurter Kunstverein, Academy of Arts, Berlin, Kunsthalle, Cologne, Musée de l&#x27;Orangerie, Musée Cantini, Maison de la Culture de Grenoble, Ancienne Douane (Strasbourg), Musée d&#x27;Arts de Nantes) and later the US (Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art, Fogg Art Museum, The Art Institute of Chicago, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum) The opening of the exhibition in Paris was augmented with 44 pieces from various collations and opened on 2 April 1971, Max Ernst&#x27;s 80th birthday.
* In 2005, &quot;Max Ernst: A Retrospective&quot; opened at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and included works like &quot;Celebes&quot; (1921), &quot;Ubu Imperator&quot; (1923), and &quot;Fireside Angel&quot; (1937), which is one of Ernst&#x27;s few definitively political pieces and is sub-titled &quot;The Triumph of Surrealism&quot; depicting a raging bird-like creature that symbolises the wave of fascism that enveloped Europe. The exhibition also includes Ernst&#x27;s works that experiment with free association writing and the techniques of frottage, created from a rubbing from a textured surface; grattage, involving scratching at the surface of a painting; and decalcomania, which involves altering a wet painting by pressing a second surface against it and taking it away.
* &quot;Dada is Dada&quot; retrospective group exhibition at Bildmuseet, Umeå University, Sweden, running from 17 November 2017 to 20 May 2018

Documentary images
==Selected works==
=== Early work, Germany (1891–1922) ===
=== First French period (1922–1940) ===
=== American period (1941–1952) ===
=== Second French period (1953–1976) ===
===Prints, collages, and illustrations===
* Illustrations for books by Paul Éluard: &quot;Répétitions&quot; (1922), &quot;Les malheurs des immortels&quot; (1922), &quot;Au défaut du silence&quot; (1925)
* &quot;Histoire Naturelle&quot; (ca. 1925–1926), a set of 34 collotypes after frottages
* &quot;La femme 100 têtes&quot; (1929, graphic novel)
* &quot;Rêve d&#x27;une petite fille qui voulut entrer au carmel&quot; (1930, graphic novel)
* &quot;Une Semaine de Bonté&quot; (1934, graphic novel)
* Illustrations for editions of works by Lewis Carroll: &quot;Symbolic Logic&quot; (1966, under the title &quot;Logique sans peine&quot;), &quot;The Hunting of the Snark&quot; (1968), and &quot;Lewis Carrols Wunderhorn&quot; (1970, an anthology of texts)
* &quot;Deux Oiseaux&quot; (1970, lithograph in colors)
* &quot;Aux petits agneaux&quot; (1971, lithographs)
* &quot;Paysage marin avec capucin&quot; (1972, illustrated book with essays by various authors)
* &quot;Maximiliana: the illegal practice of astronomy : hommage à Dorothea Tanning&quot; (1974, art book)
* &quot;Oiseaux en péril&quot; (1975, etchings with aquatint in colours; published posthumously)

==See also==
* List of German painters
* Transatlantic (portrayal in 2023 TV series)

==Notes==
==References==
===Works cited===
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* John Russell; &quot;Max Ernst: life and work&quot; (New York, H.N. Abrams, 1967) 
* Bodley Gallery (New York, N.Y.) Max Ernst : paintings, collages, drawings, sculpture : 30 October – 25 November 1961 : Bodley Gallery, 223 East 60, New York (exhibition catalogue and commentary; published by the gallery, 1961) 
* &quot;Max Ernst Books and Graphic Works&quot;. Institut fur Auslandsbeziehungen, 1977
* Max Ernst : the psychoanalytic sources
* David Hopkins; &quot;Marcel Duchamp and Max Ernst: The Bride Shared&quot; (Oxford, 1998)
* William Camfield; &quot;Max Ernst Dada and the Dawn of Surrealism&quot; (MoMA, 1993)

==External links==
* 
* Max Ernst, &quot;A Retrospective&quot;, The Metropolitain Museum of Art
* Paintings in Museums and Public Art Galleries Worldwide, Artcyclopedia
* Works in the National Galleries of Scotland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q154842" start="0" end="9" title="Max Ernst" label="Max Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q627325" start="136" end="150" title="graphic artist" label="graphic artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="216" end="220" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="234" end="244" title="surrealism" label="surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="248" end="254" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375860" start="376" end="384" title="frottage (surrealist technique)" label="frottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543649" start="484" end="492" title="Grattage (art)" label="grattage"/>
<link wikidata="Q170593" start="730" end="737" title="collage" label="collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="785" end="796" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="1228" end="1234" title="Cubism" label="cubist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="1239" end="1252" title="Expressionism" label="expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7036" start="1503" end="1508" title="Brühl, North Rhine-Westphalia" label="Brühl"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="1518" end="1534" title="Cologne" label="Cologne, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1581" end="1589" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q152171" start="1896" end="1914" title="University of Bonn" label="University of Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="1918" end="1922" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104" start="1936" end="1952" title="Koblenz" label="Koblenz, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516931" start="2037" end="2044" title="lunatic asylum" label="asylums"/>
<link wikidata="Q33981" start="2268" end="2280" title="August Macke" label="August Macke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="2469" end="2482" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q166713" start="2487" end="2505" title="post-Impressionist" label="post-Impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="2515" end="2531" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q37693" start="2536" end="2548" title="Paul Gauguin" label="Paul Gauguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="2848" end="2854" title="Cubism" label="Cubist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="2859" end="2872" title="German Expressionism" label="Expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q153739" start="2901" end="2909" title="Hans Arp" label="Hans Arp"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="3123" end="3130" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q154573" start="3139" end="3153" title="Eastern Front (World War I)" label="Eastern Fronts"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="3501" end="3521" title="German Expressionist" label="German Expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33981" start="3573" end="3585" title="August Macke" label="August Macke"/>
<link wikidata="Q44054" start="3590" end="3600" title="Franz Marc" label="Franz Marc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462138" start="3720" end="3732" title="Luise Straus-Ernst" label="Luise Straus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="3737" end="3743" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q44007" start="3799" end="3808" title="Paul Klee" label="Paul Klee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="3812" end="3818" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q156622" start="3844" end="3862" title="Giorgio de Chirico" label="Giorgio de Chirico"/>
<link wikidata="Q170593" start="3997" end="4004" title="collage" label="collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q133036" start="4054" end="4064" title="lithograph" label="lithograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q481655" start="4162" end="4187" title="Johannes Theodor Baargeld" label="Johannes Theodor Baargeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="4231" end="4235" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q92395" start="4431" end="4461" title="Jimmy Ernst" label="Ulrich &amp;#x27;Jimmy&amp;#x27; Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q152176" start="4590" end="4601" title="Paul Éluard" label="Paul Éluard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052784" start="4684" end="4691" title="The Elephant Celebes" label="Celebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q161955" start="4904" end="4916" title="André Breton" label="André Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256747" start="4964" end="4975" title="Littérature (magazine)" label="Littérature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159593" start="5081" end="5095" title="ménage à trois" label="ménage à trois"/>
<link wikidata="Q464056" start="5121" end="5125" title="Gala Dalí" label="Gala"/>
<link wikidata="Q240771" start="5345" end="5353" title="Eaubonne" label="Eaubonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q219423" start="5399" end="5404" title="mural" label="mural"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="5631" end="5637" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="5651" end="5666" title="Ho Chi Minh City" label="Saigon, Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q96142" start="5851" end="5861" title="Johanna Ey" label="Johanna Ey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="6125" end="6139" title="southeast Asia" label="southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375860" start="6372" end="6380" title="frottage (surrealist technique)" label="frottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819938" start="6386" end="6407" title="surrealist techniques" label="surrealist techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543649" start="6497" end="6505" title="Grattage (art)" label="grattage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469141" start="6669" end="6684" title="Forest and Dove" label="Forest and Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q152384" start="6757" end="6766" title="Joan Miró" label="Joan Miró"/>
<link wikidata="Q211513" start="6782" end="6798" title="Sergei Diaghilev" label="Sergei Diaghilev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145705" start="6937" end="6949" title="decalcomania" label="decalcomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q10421187" start="7064" end="7074" title="Atelier 17" label="Atelier 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678637" start="7194" end="7200" title="Loplop" label="Loplop"/>
<link wikidata="Q946849" start="7982" end="8002" title="L&amp;#x27;Âge d&amp;#x27;Or" label="L&amp;#x27;Âge d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q51545" start="8037" end="8048" title="Luis Buñuel" label="Luis Buñuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q157194" start="8100" end="8118" title="Alberto Giacometti" label="Alberto Giacometti"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="8163" end="8169" title="patron" label="patron"/>
<link wikidata="Q233806" start="8170" end="8186" title="Peggy Guggenheim" label="Peggy Guggenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8404" end="8416" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q481647" start="8503" end="8518" title="Camp des Milles" label="Camp des Milles"/>
<link wikidata="Q47465" start="8525" end="8540" title="Aix-en-Provence" label="Aix-en-Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q213703" start="8572" end="8584" title="Hans Bellmer" label="Hans Bellmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q233207" start="8688" end="8706" title="Leonora Carrington" label="Leonora Carrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q152176" start="8859" end="8870" title="Paul Éluard" label="Paul Éluard"/>
<link wikidata="Q201161" start="8915" end="8925" title="Varian Fry" label="Varian Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="8977" end="9004" title="German military administration in occupied France during World War II" label="German occupation of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="9046" end="9053" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q233806" start="9113" end="9129" title="Peggy Guggenheim" label="Peggy Guggenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912" start="9328" end="9342" title="Marcel Duchamp" label="Marcel Duchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q93284" start="9347" end="9359" title="Marc Chagall" label="Marc Chagall"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="9455" end="9477" title="abstract expressionism" label="abstract expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="9557" end="9567" title="Surrealism" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q234324" start="9576" end="9592" title="Dorothea Tanning" label="Dorothea Tanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q46139" start="9619" end="9626" title="Man Ray" label="Man Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="9652" end="9677" title="Beverly Hills, California" label="Beverly Hills, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q80041" start="9709" end="9724" title="Sedona, Arizona" label="Sedona, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558054" start="10027" end="10047" title="artists&amp;#x27; colony" label="artists&amp;#x27; colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q156567" start="10212" end="10233" title="Henri Cartier-Bresson" label="Henri Cartier-Bresson"/>
<link wikidata="Q66809948" start="10238" end="10249" title="Yves Tanguy" label="Yves Tanguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205751" start="10634" end="10649" title="Venice Biennale" label="Venice Biennale"/>
<link wikidata="Q311" start="10721" end="10743" title="Père Lachaise Cemetery" label="Père Lachaise Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q92395" start="10774" end="10785" title="Jimmy Ernst" label="Jimmy Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="10816" end="10838" title="abstract expressionist" label="abstract expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="10880" end="10901" title="Long Island" label="Long Island, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q66035" start="11140" end="11154" title="Peter Schamoni" label="Peter Schamoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q76000" start="11233" end="11245" title="Werner Spies" label="Werner Spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q46139" start="11938" end="11945" title="Man Ray" label="Man Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q156567" start="11947" end="11968" title="Henri Cartier-Bresson" label="Henri Cartier-Bresson"/>
<link wikidata="Q265131" start="11970" end="11980" title="Lee Miller" label="Lee Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q234324" start="12158" end="12174" title="Dorothea Tanning" label="Dorothea Tanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888308" start="12454" end="12470" title="Menil Collection" label="Menil Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="12475" end="12482" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678637" start="12651" end="12673" title="Loplop" label="Loplop Presents Loplop"/>
<link wikidata="Q205751" start="13120" end="13135" title="Venice Biennale" label="Venice Biennale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895953" start="13188" end="13221" title="Musée National d&amp;#x27;Art Moderne" label="Musée National d&amp;#x27;Art Moderne"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="13279" end="13299" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q430682" start="13319" end="13331" title="Tate Gallery" label="Tate Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q685038" start="13349" end="13365" title="Kunsthaus Zürich" label="Kunsthaus Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274511" start="13375" end="13389" title="Moderna Museet" label="Moderna Museet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888308" start="13493" end="13509" title="Menil Collection" label="Menil Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q169542" start="13544" end="13564" title="Hamburger Kunsthalle" label="Hamburger Kunsthalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q565375" start="13566" end="13585" title="Kestnergesellschaft" label="Kestnergesellschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444994" start="13587" end="13610" title="Frankfurter Kunstverein" label="Frankfurter Kunstverein"/>
<link wikidata="Q414110" start="13612" end="13635" title="Academy of Arts, Berlin" label="Academy of Arts, Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q726781" start="13658" end="13683" title="Musée de l&amp;#x27;Orangerie" label="Musée de l&amp;#x27;Orangerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086101" start="13685" end="13698" title="Musée Cantini" label="Musée Cantini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272779" start="13700" end="13732" title="Maison de la Culture de Grenoble" label="Maison de la Culture de Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845867" start="13734" end="13762" title="Ancienne Douane (Strasbourg)" label="Ancienne Douane (Strasbourg)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783956" start="13764" end="13791" title="Musée d&amp;#x27;Arts de Nantes" label="Musée d&amp;#x27;Arts de Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976985" start="13811" end="13838" title="Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art" label="Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783572" start="13840" end="13855" title="Fogg Art Museum" label="Fogg Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q239303" start="13857" end="13885" title="The Art Institute of Chicago" label="The Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q201469" start="13887" end="13915" title="Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum" label="Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="14133" end="14159" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375860" start="14617" end="14625" title="frottage (art)" label="frottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543649" start="14675" end="14683" title="Grattage (art)" label="grattage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145705" start="14740" end="14752" title="decalcomania" label="decalcomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907651" start="14914" end="14924" title="Bildmuseet" label="Bildmuseet"/>
<link wikidata="Q152176" start="15263" end="15274" title="Paul Éluard" label="Paul Éluard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733408" start="15640" end="15660" title="Une Semaine de Bonté" label="Une Semaine de Bonté"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="15730" end="15743" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192219" start="16370" end="16393" title="List of German painters" label="List of German painters"/>
<link wikidata="Q116749984" start="16396" end="16409" title="Transatlantic (TV series)" label="Transatlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936656" start="16597" end="16611" title="Bodley Gallery" label="Bodley Gallery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42650" wikidata="Q5912" url="?curid=42650" title="Marcel Duchamp">
<text>Henri-Robert-Marcel Duchamp (, ; ; 28 July 1887 – 2 October 1968) was a French painter, sculptor, chess player, and writer whose work is associated with Cubism, Dada, and conceptual art. He is commonly regarded, along with Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse, as one of the three artists who helped to define the revolutionary developments in the plastic arts in the opening decades of the 20th century, responsible for significant developments in painting and sculpture. He has had an immense impact on 20th- and 21st-century art, and a seminal influence on the development of conceptual art. By the time of World War I, he had rejected the work of many of his fellow artists (such as Henri Matisse) as &quot;retinal&quot;, intended only to please the eye. Instead, he wanted to use art to serve the mind.

==Early life and education==

Duchamp was born at Blainville-Crevon in Normandy, France, to Eugène Duchamp and Lucie Duchamp (formerly Lucie Nicolle) and grew up in a family that enjoyed cultural activities. The art of painter and engraver Émile Frédéric Nicolle, his maternal grandfather, filled the house, and the family liked to play chess, read books, paint, and make music together.

Of Eugene and Lucie Duchamp&#x27;s seven children, one died as an infant and four became successful artists. Marcel Duchamp was the brother of:
* Jacques Villon (1875–1963), painter, printmaker
* Raymond Duchamp-Villon (1876–1918), sculptor
* Suzanne Duchamp-Crotti (1889–1963), painter.

As a child, with his two elder brothers already away from home at school in Rouen, Duchamp was closer to his sister Suzanne, who was a willing accomplice in games and activities conjured by his fertile imagination. At eight years old, Duchamp followed in his brothers&#x27; footsteps when he left home and began schooling at the Lycée Pierre-Corneille, in Rouen. Two other students in his class also became well-known artists and lasting friends: Robert Antoine Pinchon and Pierre Dumont. For the next eight years, he was locked into an educational regime which focused on intellectual development. Though he was not an outstanding student, his best subject was mathematics and he won two mathematics prizes at the school. He also won a prize for drawing in 1903, and at his commencement in 1904 he won a coveted first prize, validating his recent decision to become an artist.

He learned academic drawing from a teacher who unsuccessfully attempted to &quot;protect&quot; his students from Impressionism, Post-Impressionism, and other avant-garde influences. However, Duchamp&#x27;s true artistic mentor at the time was his brother Jacques Villon, whose fluid and incisive style he sought to imitate. At 14, his first serious art attempts were drawings and watercolors depicting his sister Suzanne in various poses and activities. That summer he also painted landscapes in an Impressionist style using oils.

==Early work==
Duchamp&#x27;s early art works align with Post-Impressionist styles. He experimented with classical techniques and subjects. When he was later asked about what had influenced him at the time, Duchamp cited the work of Symbolist painter Odilon Redon, whose approach to art was not outwardly anti-academic, but quietly individual.
He studied art at the Académie Julian from 1904 to 1905, but preferred playing billiards to attending classes. During this time, Duchamp drew and sold cartoons which reflected his ribald humor. Many of the drawings use verbal puns (sometimes spanning multiple languages), visual puns, or both. Such play with words and symbols engaged his imagination for the rest of his life.

In 1905, he began his compulsory military service with the 39th Infantry Regiment, working for a printer in Rouen. There he learned typography and printing processes—skills he would use in his later work.

Owing to his eldest brother Jacques&#x27; membership in the prestigious Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture Duchamp&#x27;s work was exhibited in the 1908 Salon d&#x27;Automne, and the following year in the Salon des Indépendants. Fauves and Paul Cézanne&#x27;s proto-Cubism influenced his paintings, although the critic Guillaume Apollinaire—who was eventually to become a friend—criticized what he called &quot;Duchamp&#x27;s very ugly nudes&quot; (&quot;les nus très vilains de Duchamp&quot;). Duchamp also became lifelong friends with exuberant artist Francis Picabia after meeting him at the 1911 Salon d&#x27;Automne, and Picabia proceeded to introduce him to a lifestyle of fast cars and &quot;high&quot; living.

In 1911, at Jacques&#x27; home in Puteaux, the brothers hosted a regular discussion group with Cubist artists including Picabia, Robert Delaunay, Fernand Léger, Roger de La Fresnaye, Albert Gleizes, Jean Metzinger, Juan Gris, and Alexander Archipenko. Poets and writers also participated. The group came to be known as the Puteaux Group, or the Section d&#x27;Or. Uninterested in the Cubists&#x27; seriousness, or in their focus on visual matters, Duchamp did not join in discussions of Cubist theory and gained a reputation of being shy. However, that same year he painted in a Cubist style and added an impression of motion by using repetitive imagery.

During this period, Duchamp&#x27;s fascination with transition, change, movement, and distance became manifest, and as many artists of the time, he was intrigued with the concept of depicting the fourth dimension in art. His painting &quot;Sad Young Man on a Train&quot; embodies this concern:

First, there&#x27;s the idea of the movement of the train, and then that of the sad young man who is in a corridor and who is moving about; thus there are two parallel movements corresponding to each other. Then, there is the distortion of the young man—I had called this &quot;elementary parallelism&quot;. It was a formal decomposition; that is, linear elements following each other like parallels and distorting the object. The object is completely stretched out, as if elastic. The lines follow each other in parallels, while changing subtly to form the movement, or the form of the young man in question. I also used this procedure in the &quot;Nude Descending a Staircase&quot;.

In his 1911 &quot;Portrait of Chess Players&quot; (&quot;Portrait de joueurs d&#x27;échecs&quot;) there is the Cubist overlapping frames and multiple perspectives of his two brothers playing chess, but to that Duchamp added elements conveying the unseen mental activity of the players.

Works from this time also included his first &quot;machine&quot; painting, &quot;Coffee Mill (Moulin à café)&quot; (1911), which he gave to his brother Raymond Duchamp-Villon. The later more figurative machine painting of 1914, &quot;Chocolate Grinder&quot; (&quot;Broyeuse de chocolat&quot;), prefigures the mechanism incorporated into the &quot;Large Glass&quot; on which he began work in New York the following year.
===&quot;Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2&quot;===
Duchamp&#x27;s first work to provoke significant controversy was &quot;Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2&quot; &quot;(Nu descendant un escalier n° 2)&quot; (1912). The painting depicts the mechanistic motion of a nude, with superimposed facets, similar to motion pictures. It shows elements of the fragmentation and synthesis of the Cubists, as well as the movement and dynamism of the Futurists.

He first submitted the piece to appear at the Cubist Salon des Indépendants, but Albert Gleizes (according to Duchamp in an interview with Pierre Cabanne, p. 31) asked Duchamp&#x27;s brothers to have him voluntarily withdraw the painting, or to paint over the title that he had painted on the work and rename it something else. Duchamp&#x27;s brothers did approach him with Gleizes&#x27; request, but Duchamp quietly refused. However, there was no jury at the Salon des Indépendants and Gleizes was in no position to reject the painting. The controversy, according to art historian Peter Brooke, was not whether the work should be hung or not, but whether it should be hung with the Cubist group.

Of the incident Duchamp later recalled, &quot;I said nothing to my brothers. But I went immediately to the show and took my painting home in a taxi. It was really a turning point in my life, I can assure you. I saw that I would not be very much interested in groups after that.&quot; Yet Duchamp did appear in the illustrations to &quot;Du &quot;Cubisme&quot;&quot;, he participated in the &quot;La Maison Cubiste (Cubist House)&quot;, organized by the designer André Mare for the Salon d&#x27;Automne of 1912 (a few months after the Indépendants); he signed the Section d&#x27;Or invitation and participated in the Section d&#x27;Or exhibition during the fall of 1912. The impression is, Brooke writes, &quot;it was precisely because he wished to remain part of the group that he withdrew the painting; and that, far from being ill treated by the group, he was given a rather privileged position, probably through the patronage of Picabia&quot;.

The painting was exhibited for the first time at Galeries Dalmau, &quot;Exposició d&#x27;Art Cubista&quot;, Barcelona, 1912, the first exhibition of Cubism in Spain. Duchamp later submitted the painting to the 1913 &quot;Armory Show&quot; in New York City. In addition to displaying works of American artists, this show was the first major exhibition of modern trends coming out of Paris, encompassing experimental styles of the European avant-garde, including Fauvism, Cubism, and Futurism. American show-goers, accustomed to realistic art, were scandalized, and the &quot;Nude&quot; was at the center of much of the controversy.

==Leaving &quot;retinal art&quot; behind==
At about this time, Duchamp read Max Stirner&#x27;s philosophical tract, &quot;The Ego and Its Own&quot;, the study which he considered another turning point in his artistic and intellectual development. He called it &quot;a remarkable book ... which advances no formal theories, but just keeps saying that the ego is always there in everything.&quot;

While in Munich in 1912, he painted the last of his Cubist-like paintings. He started &quot;The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even&quot; image, and began making plans for &quot;The Large Glass&quot; – scribbling short notes to himself, sometimes with hurried sketches. It would be more than ten years before this piece was completed. Not much else is known about the two-month stay in Munich except that the friend he visited was intent on showing him the sights and the nightlife, and that he was influenced by the works of the sixteenth century German painter Lucas Cranach the Elder in Munich&#x27;s famed Alte Pinakothek, known for its Old Master paintings. Duchamp recalled that he took the short walk to visit this museum daily. Duchamp scholars have long recognized in Cranach the subdued ochre and brown color range Duchamp later employed.

The same year, Duchamp also attended a performance of a stage adaptation of Raymond Roussel&#x27;s 1910 novel, &quot;Impressions d&#x27;Afrique,&quot; which featured plots that turned in on themselves, word play, surrealistic sets and humanoid machines. He credited the drama with having radically changed his approach to art, and having inspired him to begin the creation of his &quot;The Bride Stripped Bare By Her Bachelors, Even&quot;, also known as &quot;The Large Glass&quot;. Work on &quot;The Large Glass&quot; continued into 1913, with his invention of inventing a repertoire of forms. He made notes, sketches and painted studies, and even drew some of his ideas on the wall of his apartment.

Toward the end of 1912, he traveled with Picabia, Apollinaire and Gabrielle Buffet-Picabia through the Jura mountains, an adventure that Buffet-Picabia described as one of their &quot;forays of demoralization, which were also forays of witticism and clownery ... the disintegration of the concept of art&quot;. Duchamp&#x27;s notes from the trip avoid logic and sense, and have a surrealistic, mythical connotation.

Duchamp painted few canvases after 1912, and in those he did, he attempted to remove &quot;painterly&quot; effects, and to use a technical drawing approach instead.

His broad interests led him to an exhibition of aviation technology during this period, after which Duchamp said to his friend Constantin Brâncuși, &quot;Painting is washed up. Who will ever do anything better than that propeller? Tell me, can you do that?&quot;. Brâncuși later sculpted bird forms. U.S. Customs officials mistook them for aviation parts and attempted to collect import duties on them.

In 1913, Duchamp withdrew from painting circles and began working as a librarian in the Bibliothèque Sainte-Geneviève to be able to earn a living wage while concentrating on scholarly realms and working on his &quot;Large Glass&quot;. He studied math and physics – areas where exciting new discoveries were taking place. The theoretical writings of Henri Poincaré particularly intrigued and inspired Duchamp. Poincaré postulated that the laws believed to govern matter were created solely by the minds that &quot;understood&quot; them and that no theory could be considered &quot;true&quot;. &quot;The things themselves are not what science can reach..., but only the relations between things. Outside of these relations there is no knowable reality&quot;, Poincaré wrote in 1902. Reflecting the influence of Poincaré&#x27;s writings, Duchamp tolerated any interpretation of his art by regarding it as the creation of the person who formulated it, not as truth.

Duchamp&#x27;s own art-science experiments began during his tenure at the library. To make one of his favorite pieces, &quot;3 Standard Stoppages&quot; (&quot;3 stoppages étalon&quot;), he dropped three 1-meter lengths of thread onto prepared canvases, one at a time, from a height of 1 meter. The threads landed in three random undulating positions. He varnished them into place on the blue-black canvas strips and attached them to glass. He then cut three wood slats into the shapes of the curved strings, and put all the pieces into a croquet box. Three small leather signs with the title printed in gold were glued to the &quot;stoppage&quot; backgrounds. The piece appears to literally follow Poincaré&#x27;s &quot;School of the Thread&quot;, part of a book on classical mechanics.

In his studio he mounted a bicycle wheel upside down onto a stool, spinning it occasionally just to watch it. Although it is often assumed that the &quot;Bicycle Wheel&quot; represents the first of Duchamp&#x27;s &quot;Readymades&quot;, this particular installation was never submitted for any art exhibition, and it was eventually lost. However, initially, the wheel was simply placed in the studio to create atmosphere: &quot;I enjoyed looking at it just as I enjoy looking at the flames dancing in a fireplace.&quot;
After World War I started in August 1914, with his brothers and many friends in military service and himself exempted (due to a heart murmur), Duchamp felt uncomfortable in Paris. Meanwhile, &quot;Nude Descending a Staircase No. 2&quot; had scandalized Americans at the Armory Show, and helped secure the sale of all four of his paintings in the exhibition. Thus, being able to finance the trip, Duchamp decided to emigrate to the United States in 1915. To his surprise, he found he was a celebrity when he arrived in New York in 1915, where he quickly befriended art patron Katherine Dreier and artist Man Ray. Duchamp&#x27;s circle included art patrons Louise and Walter Conrad Arensberg, actress and artist Beatrice Wood and Francis Picabia, as well as other avant-garde figures. Though he spoke little English, in the course of supporting himself by giving French lessons, and through some library work, he quickly learned the language. Duchamp became part of an artist colony in Ridgefield, New Jersey, across the Hudson River from New York City.

For two years the Arensbergs, who would remain his friends and patrons for 42 years, were the landlords of his studio. In lieu of rent, they agreed that his payment would be &quot;The Large Glass&quot;. An art gallery offered Duchamp $10,000 per year in exchange for all of his yearly production, but he declined the offer, preferring to continue his work on &quot;The Large Glass&quot;.

===Société Anonyme===
Duchamp created the Société Anonyme in 1920, along with Katherine Dreier and Man Ray. This was the beginning of his lifelong involvement in art dealing and collecting. The group collected modern art works, and arranged modern art exhibitions and lectures throughout the 1930s.

By this time Walter Pach, one of the coordinators of the 1913 Armory Show, sought Duchamp&#x27;s advice on modern art. Beginning with Société Anonyme, Dreier also depended on Duchamp&#x27;s counsel in gathering her collection, as did Arensberg. Later Peggy Guggenheim, Museum of Modern Art directors Alfred Barr and James Johnson Sweeney consulted with Duchamp on their modern art collections and shows.

===Dada===
Dada or Dadaism was an art movement of the European avant-garde in the early 20th century. It began in Zürich, Switzerland, in 1916, and spread to Berlin shortly thereafter. To quote Dona Budd&#x27;s &quot;The Language of Art Knowledge&quot;,

Dada was born out of negative reaction to the horrors of World War I. This international movement was begun by a group of artists and poets associated with the Cabaret Voltaire in Zürich. Dada rejected reason and logic, prizing nonsense, irrationality, and intuition. The origin of the name Dada is unclear; some believe that it is a nonsense word. Others maintain that it originates from the Romanian artists Tristan Tzara and Marcel Janco&#x27;s frequent use of the words da, da, meaning yes, yes in the Romanian language. Another theory says that the name &quot;Dada&quot; came during a meeting of the group when a paper knife stuck into a French-German dictionary happened to point to &quot;dada&quot;, a French word for &quot;hobbyhorse&quot;.

The movement primarily involved visual arts, literature, poetry, art manifestoes, art theory, theatre, and graphic design, and concentrated its anti-war politics through a rejection of the prevailing standards in art through anti-art cultural works. In addition to being anti-war, Dada was also anti-bourgeois and had political affinities with the radical left.

Dada activities included public gatherings, demonstrations, and publication of art/literary journals; passionate coverage of art, politics, and culture were topics often discussed in a variety of media. Key figures in the movement, apart from Duchamp, included: Hugo Ball, Emmy Hennings, Hans Arp, Raoul Hausmann, Hannah Höch, Johannes Baader, Tristan Tzara, Francis Picabia, Richard Huelsenbeck, Georg Grosz, John Heartfield, Beatrice Wood, Kurt Schwitters, and Hans Richter, among others. The movement influenced later styles, such as the avant-garde and downtown music movements, and groups including surrealism, Nouveau réalisme, pop art, and Fluxus.

Dada is the groundwork to abstract art and sound poetry, a starting point for performance art, a prelude to postmodernism, an influence on pop art, a celebration of antiart to be later embraced for anarcho-political uses in the 1960s and the movement that lay the foundation for Surrealism.

New York Dada had a less serious tone than that of European Dadaism, and was not a particularly organized venture. Duchamp&#x27;s friend Francis Picabia connected with the Dada group in Zürich, bringing to New York the Dadaist ideas of absurdity and &quot;anti-art&quot;. Duchamp and Picabia first met in September 1911 at the Salon d&#x27;Automne in Paris, where they were both exhibiting. Duchamp showed a larger version of his &quot;Young Man and Girl in Spring&quot; 1911, a work that had an Edenic theme and a thinly veiled sexuality also found in Picabia&#x27;s contemporaneous &quot;Adam and Eve&quot; 1911. According to Duchamp, &quot;our friendship began right there&quot;. A group met almost nightly at the Arensberg home, or caroused in Greenwich Village. Together with Man Ray, Duchamp contributed his ideas and humor to the New York activities, many of which ran concurrent with the development of his Readymades and &quot;The Large Glass&quot;.

The most prominent example of Duchamp&#x27;s association with Dada was his submission of &quot;Fountain&quot;, a urinal, to the Society of Independent Artists exhibit in 1917. Artworks in the Independent Artists shows were not selected by jury, and all pieces submitted were displayed. However, the show committee insisted that &quot;Fountain&quot; was not art, and rejected it from the show. This caused an uproar among the Dadaists, and led Duchamp to resign from the board of the Independent Artists.

Along with Henri-Pierre Roché and Beatrice Wood, Duchamp published multiple Dada magazines in New York—including &quot;The Blind Man&quot; and &quot;Rongwrong&quot;—which included art, literature, humor and commentary.

When he returned to Paris after World War I, Duchamp did not participate in the Dada group.

==Readymades==

&quot;Readymades&quot; were found objects which Duchamp chose and presented as art. In 1913, Duchamp installed a &quot;Bicycle Wheel&quot; in his studio. The Bicycle Wheel was an idea of Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven. However, the idea of &quot;Readymades&quot; did not fully develop until 1915. The idea was to question the very notion of Art, and the adoration of art, which Duchamp found &quot;unnecessary&quot;.

&quot;Bottle Rack&quot; (1914), a bottle-drying rack signed by Duchamp, is considered to be the first &quot;pure&quot; readymade. &quot;In Advance of the Broken Arm&quot; (1915), a snow shovel, also called &quot;Prelude to a Broken Arm&quot;, followed soon after. His &quot;Fountain&quot;, a urinal signed with the pseudonym &quot;R. Mutt&quot;, shocked the art world in 1917. &quot;Fountain&quot; was selected in 2004 as &quot;the most influential artwork of the 20th century&quot; by 500 renowned artists and historians.

In 1919, Duchamp made a parody of the &quot;Mona Lisa&quot; by adorning a cheap reproduction of the painting with a mustache and goatee. To this he added the inscription &quot;L.H.O.O.Q.&quot;, a phonetic game which, when read out loud in French quickly sounds like &quot;Elle a chaud au cul&quot;. This can be translated as &quot;She has a hot ass&quot;, implying that the woman in the painting is in a state of sexual excitement and availability. It may also have been intended as a Freudian joke, referring to Leonardo da Vinci&#x27;s alleged homosexuality. Duchamp gave a &quot;loose&quot; translation of L.H.O.O.Q. as &quot;there is fire down below&quot; in a late interview with Arturo Schwarz. According to Rhonda Roland Shearer, the apparent &quot;Mona Lisa&quot; reproduction is in fact a copy modeled partly on Duchamp&#x27;s own face. Research published by Shearer also speculates that Duchamp himself may have created some of the objects which he claimed to be &quot;found objects&quot;.

== Antecedent ==

In 2017–2018, the French expert Johann Naldi found and identified seventeen unpublished works in a private collection, classified as a national treasure on May 7, 2021 by the French Ministry of Culture, including &quot;Des souteneurs encore dans la force de l&#x27;âge et le ventre dans l&#x27;herbe&quot; by Alphonse Allais&quot;,&quot; consisting of a green carriage curtain suspended from a wooden cylinder. This work was certainly exhibited at the Incoherents exhibitions in Paris between 1883 and 1893. According to Johann Naldi, this work is the oldest known readymade and was a source of inspiration for Marcel Duchamp.

==&quot;The Large Glass&quot;==
Duchamp worked on his complex Futurism-inspired piece &quot;The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even (The Large Glass)&quot; from 1915 to 1923, except for periods in Buenos Aires and Paris in 1918–1920. He executed the work on two panes of glass with materials such as lead foil, fuse wire, and dust. It combines chance procedures, plotted perspective studies, and laborious craftsmanship. He published notes for the piece, &quot;The Green Box&quot;, intended to complement the visual experience. They reflect the creation of unique rules of physics, and a mythology which describes the work. He stated that his &quot;hilarious picture&quot; is intended to depict the erotic encounter between a bride and her nine bachelors.

A performance of the stage adaptation of Raymond Roussel&#x27;s novel &quot;Impressions d&#x27;Afrique&quot;, which Duchamp attended in 1912, inspired the piece. Notes, sketches and plans for the work were drawn on his studio walls as early as 1913. To concentrate on the work free from material obligations, Duchamp found work as a librarian while living in France. After immigrating to the United States in 1915, he began work on the piece, financed by the support of the Arensbergs.

The piece is partly constructed as a retrospective of Duchamp&#x27;s works, including a three-dimensional reproduction of his earlier paintings &quot;Bride&quot; (1912), &quot;Chocolate Grinder&quot; (1914) and &quot;Glider containing a water mill in neighboring metals&quot; (1913–1915), which has led to numerous interpretations. The work was formally declared &quot;Unfinished&quot; in 1923. Returning from its first public exhibition in a shipping crate, the glass suffered a large crack. Duchamp repaired it, but left the smaller cracks in the glass intact, accepting the chance element as a part of the piece.

Joseph Nechvatal has cast a considerable light on &quot;The Large Glass&quot; by noting the autoerotic implications of both bachelorhood and the repetitive, frenetic machine; he then discerns a larger constellation of themes by insinuating that autoeroticsm – and with the machine as omnipresent partner and practitioner – opens out into a subversive pan-sexuality as expressed elsewhere in Duchamp&#x27;s work and career, in that a trance-inducing pleasure becomes the operative principle as opposed to the dictates of the traditional male-female coupling; and he as well documents the existence of this theme cluster throughout modernism, starting with Rodin&#x27;s controversial Monument to Balzac, and culminating in a Duchampian vision of a techno-universe in which one and all can find themselves welcomed.

Until 1969 when the Philadelphia Museum of Art revealed Duchamp&#x27;s &quot;Étant donnés&quot; tableau, &quot;The Large Glass&quot; was thought to have been his last major work.

==Kinetic works==

Duchamp&#x27;s interest in kinetic art works can be discerned as early as the notes for &quot;The Large Glass&quot; and the &quot;Bicycle Wheel&quot; readymade, and despite losing interest in &quot;retinal art&quot;, he retained interest in visual phenomena. In 1920, with help from Man Ray, Duchamp built a motorized sculpture, &quot;Rotative plaques verre, optique de précision&quot; (&quot;Rotary Glass Plates, Precision Optics&quot;). The piece, which he did not consider to be art, involved a motor to spin pieces of rectangular glass on which were painted segments of a circle. When the apparatus spins, an optical illusion occurs, where the segments appear to be closed concentric circles. Man Ray set up equipment to photograph the initial experiment, but when they turned the machine for the second time, a drive belt broke and caught a piece of the glass, which after glancing off Man Ray&#x27;s head, shattered into bits.

After moving back to Paris in 1923, at André Breton&#x27;s urging, with financing by Jacques Doucet, Duchamp built another optical device based on the first one, &quot;Rotative Demisphère, optique de précision&quot; (Rotary Demisphere, Precision Optics). This time the optical element was a globe cut in half, with black concentric circles painted on it. When it spins, the circles appear to move backward and forward in space. Duchamp asked that Doucet not exhibit the apparatus as art.

&quot;Rotoreliefs&quot; were the next phase of Duchamp&#x27;s spinning works. To make the optical &quot;play toys&quot;, he painted designs on flat cardboard circles and spun them on a phonographic turntable. When spinning, the flat disks appeared three-dimensional. He had a printer produce 500 sets of six of the designs, and set up a booth at a 1935 Paris inventors&#x27; show to sell them. The venture was a financial disaster, but some optical scientists thought they might be of use in restoring three-dimensional stereoscopic sight to people who have lost vision in one eye. In collaboration with Man Ray and Marc Allégret, Duchamp filmed early versions of the &quot;Rotoreliefs&quot;, and they named the film &quot;Anémic Cinéma&quot; (1926). Later, in Alexander Calder&#x27;s studio in 1931, while looking at the sculptor&#x27;s kinetic works, Duchamp suggested that these should be called &quot;mobiles&quot;. Calder agreed to use this novel term in his upcoming show. To this day, sculptures of this type are called &quot;mobiles&quot;.

==Musical ideas==
Between 1912 and 1915, Duchamp worked with various musical ideas. At least three pieces have survived: two compositions and a note for a musical happening. The two compositions are based on chance operations. &quot;Erratum Musical&quot;, written for three voices, was published in 1934. &quot;La Mariée mise à nu par ses célibataires même. Erratum Musical&quot; is unfinished and was never published or exhibited during Duchamp&#x27;s lifetime. According to the manuscript, the piece was intended for a mechanical instrument &quot;in which the virtuoso intermediary is suppressed&quot;. The manuscript also contains a description for &quot;An apparatus automatically recording fragmented musical periods,&quot; consisting of a funnel, several open-end cars and a set of numbered balls. These pieces predate John Cage&#x27;s &quot;Music of Changes&quot; (1951), which is often considered the first modern piece to be conceived largely through random procedures.

In 1968, Duchamp and John Cage appeared together at a concert entitled &quot;Reunion&quot;, playing a game of chess and composing Aleatoric music by triggering a series of photoelectric cells underneath the chessboard.

==Rrose Sélavy==
&quot;Rrose Sélavy&quot;, also spelled Rose Sélavy, was one of Duchamp&#x27;s pseudonyms. The name, a pun, sounds like the French phrase , which may be translated as &quot;Eros, such is life.&quot; It has also been read as (&quot;to make a toast to life&quot;). Sélavy emerged in 1921 in a series of photographs by Man Ray showing Duchamp dressed as a woman. Through the 1920s Man Ray and Duchamp collaborated on more photos of Sélavy. Duchamp later used the name as the byline on written material and signed several creations with it.

Duchamp used the name in the title of at least one sculpture, &quot;Why Not Sneeze Rose Sélavy?&quot; (1921). The sculpture, a type of readymade called an assemblage, consists of an oral thermometer, a couple of dozen small cubes of marble resembling sugar cubes and a cuttlefish bone inside a birdcage. Sélavy also appears on the label of &quot;Belle Haleine, Eau de Voilette&quot; (1921), a readymade that is a perfume bottle in the original box. Duchamp also signed his film &quot;Anémic Cinéma&quot; (1926) with the Sélavy name.

The inspiration for the name Rrose Sélavy has been thought to be Belle da Costa Greene, J. P. Morgan&#x27;s librarian at The Morgan Library &amp; Museum (formerly The Pierpont Morgan Library) who, following his death, became the Library&#x27;s director, working there for a total of forty-three years. Empowered by J. P. Morgan, and then by his son Jack, Greene built the collection buying and selling rare manuscripts, books and art.

Rrose Sélavy, and the other pseudonyms Duchamp used, may be read as a comment on the fallacy of romanticizing the conscious individuality or subjectivity of the artist, a theme that is also a prominent subtext of the readymades. Duchamp said in an interview, &quot;You think you&#x27;re doing something entirely your own, and a year later you look at it and you see actually the roots of where your art comes from without your knowing it at all.&quot; The Pérez Art Museum Miami, in Florida, holds the piece &quot;Boîte-en-valise (De ou par Marcel Duchamp ou Rrose Sélavy),&quot; or in English, &quot;Box in a Valise (From or by Marcel Duchamp or Rrose Sélavy)&quot; created from 1941–61, in the museum&#x27;s collection. 

From 1922, the name Rrose Sélavy also started appearing in a series of aphorisms, puns, and spoonerisms by the French surrealist poet Robert Desnos. Desnos tried to portray Rrose Sélavy as a long-lost aristocrat and rightful queen of France. Aphorism 13 paid homage to Marcel Duchamp: ‒ in English: &quot;Rrose Sélavy knows the merchant of salt well&quot;; in French the final words sound like Mar-champ Du-cel. Note that the &quot;salt seller&quot; aphorism – &quot;mar-chand-du-sel&quot; – is a phonetic anagram of the artist&#x27;s name: &quot;mar-cel-du-champ&quot;. (Duchamp&#x27;s compiled notes are entitled, &quot;Salt Seller&quot;.) In 1939 a collection of these aphorisms was published under the name of Rrose Sélavy, entitled, .

== Transition from art to chess ==

In 1918, Duchamp took leave of the New York art scene, interrupting his work on the &quot;Large Glass&quot;, and went to Buenos Aires, where he remained for nine months and often played chess. He carved his own chess set from wood with help from a local craftsman who made the knights. He moved to Paris in 1919, and then back to the United States in 1920. Upon his return to Paris in 1923, Duchamp was, in essence, no longer a practicing artist. Instead, his main interest was chess, which he studied for the rest of his life to the exclusion of most other activities.

Duchamp is seen, briefly, playing chess with Man Ray in the short film &quot;Entr&#x27;acte&quot; (1924) by René Clair. He designed the 1925 poster for the Third French Chess Championship, and as a competitor in the event, finished at fifty percent (3–3, with two draws), earning the title of chess master. During this period his fascination with chess so distressed his first wife that she glued his pieces to the chessboard. Duchamp continued to play in the French Championships and in the Chess Olympiads from 1928 to 1933, favoring hypermodern openings such as the Nimzo-Indian.

Sometime in the early 1930s, Duchamp reached the height of his ability, but realized that he had little chance of winning recognition in top-level chess. In the following years, his participation in chess tournaments declined, but he discovered correspondence chess and became a chess journalist, writing weekly newspaper columns. While his contemporaries were achieving spectacular success in the art world by selling their works to high-society collectors, Duchamp observed, &quot;I am still a victim of chess. It has all the beauty of art—and much more. It cannot be commercialized. Chess is much purer than art in its social position.&quot; On another occasion, Duchamp elaborated, &quot;The chess pieces are the block alphabet which shapes thoughts; and these thoughts, although making a visual design on the chess-board, express their beauty abstractly, like a poem. ... I have come to the personal conclusion that while all artists are not chess players, all chess players are artists.&quot;

In 1932, Duchamp teamed with chess theorist Vitaly Halberstadt to publish &quot;L&#x27;opposition et cases conjuguées sont réconciliées&quot; (Opposition and Sister Squares are Reconciled), known as corresponding squares. This treatise describes the Lasker-Reichhelm position, an extremely rare type of position that can arise in the endgame. Using enneagram-like charts that fold upon themselves, the authors demonstrated that in this position, the most Black can hope for is a draw.

The theme of the &quot;endgame&quot; is important to an understanding of Duchamp&#x27;s complex attitude toward his artistic career. Irish playwright Samuel Beckett was an associate of Duchamp, and used the theme as the narrative device for the 1957 play of the same name, &quot;Endgame&quot;. In 1968, Duchamp played an artistically important chess match with avant-garde composer John Cage, at a concert entitled &quot;Reunion&quot;. Music was produced by a series of photoelectric cells underneath the chessboard, triggered sporadically by normal game play.

On choosing a career in chess, Duchamp said, &quot;If Bobby Fischer came to me for advice, I certainly would not discourage him—as if anyone could—but I would try to make it positively clear that he will never have any money from chess, live a monk-like existence and know more rejection than any artist ever has, struggling to be known and accepted.&quot;

Duchamp left a legacy to chess in the form of an enigmatic endgame problem he composed in 1943. The problem was included in the announcement for Julian Levi&#x27;s gallery exhibition &quot;Through the Big End of the Opera Glass&quot;, printed on translucent paper with the faint inscription: &quot;White to play and win&quot;. Grandmasters and endgame specialists have since grappled with the problem, with most concluding that there is no solution.

==Later artistic involvement==
Although Duchamp was no longer considered to be an active artist, he continued to consult with artists, art dealers and collectors. From 1925 he often traveled between France and the United States, and made New York&#x27;s Greenwich Village his home in 1942. He also occasionally worked on artistic projects such as the short film &quot;Anémic Cinéma&quot; (1926), &quot;Box in a Valise&quot; (1935–1941), &quot;Self Portrait in Profile&quot; (1958) and the larger work &quot;Étant Donnés&quot; (1946–1966). In 1943, he participated with Maya Deren in her unfinished film &quot;The Witch&#x27;s Cradle&quot;, filmed in Peggy Guggenheim&#x27;s Art of This Century gallery, in which his hands manipulate the string game, Cat&#x27;s Cradle, while his body is enmeshed in stop-motion-animated twine.

From the mid-1930s onward he collaborated with the Surrealists; however, he did not join the movement, despite the coaxing of André Breton. From then until 1944, together with Max Ernst, Eugenio Granell, and Breton, Duchamp edited the Surrealist periodical &quot;VVV&quot;, and served as an advisory editor for the magazine &quot;View&quot;, which featured him in its March 1945 edition, thus introducing him to a broader American audience.

Duchamp&#x27;s influence on the art world remained behind the scenes until the late 1950s, when he was &quot;discovered&quot; by young artists such as Robert Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns, who were eager to escape the dominance of Abstract Expressionism. In 1959, the publication in both French and English of Robert Lebel&#x27;s catalogue raisonné made his work more widely accessible. He was a co-founder of the international literary group Oulipo in 1960. Interest in Duchamp was reignited in the 1960s, and he gained international public recognition. In 1963, curator Walter Hopps organized Duchamp&#x27;s first retrospective exhibition at the Pasadena Art Museum, and there he appeared in an iconic photograph playing chess opposite nude model Eve Babitz, photographed by Julian Wasser. The photograph was later described by the Smithsonian Archives of American Art as being &quot;among the key documentary images of American modern art&quot;.

Artist and collaborator Richard Hamilton (artist) organized a retrospective at The Tate Gallery in 1966. Other major institutions, including the Philadelphia Museum of Art and the Museum of Modern Art, New York, followed with a retrospective of Duchamp&#x27;s work in 1973. He was invited to lecture on art and to participate in formal discussions, as well as sitting for interviews with major publications. As the last surviving member of the Duchamp family of artists, in 1967 Duchamp helped to organize an exhibition in Rouen, France, called &quot;Les Duchamp: Jacques Villon, Raymond Duchamp-Villon, Marcel Duchamp, Suzanne Duchamp&quot;. Parts of this family exhibition were later shown again at the Musée National d&#x27;Art Moderne in Paris.

===Exhibition design and installation art===

Duchamp participated in the design of the 1938 Exposition Internationale du Surréalisme, held at the Galerie des Beaux-arts, Paris. The show was organised by André Breton and Paul Éluard, and featured &quot;Two hundred and twenty-nine artworks by sixty exhibitors from fourteen countries... at this multimedia exhibition.&quot; The Surrealists wanted to create an exhibition which in itself would be a creative act, thus working collaboratively in its staging. Marcel Duchamp was named as &quot;Generateur-arbitre&quot;, Salvador Dalí and Max Ernst were listed as technical directors, Man Ray was chief lighting technician and Wolfgang Paalen responsible for &quot;water and foliage&quot;.

&quot;Plus belles rues de Paris&quot; (The most beautiful streets of Paris) filled one side of the lobby with mannequins dressed by various Surrealists. The main hall, or the &quot;Salle de Superstition&quot; (Room of Superstition), was &quot;a cave-like Gesamtkunstwerk&quot; notably including Duchamp&#x27;s installation, &quot;Twelve Hundred Coal Bags Suspended from the Ceiling over a Stove&quot;, which was literally 1,200 stuffed coal bags suspended from the ceiling. The floor was covered by Paalen with dead leaves and mud from the Montparnasse Cemetery. In the middle of the grand hall underneath Duchamp&#x27;s coal sacks, Paalen installed an artificial water-filled pond with real water lilies and reeds, which he called &quot;Avant La Mare&quot;. A single light bulb provided the only illumination, so patrons were given flashlights with which to view the art (an idea of Man Ray), while the aroma of roasting coffee filled the air. Around midnight, the visitors witnessed the dancing shimmer of a scantily dressed girl who suddenly arose from the reeds, jumped on a bed, shrieked hysterically, then disappeared just as quickly. Much to the Surrealists&#x27; satisfaction, the exhibition scandalized many of the guests.

In 1942, for the &quot;First Papers of Surrealism&quot; show in New York, surrealists called on Duchamp to design the exhibition. He created an installation, &quot;His Twine&quot;, commonly known as the &quot;mile of string&quot;, it was a three-dimensional web of string throughout the rooms of the space, in some cases making it almost impossible to see the works. Duchamp made a secret arrangement with an associate&#x27;s son to bring young friends to the opening of the show. When the formally-dressed patrons arrived, they found a dozen children in athletic clothes kicking and passing balls, and skipping rope. When questioned, the children were told to say &quot;Mr. Duchamp told us we could play here&quot;. Duchamp&#x27;s design of the catalog for the show included &quot;found&quot;, rather than posed, photographs of the artists.

Breton with Duchamp organized the exhibition &quot;Le surréalisme en 1947&quot; in the Galerie Maeght in Paris after the war and named set designer Frederick Kiesler as architect.

== &quot;Étant donnés&quot; ==
Duchamp&#x27;s final major art work surprised the art world, which believed he had given up art for chess 25 years earlier. Entitled &quot;Étant donnés: 1° la chute d&#x27;eau / 2° le gaz d&#x27;éclairage&quot; (&quot;Given: 1. The Waterfall, 2. The Illuminating Gas&quot;), it is a tableau, visible only through a peep hole in a wooden door. A nude woman may be seen lying on her back with her face hidden, legs spread, and one hand holding a gas lamp in the air against a landscape backdrop. Duchamp had worked secretly on the piece from 1946 to 1966 in his Greenwich Village studio while even his closest friends thought he had abandoned art. The torso of the nude figure is based on Duchamp&#x27;s lover, the Brazilian sculptor Maria Martins, with whom he had an affair from 1946 to 1951.

== Personal life ==
Throughout his adult life, Duchamp was a passionate smoker of Habana cigars.

Duchamp became a United States citizen in 1955.

In June 1927, Duchamp married Lydie Sarazin-Levassor; however, they divorced six months later. It was rumored that Duchamp had chosen a marriage of convenience, because Sarazin-Levassor was the daughter of a wealthy automobile manufacturer. Early in January 1928, Duchamp said that he could no longer bear the responsibility and confinement of marriage, and they were soon divorced.

Between 1946 and 1951 Maria Martins was his mistress.

In 1954, he and Alexina &quot;Teeny&quot; Sattler married. They remained together until his death.

Duchamp was an atheist.

==Death and burial==

Duchamp died suddenly and peacefully in the early morning of 2 October 1968 at his home in Neuilly-sur-Seine, France. After an evening dining at home with his friends Man Ray and Robert Lebel, Duchamp retired at 1:05 am, collapsed in his studio, and died of heart failure.

He is buried in the Rouen Cemetery, in Rouen, France, with the epitaph, &quot;D&#x27;ailleurs, c&#x27;est toujours les autres qui meurent&quot; (&quot;Besides, it&#x27;s always the others who die&quot;).

==Legacy==
Many critics consider Duchamp to be one of the most important artists of the 20th century, and his output influenced the development of post–World War I Western art. He advised modern art collectors, such as Peggy Guggenheim and other prominent figures, thereby helping to shape the tastes of Western art during this period. He challenged conventional thought about artistic processes and rejected the emerging art market, through subversive anti-art. He famously dubbed a urinal art and named it &quot;Fountain&quot;. Duchamp produced relatively few artworks and remained mostly aloof of the avant-garde circles of his time. He went on to pretend to abandon art and devote the rest of his life to chess, while secretly continuing to make art. In 1958 Duchamp said of creativity,

The creative act is not performed by the artist alone; the spectator brings the work in contact with the external world by deciphering and interpreting its inner qualifications and thus adds his contribution to the creative act.

Duchamp in his later life explicitly expressed negativity toward art. In a BBC interview with Duchamp conducted by Joan Bakewell in 1968 he compared art with religion, saying that he wished to do away with art the same way many have done away with religion. Duchamp goes on to explain to the interviewer that &quot;the word art etymologically means to do&quot;, that art means activity of any kind, and that it is our society that creates &quot;purely artificial&quot; distinctions of being an artist.

A quotation erroneously attributed to Duchamp suggests a negative attitude toward later trends in 20th century art:

However, this was written in 1961 by fellow Dadaist Hans Richter, in the second person, i.e. &quot;You threw the bottle-rack...&quot;. Although a marginal note in the letter suggests that Duchamp generally approved of the statement, Richter did not make the distinction clear until many years later.

Duchamp&#x27;s attitude was more favorable, however, as evidenced by another statement made in 1964:

The Prix Marcel Duchamp (Marcel Duchamp Prize), established in 2000, is an annual award given to a young artist by the Centre Georges Pompidou. In 2004, as a testimony to the legacy of Duchamp&#x27;s work to the art world, a panel of prominent artists and art historians voted &quot;Fountain&quot; &quot;the most influential artwork of the 20th century&quot;.

==Art market==
On 17 November 1999, a version of &quot;Fountain&quot; (owned by Arturo Schwarz) was sold at Sotheby&#x27;s, New York, for $1,762,500 to Dimitris Daskalopoulos, who declared that &quot;Fountain&quot; represented the origin of contemporary art. The price set a world record, at the time, for a work by Marcel Duchamp at public auction. The record has since been surpassed by a work sold at Christie&#x27;s Paris, titled &quot;Belle Haleine, Eau de Voilette&quot; (1921). The readymade of a perfume bottle in its box sold for a record $11.5 million (€8.9 million).

==Selected works==

==See also==
* Shock art
* Stereokinetic stimulus
* Fourth dimension in art
* &quot;Hommage à Marcel Duchamp&quot; (1947 painting by his friend, Victor Brauner)
* &quot;Fountain Archive&quot;
* &quot;Transatlantic&quot; (portrayal in 2023 TV series)

==Notes==
==References==
* Tomkins, Calvin: &quot;Duchamp: The World of Marcel Duchamp 1887–&quot;, Time Inc., 1966. 
* Ian Chilvers &amp; John Glaves-Smith: &quot;A Dictionary of Modern and Contemporary Art&quot;. Oxford University Press, pp. 202–205
* Seigel, Jerrold: &quot;The Private Worlds of Marcel Duchamp&quot;, University of California Press, 1995. 
* Hulten, Pontus (editor): &quot;Marcel Duchamp: Work and Life&quot;, The MIT Press, 1993. 
* Yves Arman: &quot;Marcel Duchamp plays and wins&quot;, &quot;Marcel Duchamp joue et gagne&quot;, Marval Press, 1984
* Cabanne, Pierre: &quot;Dialogues with Marcel Duchamp&quot;, Da Capo Press, Inc., 1987 Reprint of the 1979 London edition (1969 in French), . Notable for having contributions by Jasper Johns, Robert Motherwell, and Salvador Dalí 
* Gammel, Irene: &quot;Baroness Elsa: Gender, Dada and Everyday Modernity&quot;. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002.
* by Bonnie Jean Garner (with text boxes by Stephen Jay Gould)
* Gibson, Michael: Duchamp-Dada, (in French, Nouvelles Editions Françaises-Casterman, 1990) International Art Book Award of the Vasari Prize in 1991.
* Sanouillet, Michel and Peterson, Elmer: &quot;The Writings of Marcel Duchamp&quot;. NY: Da Capo Press, 1989. 
* Sanouillet, Michel and Matisse, Paul: &quot;Marcel Duchamp: Duchamp du signe&quot; suivi de &quot;Notes&quot;, Flammarion, 2008. 
* Catherine Perret: Marcel Duchamp, le manieur de gravité, Ed. CNDP, Paris, 1998
* Banz, Stefan (ed.): &quot;Marcel Duchamp and the Forestay Waterfall&quot;, JRP-Ringier, Zürich, 2010. 
* Jean-Marc Rouvière: &quot;Au prisme du readymade, incises sur l&#x27;identité équivoque de l&#x27;objet préface de Philippe Sers et G. Litichevesky&quot;, Paris L&#x27;Harmattan 2023 

==Further reading==
* Arturo Schwarz, &quot;The Complete Works of Marcel Duchamp&quot;, Delano Greenidge Editions, 1995
* Anne D&#x27;Harnoncourt (Intro), &quot;Joseph Cornell/Marcel Duchamp... in resonance&quot;, Menil Foundation, Houston, 1998, 
* Linda Dalrymple Henderson, &quot;Duchamp in Context: Science and Technology in the Large Glass and Related Works&quot;, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1998
* Paola Magi, &quot;Caccia al tesoro con Marcel Duchamp&quot;, Edizioni Archivio Dedalus, Milano, 2010, 
* Paola Magi: &quot;Treasure Hunt With Marcel Duchamp&quot;, Edizioni Archivio Dedalus, Milano, 2011, 
* Marc Décimo: &quot;Marcel Duchamp mis à nu. A propos du processus créatif&quot; (&quot;Marcel Duchamp Stripped Bare. Apropos of the creative Act&quot;), Les presses du réel, Dijon (France), 2004 .
* Marc Décimo:&quot;The Marcel Duchamp Library&quot;, perhaps (&quot;La Bibliothèque de Marcel Duchamp, peut-être&quot;), Les presses du réel, Dijon (France), 2002.
* Marc Décimo, &quot;Le Duchamp facile&quot;, Les presses du réel, coll. &quot;L&#x27;écart absolu / Poche&quot;, Dijon, 2005
* Marc Décimo (dir.), &quot;Marcel Duchamp et l&#x27;érotisme&quot;, Les presses du réel, coll. « L&#x27;écart absolu / Chantier », Dijon, 2008
* T.J. Demos, &quot;The Exiles of Marcel Duchamp&quot;, Cambridge, MIT Press, 2007.
* Lydie Fischer Sarazin-Levassor, &quot;A Marriage in Check. The Heart of the Bride Stripped by her Bachelor, even&quot;, Les presses du réel, Dijon (France), 2007.
* J-T. Richard, &quot;M. Duchamp mis à nu par la psychanalyse, même&quot; (M. Duchamp stripped bare even by psychoanalysis), éd. L&#x27;Harmattan, Paris (France), 2010.
* Chris Allen (Trans), Dawn Ades (Intro), &quot;Three New York Dadas and The Blind Man: Marcel Duchamp, Henri-Pierre Roché, Beatrice Wood&quot;, Atlas Press, London, 2013, 

==External links==
Duchamp works
* Philadelphia Museum of Art houses the Arensbergs&#x27; large collection of Duchamp&#x27;s work. (website)
* An explanation about the &quot;Roue de bicyclette&quot; by Duchamp (website)
* Dossier : Marcel Duchamp, Centre Pompidou

* Philadelphia Museum of Art &quot;Portrait of Chess Players&quot; (&quot;Portrait de joueurs d&#x27;échecs&quot;) (1911).
* &quot;Philadelphia Museum of Art The Green Box&quot;. Notes and studies for &quot;The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even&quot;. (1915–1923)
* &quot;Anémic Cinéma&quot; film (1926)
* Marcel Duchamp &quot;Apropos of Myself&quot; The Baltimore Museum of Art: Baltimore, Maryland, 1963 Accessed 26 June 2012
* Duchamp Research Centre at the Staatliches Museum Schwerin

Essays by Duchamp
* Marcel Duchamp: &quot;The Creative Act&quot; (1957) Audio

General resources
* &quot;Toutfait&quot;: The Marcel Duchamp Studies Online Journal
* Inventing Marcel Duchamp: The Dynamics of Poraiture – online exhibition from the National Portrait Gallery, Smithsonian Institution
* Oral history interview with Eve Babitz, 2000 Jun 14, a model of Duchamp&#x27;s from the Smithsonian Archives of American Art
* Duchamp Research Portal, archival collections and works of art from the Philadelphia Museum of Art, Centre Pompidou, and Association Marcel Duchamp

Audio and video
* Duchamp audio CD &quot;Musical Erratum + In Conversation&quot; at LTM
* Marcel Duchamp: Various Statements and Interviews at Ubuweb
* &quot;Voices of Dada&quot;, &quot;Futurism &amp; Dada Reviewed&quot; and &quot;Surrealism Reviewed&quot; – readings by Duchamp on audio CDs
* Films of Marcel Duchamp at Ubuweb
* &quot;Duchamp&#x27;s Legacy&quot; with Richard Hamilton and Sarat Maharaj from Tate Britain. (RealPlayer required.)
*An Conversation with Marcel Duchamp and James Johnson Sweeney, National Broadcasting Company, 1956
* Marcel Duchamp Arrivato a cosa? Got to what? in Italian language from the Pasadena Art Museum, 1971. Video released by art critic and curator dr Alain Chivilò in 2021.

Chess
* &quot;Marcel Duchamp and Chess&quot; by Edward Winter</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5912" start="0" end="27" title="Marcel Duchamp" label="Henri-Robert-Marcel Duchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="153" end="159" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="161" end="165" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="171" end="185" title="conceptual art" label="conceptual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="223" end="236" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589" start="241" end="254" title="Henri Matisse" label="Henri Matisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078913" start="343" end="355" title="plastic arts" label="plastic arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="605" end="616" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="706" end="712" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="797" end="801" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q475617" start="854" end="871" title="Blainville-Crevon" label="Blainville-Crevon"/>
<link wikidata="Q452254" start="1339" end="1353" title="Jacques Villon" label="Jacques Villon"/>
<link wikidata="Q705282" start="1389" end="1411" title="Raymond Duchamp-Villon" label="Raymond Duchamp-Villon"/>
<link wikidata="Q435558" start="1436" end="1458" title="Suzanne Duchamp" label="Suzanne Duchamp-Crotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="1558" end="1563" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268638" start="1811" end="1833" title="Lycée Pierre-Corneille" label="Lycée Pierre-Corneille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434445" start="1929" end="1951" title="Robert Antoine Pinchon" label="Robert Antoine Pinchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q674956" start="1956" end="1969" title="Pierre Dumont (painter)" label="Pierre Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="2474" end="2487" title="Impressionism" label="Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q166713" start="2489" end="2507" title="Post-Impressionism" label="Post-Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="2519" end="2530" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q166713" start="2950" end="2968" title="Post-Impressionism" label="Post-Impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="3126" end="3143" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="Symbolist painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q154349" start="3144" end="3156" title="Odilon Redon" label="Odilon Redon"/>
<link wikidata="Q337480" start="3259" end="3274" title="Académie Julian" label="Académie Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="3463" end="3466" title="pun" label="pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933810" start="3509" end="3519" title="visual pun" label="visual pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q159964" start="3747" end="3757" title="typography" label="typography"/>
<link wikidata="Q452254" start="3849" end="3862" title="Jacques Villon" label="Jacques&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q337579" start="3893" end="3936" title="Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture" label="Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q739989" start="3983" end="4003" title="Salon d&amp;#x27;Automne" label="Salon d&amp;#x27;Automne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420385" start="4035" end="4057" title="Salon des Indépendants" label="Salon des Indépendants"/>
<link wikidata="Q166593" start="4059" end="4065" title="Fauvism" label="Fauves"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="4070" end="4082" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Paul Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408836" start="4090" end="4102" title="proto-Cubism" label="proto-Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q133855" start="4149" end="4170" title="Guillaume Apollinaire" label="Guillaume Apollinaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q157321" start="4384" end="4399" title="Francis Picabia" label="Francis Picabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q234743" start="4583" end="4590" title="Puteaux" label="Puteaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="4644" end="4650" title="Cubism" label="Cubist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33978" start="4678" end="4693" title="Robert Delaunay" label="Robert Delaunay"/>
<link wikidata="Q157183" start="4695" end="4708" title="Fernand Léger" label="Fernand Léger"/>
<link wikidata="Q718882" start="4710" end="4730" title="Roger de La Fresnaye" label="Roger de La Fresnaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q711903" start="4732" end="4746" title="Albert Gleizes" label="Albert Gleizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q313096" start="4748" end="4762" title="Jean Metzinger" label="Jean Metzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q151152" start="4764" end="4773" title="Juan Gris" label="Juan Gris"/>
<link wikidata="Q157578" start="4779" end="4799" title="Alexander Archipenko" label="Alexander Archipenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086353" start="4872" end="4885" title="Puteaux Group" label="Puteaux Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086353" start="4894" end="4911" title="Section d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Section d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413630" start="5401" end="5424" title="fourth dimension in art" label="fourth dimension in art"/>
<link wikidata="Q421716" start="7017" end="7051" title="Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2" label="Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="7333" end="7342" title="futurism (art)" label="Futurists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420385" start="7398" end="7420" title="Salon des Indépendants" label="Salon des Indépendants"/>
<link wikidata="Q711903" start="7426" end="7440" title="Albert Gleizes" label="Albert Gleizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385541" start="8380" end="8402" title="Du &amp;quot;Cubisme&amp;quot;" label="Du &amp;quot;Cubisme&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403727" start="8439" end="8456" title="La Maison Cubiste" label="La Maison Cubiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848249" start="8505" end="8515" title="André Mare" label="André Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q739989" start="8524" end="8544" title="Salon d&amp;#x27;Automne" label="Salon d&amp;#x27;Automne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086353" start="8606" end="8623" title="Section d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Section d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q60465010" start="9040" end="9055" title="Galeries Dalmau" label="Galeries Dalmau"/>
<link wikidata="Q688909" start="9212" end="9223" title="Armory Show" label="Armory Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="9429" end="9440" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="9473" end="9481" title="Futurism" label="Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76725" start="9699" end="9710" title="Max Stirner" label="Max Stirner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193108" start="9745" end="9764" title="The Ego and Its Own" label="The Ego and Its Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915336" start="10111" end="10157" title="The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even" label="The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even"/>
<link wikidata="Q191748" start="10589" end="10612" title="Lucas Cranach the Elder" label="Lucas Cranach the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q154568" start="10636" end="10651" title="Alte Pinakothek" label="Alte Pinakothek"/>
<link wikidata="Q462662" start="10952" end="10967" title="Raymond Roussel" label="Raymond Roussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q178611" start="11682" end="11696" title="Jura mountains" label="Jura mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268481" start="12087" end="12096" title="painterly" label="painterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q153048" start="12289" end="12308" title="Constantin Brâncuși" label="Constantin Brâncuși"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381632" start="12450" end="12460" title="Bird in Space" label="bird forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q81082" start="12915" end="12929" title="Henri Poincaré" label="Henri Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000713" start="14530" end="14552" title="Readymades of Marcel Duchamp" label="&amp;quot;Readymades&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q421716" start="15034" end="15067" title="Nude Descending a Staircase No. 2" label="Nude Descending a Staircase No. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q688909" start="15107" end="15118" title="Armory Show" label="Armory Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q464044" start="15412" end="15428" title="Katherine Dreier" label="Katherine Dreier"/>
<link wikidata="Q46139" start="15440" end="15447" title="Man Ray" label="Man Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543934" start="15492" end="15498" title="Walter Conrad Arensberg" label="Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543934" start="15503" end="15526" title="Walter Conrad Arensberg" label="Walter Conrad Arensberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q459378" start="15547" end="15560" title="Beatrice Wood" label="Beatrice Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q157321" start="15565" end="15580" title="Francis Picabia" label="Francis Picabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="15599" end="15610" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q187626" start="15821" end="15843" title="Ridgefield, New Jersey" label="Ridgefield, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="15856" end="15868" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549839" start="16321" end="16336" title="Société Anonyme (art)" label="Société Anonyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q466258" start="16592" end="16603" title="Walter Pach" label="Walter Pach"/>
<link wikidata="Q233806" start="16830" end="16846" title="Peggy Guggenheim" label="Peggy Guggenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="16848" end="16868" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q711362" start="16879" end="16890" title="Alfred Barr" label="Alfred Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136905" start="16895" end="16916" title="James Johnson Sweeney" label="James Johnson Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="16995" end="16999" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q968159" start="17018" end="17030" title="art movement" label="art movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="17098" end="17104" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="17142" end="17148" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17296" end="17307" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q661745" start="17399" end="17415" title="Cabaret Voltaire (Zurich)" label="Cabaret Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16409" start="17649" end="17662" title="Tristan Tzara" label="Tristan Tzara"/>
<link wikidata="Q366217" start="17667" end="17679" title="Marcel Janco" label="Marcel Janco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="17745" end="17762" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797221" start="18054" end="18067" title="art manifesto" label="art manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="18071" end="18081" title="aesthetics" label="art theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q185925" start="18096" end="18110" title="graphic design" label="graphic design"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="18133" end="18141" title="anti-war" label="anti-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q610106" start="18214" end="18222" title="anti-art" label="anti-art"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="18289" end="18298" title="bourgeois" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q70989" start="18614" end="18623" title="Hugo Ball" label="Hugo Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q76815" start="18625" end="18638" title="Emmy Hennings" label="Emmy Hennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q153739" start="18640" end="18648" title="Hans Arp" label="Hans Arp"/>
<link wikidata="Q84503" start="18650" end="18664" title="Raoul Hausmann" label="Raoul Hausmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q463411" start="18666" end="18677" title="Hannah Höch" label="Hannah Höch"/>
<link wikidata="Q67897" start="18679" end="18694" title="Johannes Baader" label="Johannes Baader"/>
<link wikidata="Q16409" start="18696" end="18709" title="Tristan Tzara" label="Tristan Tzara"/>
<link wikidata="Q157321" start="18711" end="18726" title="Francis Picabia" label="Francis Picabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76853" start="18728" end="18747" title="Richard Huelsenbeck" label="Richard Huelsenbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q107194" start="18749" end="18760" title="Georg Grosz" label="Georg Grosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q168671" start="18762" end="18777" title="John Heartfield" label="John Heartfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q459378" start="18779" end="18792" title="Beatrice Wood" label="Beatrice Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q155158" start="18794" end="18809" title="Kurt Schwitters" label="Kurt Schwitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q213597" start="18815" end="18827" title="Hans Richter (artist)" label="Hans Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303621" start="18909" end="18923" title="downtown music" label="downtown music"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="18956" end="18966" title="surrealism" label="surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q276308" start="18968" end="18984" title="Nouveau réalisme" label="Nouveau réalisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q134147" start="18986" end="18993" title="pop art" label="pop art"/>
<link wikidata="Q108908" start="18999" end="19005" title="Fluxus" label="Fluxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="19116" end="19129" title="postmodernism" label="postmodernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11324971" start="19300" end="19313" title="New York Dada" label="New York Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q157321" start="19437" end="19452" title="Francis Picabia" label="Francis Picabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543934" start="20017" end="20026" title="Walter Arensberg" label="Arensberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="20048" end="20065" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000713" start="20215" end="20225" title="Readymades of Marcel Duchamp" label="Readymades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206847" start="20355" end="20363" title="Fountain (Duchamp)" label="Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q365696" start="20388" end="20418" title="Society of Independent Artists" label="Society of Independent Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605686" start="20776" end="20794" title="Henri-Pierre Roché" label="Henri-Pierre Roché"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576712" start="20884" end="20897" title="The Blind Man" label="The Blind Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038152" start="20914" end="20923" title="Rongwrong" label="Rongwrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q572916" start="21122" end="21135" title="found objects" label="found objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q164918" start="21213" end="21226" title="Bicycle Wheel" label="Bicycle Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q85393134" start="21516" end="21527" title="Bottle Rack" label="Bottle Rack"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209453" start="21646" end="21674" title="In Advance of the Broken Arm" label="In Advance of the Broken Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206847" start="21784" end="21792" title="Fountain (Duchamp)" label="Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12418" start="22078" end="22087" title="Mona Lisa" label="Mona Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720294" start="22210" end="22220" title="L.H.O.O.Q." label="L.H.O.O.Q."/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="22547" end="22564" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293786" start="22719" end="22733" title="Arturo Schwarz" label="Arturo Schwarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880310" start="22748" end="22769" title="Rhonda Roland Shearer" label="Rhonda Roland Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q371905" start="23362" end="23377" title="Alphonse Allais" label="Alphonse Allais"/>
<link wikidata="Q258694" start="23505" end="23516" title="Incoherents" label="Incoherents"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="23743" end="23751" title="Futurism" label="Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915336" start="23773" end="23819" title="The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even" label="The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="23885" end="23897" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q462662" start="24486" end="24501" title="Raymond Roussel" label="Raymond Roussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185405" start="25549" end="25565" title="Joseph Nechvatal" label="Joseph Nechvatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2770535" start="26231" end="26249" title="Monument to Balzac" label="Monument to Balzac"/>
<link wikidata="Q510324" start="26383" end="26409" title="Philadelphia Museum of Art" label="Philadelphia Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750656" start="26440" end="26452" title="Étant donnés" label="Étant donnés"/>
<link wikidata="Q466521" start="26589" end="26600" title="kinetic art" label="kinetic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915336" start="26656" end="26671" title="The Large Glass" label="The Large Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q164918" start="26692" end="26705" title="Bicycle Wheel" label="Bicycle Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q619776" start="27239" end="27257" title="Concentric objects" label="concentric circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q623755" start="27378" end="27388" title="drive belt" label="drive belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q161955" start="27535" end="27547" title="André Breton" label="André Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259209" start="27581" end="27595" title="Jacques Doucet (fashion designer)" label="Jacques Doucet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35158" start="28505" end="28517" title="stereoscopic" label="stereoscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q284911" start="28601" end="28614" title="Marc Allégret" label="Marc Allégret"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620529" start="28708" end="28721" title="Anémic Cinéma" label="Anémic Cinéma"/>
<link wikidata="Q151580" start="28746" end="28762" title="Alexander Calder" label="Alexander Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q784445" start="28890" end="28897" title="Mobile (sculpture)" label="mobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q623715" start="29242" end="29259" title="Aleatoric music" label="chance operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q29957" start="29779" end="29785" title="funnel" label="funnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="29859" end="29868" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328515" start="29882" end="29898" title="Music of Changes" label="Music of Changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q623715" start="30144" end="30159" title="Aleatoric music" label="Aleatoric music"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="30186" end="30204" title="photoelectric cell" label="photoelectric cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q110079" start="30221" end="30231" title="chessboard" label="chessboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="30353" end="30356" title="pun" label="pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997852" start="30856" end="30883" title="Why Not Sneeze Rose Sélavy?" label="Why Not Sneeze Rose Sélavy?"/>
<link wikidata="Q262343" start="30943" end="30953" title="assemblage (art)" label="assemblage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30970" end="30986" title="Medical thermometer#Oral" label="oral thermometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="31021" end="31027" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762674" start="31057" end="31072" title="cuttlefish bone" label="cuttlefish bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531974" start="31082" end="31090" title="birdcage" label="birdcage"/>
<link wikidata="Q60462546" start="31134" end="31164" title="Belle Haleine, Eau de Voilette" label="Belle Haleine, Eau de Voilette"/>
<link wikidata="Q273240" start="31387" end="31408" title="Belle da Costa Greene" label="Belle da Costa Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="31410" end="31422" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478423" start="31443" end="31474" title="The Morgan Library &amp;amp; Museum" label="The Morgan Library &amp;amp; Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="31729" end="31740" title="manuscripts" label="manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000713" start="31975" end="31985" title="Readymades of Marcel Duchamp" label="readymades"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026874" start="32214" end="32236" title="Pérez Art Museum Miami" label="Pérez Art Museum Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q165740" start="32553" end="32561" title="aphorism" label="aphorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133076" start="32574" end="32584" title="spoonerism" label="spoonerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="32600" end="32610" title="surrealism" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170095" start="32616" end="32629" title="Robert Desnos" label="Robert Desnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q122981" start="32988" end="32995" title="anagram" label="anagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="33380" end="33392" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="33445" end="33450" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="33455" end="33461" title="woodcarving" label="carved"/>
<link wikidata="Q25098560" start="33470" end="33479" title="chess set" label="chess set"/>
<link wikidata="Q136" start="33536" end="33543" title="Knight (chess)" label="knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345290" start="33907" end="33921" title="Entr&amp;#x27;acte (film)" label="Entr&amp;#x27;acte"/>
<link wikidata="Q55388" start="33938" end="33948" title="René Clair" label="René Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093327" start="34123" end="34135" title="chess master" label="chess master"/>
<link wikidata="Q110079" start="34245" end="34255" title="chessboard" label="chessboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q428303" start="34322" end="34336" title="Chess Olympiad" label="Chess Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361911" start="34366" end="34377" title="hypermodernism (chess)" label="hypermodern"/>
<link wikidata="Q921388" start="34399" end="34411" title="Nimzo-Indian" label="Nimzo-Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128406" start="34659" end="34679" title="correspondence chess" label="correspondence chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="34984" end="34998" title="commercialized" label="commercialized"/>
<link wikidata="Q327577" start="35458" end="35476" title="Vitaly Halberstadt" label="Vitaly Halberstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568233" start="35557" end="35567" title="Opposition (chess)" label="Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940894" start="35613" end="35634" title="corresponding squares" label="corresponding squares"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35664" end="35689" title="Corresponding squares#Lasker-Reichhelm position" label="Lasker-Reichhelm position"/>
<link wikidata="Q332225" start="35748" end="35755" title="Chess endgame" label="endgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q633715" start="35763" end="35772" title="Enneagram (geometry)" label="enneagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137224" start="35893" end="35897" title="Draw (chess)" label="draw"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="36050" end="36064" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235448" start="36179" end="36186" title="Endgame (play)" label="Endgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q41314" start="36516" end="36529" title="Bobby Fischer" label="Bobby Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214014" start="37673" end="37688" title="De ou par Marcel Duchamp ou Rrose Sélavy (La Boîte-en-valise)" label="Box in a Valise"/>
<link wikidata="Q450382" start="37840" end="37850" title="Maya Deren" label="Maya Deren"/>
<link wikidata="Q16941705" start="37880" end="37903" title="The Witch&amp;#x27;s Cradle" label="The Witch&amp;#x27;s Cradle"/>
<link wikidata="Q233806" start="37921" end="37937" title="Peggy Guggenheim" label="Peggy Guggenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q705846" start="37945" end="37972" title="Art of This Century gallery" label="Art of This Century gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="38150" end="38161" title="Surrealists" label="Surrealists"/>
<link wikidata="Q161955" start="38225" end="38237" title="André Breton" label="André Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q154842" start="38275" end="38284" title="Max Ernst" label="Max Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059616" start="38286" end="38301" title="Eugenio Granell" label="Eugenio Granell"/>
<link wikidata="Q631778" start="38362" end="38365" title="VVV (magazine)" label="VVV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928745" start="38429" end="38433" title="View (magazine)" label="View"/>
<link wikidata="Q164358" start="38692" end="38711" title="Robert Rauschenberg" label="Robert Rauschenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155057" start="38716" end="38728" title="Jasper Johns" label="Jasper Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="38772" end="38794" title="Abstract Expressionism" label="Abstract Expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q744609" start="38984" end="38990" title="Oulipo" label="Oulipo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544848" start="39113" end="39125" title="Walter Hopps" label="Walter Hopps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752085" start="39189" end="39208" title="Pasadena Art Museum" label="Pasadena Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416144" start="39290" end="39300" title="Eve Babitz" label="Eve Babitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q76028685" start="39318" end="39331" title="Julian Wasser" label="Julian Wasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860568" start="39375" end="39411" title="Smithsonian Archives of American Art" label="Smithsonian Archives of American Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q159465" start="39515" end="39540" title="Richard Hamilton (artist)" label="Richard Hamilton (artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q430682" start="39574" end="39586" title="Tate Gallery" label="Tate Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q510324" start="39636" end="39662" title="Philadelphia Museum of Art" label="Philadelphia Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="39671" end="39691" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895953" start="40196" end="40229" title="Musée National d&amp;#x27;Art Moderne" label="Musée National d&amp;#x27;Art Moderne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384737" start="40334" end="40374" title="Exposition Internationale du Surréalisme" label="Exposition Internationale du Surréalisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q161955" start="40445" end="40457" title="André Breton" label="André Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q152176" start="40462" end="40473" title="Paul Éluard" label="Paul Éluard"/>
<link wikidata="Q669728" start="40914" end="40929" title="Wolfgang Paalen" label="Wolfgang Paalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q858403" start="41233" end="41248" title="Gesamtkunstwerk" label="Gesamtkunstwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q212431" start="41288" end="41300" title="Installation art" label="installation"/>
<link wikidata="Q272208" start="41518" end="41539" title="Montparnasse Cemetery" label="Montparnasse Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q148650" start="41670" end="41682" title="Nymphaeaceae" label="water lilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q235783" start="41811" end="41821" title="flashlight" label="flashlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090758" start="41891" end="41906" title="Coffee roasting" label="roasting coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742485" start="43141" end="43155" title="Galerie Maeght" label="Galerie Maeght"/>
<link wikidata="Q113775" start="43202" end="43219" title="Frederick John Kiesler" label="Frederick Kiesler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750656" start="43405" end="43417" title="Étant donnés" label="Étant donnés"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="43826" end="43843" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q9661780" start="43998" end="44011" title="Maria Martins (artist)" label="Maria Martins"/>
<link wikidata="" start="44237" end="44259" title=":fr:Lydie Sarazin-Levassor" label="Lydie Sarazin-Levassor"/>
<link wikidata="Q279394" start="44343" end="44366" title="marriage of convenience" label="marriage of convenience"/>
<link wikidata="Q9661780" start="44613" end="44626" title="Maria Martins (artist)" label="Maria Martins"/>
<link wikidata="Q514931" start="44662" end="44695" title="Alexina Duchamp" label="Alexina &amp;quot;Teeny&amp;quot; Sattler"/>
<link wikidata="Q48958" start="44884" end="44901" title="Neuilly-sur-Seine" label="Neuilly-sur-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46139" start="44960" end="44967" title="Man Ray" label="Man Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435715" start="44972" end="44984" title="Robert Lebel (art critic)" label="Robert Lebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772" start="45130" end="45137" title="epitaph" label="epitaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243117" start="45436" end="45447" title="Art of Europe" label="Western art"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243117" start="45576" end="45587" title="Western art history" label="Western art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206847" start="45786" end="45794" title="Fountain (Duchamp)" label="Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690715" start="46409" end="46422" title="Joan Bakewell" label="Joan Bakewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q213597" start="46966" end="46978" title="Hans Richter (artist)" label="Hans Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q187257" start="47321" end="47340" title="Marcel Duchamp Prize" label="Prix Marcel Duchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q178065" start="47436" end="47459" title="Centre Georges Pompidou" label="Centre Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293786" start="47758" end="47772" title="Arturo Schwarz" label="Arturo Schwarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q654762" start="47786" end="47800" title="Sotheby&amp;#x27;s" label="Sotheby&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q186030" start="47919" end="47935" title="contemporary art" label="contemporary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q503176" start="48082" end="48097" title="Christie&amp;#x27;s" label="Christie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q60462546" start="48118" end="48148" title="Belle Haleine, Eau de Voilette" label="Belle Haleine, Eau de Voilette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499861" start="48292" end="48301" title="Shock art" label="Shock art"/>
<link wikidata="Q108809323" start="48304" end="48326" title="Stereokinetic stimulus" label="Stereokinetic stimulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413630" start="48329" end="48352" title="Fourth dimension in art" label="Fourth dimension in art"/>
<link wikidata="Q99519307" start="48361" end="48385" title="Hommage à Marcel Duchamp" label="Hommage à Marcel Duchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q558060" start="48422" end="48436" title="Victor Brauner" label="Victor Brauner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18624172" start="48446" end="48462" title="Fountain Archive" label="Fountain Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q116749984" start="48477" end="48490" title="Transatlantic_(TV_series)" label="Transatlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="48743" end="48766" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q155057" start="49277" end="49289" title="Jasper Johns" label="Jasper Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q165275" start="49291" end="49308" title="Robert Motherwell" label="Robert Motherwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="49314" end="49327" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069024" start="49331" end="49344" title="Irene Gammel" label="Gammel, Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q180619" start="49486" end="49503" title="Stephen Jay Gould" label="Stephen Jay Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942032" start="49901" end="49917" title="Catherine Perret" label="Catherine Perret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335987" start="49982" end="49994" title="Stefan Banz" label="Banz, Stefan"/>
<link wikidata="Q84764607" start="50522" end="50547" title="Linda Dalrymple Henderson" label="Linda Dalrymple Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q510324" start="52155" end="52181" title="Philadelphia Museum of Art" label="Philadelphia Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543934" start="52193" end="52203" title="Walter Conrad Arensberg" label="Arensbergs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915336" start="52592" end="52638" title="The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even" label="The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324618" start="52855" end="52882" title="Staatliches Museum Schwerin" label="Staatliches Museum Schwerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860568" start="53283" end="53307" title="Archives of American Art" label="Archives of American Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q510324" start="53382" end="53408" title="Philadelphia Museum of Art" label="Philadelphia Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q178065" start="53410" end="53425" title="Centre Pompidou" label="Centre Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q258355" start="53543" end="53546" title="LTM Recordings" label="LTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145552" start="53602" end="53608" title="Ubuweb" label="Ubuweb"/>
<link wikidata="Q159465" start="53828" end="53844" title="Richard Hamilton (artist)" label="Richard Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q195436" start="53868" end="53880" title="Tate Britain" label="Tate Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q644320" start="53883" end="53893" title="RealPlayer" label="RealPlayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q20638095" start="54152" end="54165" title="Alain Chivilò" label="Alain Chivilò"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294139" start="54224" end="54237" title="Edward Winter (chess historian)" label="Edward Winter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42652" wikidata="Q1891156" url="?curid=42652" title="United States Forest Service">
<text>The United States Forest Service (USFS) is an agency within the U.S. Department of Agriculture that administers the nation&#x27;s 154 national forests and 20 national grasslands covering of land. The major divisions of the agency are the Chief&#x27;s Office, National Forest System, State and Private Forestry, Business Operations, as well as Research and Development. The agency manages about 25% of federal lands and is the sole major national land management agency not part of the U.S. Department of the Interior (which manages the National Park Service, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the Bureau of Land Management).

== History ==
In 1876, Congress formed the office of Special Agent in the Department of Agriculture to assess the quality and conditions of forests in the United States. Franklin B. Hough was appointed the head of the office. In 1881, the office was expanded into the newly formed Division of Forestry. The Forest Reserve Act of 1891 authorized withdrawing land from the public domain as forest reserves managed by the Department of the Interior. In 1901, the Division of Forestry was renamed the Bureau of Forestry.

The Transfer Act of 1905 transferred the management of forest reserves from the United States General Land Office of the Interior Department to the Bureau of Forestry, henceforth known as the United States Forest Service. Gifford Pinchot was the first United States Chief Forester in the Presidency of Theodore Roosevelt.

A historical note to include is that the National Park Service was created in 1916 to manage Yellowstone and several other parks; in 1956, the Fish and Wildlife Service became the manager of lands reserved for wildlife. The Grazing Service and the United States General Land Office were combined to create the Bureau of Land Management in 1946. Also of note was that it was not until 1976 that the Federal Land Policy and Management Act became the national policy for retaining public land for federal ownership.

Significant federal legislation affecting the Forest Service includes the Weeks Act of 1911, the Taylor Grazing Act of 1934, P.L. 73-482; the Multiple Use – Sustained Yield Act of 1960, P.L. 86-517; the Wilderness Act, P.L. 88-577; the National Forest Management Act, P.L. 94-588; the National Environmental Policy Act, P.L. 91–190; the Cooperative Forestry Assistance Act, P.L. 95-313; and the Forest and Rangelands Renewable Resources Planning Act, P.L. 95-307.

From the early 1900s to the present, there has been a fierce rivalry over control of forests between the Department of Agriculture and the Department of the Interior. Their roles overlap but numerous proposals to combine the two have failed. Most recently, in 2009, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) evaluated whether the Forest Service should be moved from the Department of Agriculture to the Department of the Interior, which already manages some of public land through the National Park Service, the Fish and Wildlife Service, and the Bureau of Land Management. GAO ultimately did not offer a recommendation upon the conclusion of its performance audit. The Forest Service remains a part of the USDA.

== Organization ==

=== Overview ===

As of 2019, FY 2020 Forest Service total budget authority is $5.14 billion, a decrease of $815 million from 2019. The budget includes $2.4 billion for Wildland Fire Management, a decrease of $530 million from the 2019 Annualized Continuing Resolution because the &quot;fire fix&quot; cap adjustment becomes available in FY 2020, while the FY 2019 Annualized Continuing Resolution includes $500 million above the base as bridge to the first year of the fire fix.

The Forest Service, headquartered in Washington, D.C., has 27,062 permanent, full-time employees as of Sept. 20, 2018, including 541 in the headquarters office and 26,521 in regional and field office.

The USDA Forest Service&#x27;s mission is to sustain the health, diversity, and productivity of the Nation&#x27;s forests and grasslands to meet the needs of present and future generations. Its motto is &quot;Caring for the land and serving people.&quot;

As the lead federal agency in natural resource conservation, the Forest Service provides leadership in the protection, management, and use of the nation&#x27;s forest, rangeland, and aquatic ecosystems. The agency&#x27;s ecosystem approach to management integrates ecological, economic, and social factors to maintain and enhance the quality of the environment to meet current and future needs. Through implementation of land and resource management plans, the agency ensures sustainable ecosystems by restoring and maintaining species diversity and ecological productivity that helps provide recreation, water, timber, minerals, fish, wildlife, wilderness, and aesthetic values for current and future generations of people.

The everyday work of the Forest Service balances resource extraction, resource protection, and providing recreation. The work includes managing of national forest and grasslands, including of roadless areas; 14,077 recreation sites; of trails; of roads; and the harvesting of 1.5 billion trees per year. Further, the Forest Service fought fires on of land in 2007.

The Forest Service organization includes ranger districts, national forests, regions, research stations and research work units and the Northeastern Area Office for State and Private Forestry. Each level has responsibility for a variety of functions.

=== National Places ===
The Chief of the Forest Service is a career federal employee who oversees the agency. The Chief reports to the Under Secretary for Natural Resources and Environment in the U.S. Department of Agriculture, an appointee of the President confirmed by the Senate. The Chief&#x27;s staff provides broad policy and direction for the agency, works with the Administration to develop a budget to submit to Congress, provides information to Congress on accomplishments, and monitors activities of the agency. There are five deputy chiefs for the following areas: National Forest System, State and Private Forestry, Research and Development, Business Operations, and Finance.

=== Research stations and research work units ===

The Forest Service Research and Development deputy area includes five research stations, the Forest Products Laboratory, and the International Institute of Tropical Forestry, in Puerto Rico. Station directors, like regional foresters, report to the Chief. Research stations include Northern, Pacific Northwest, Pacific Southwest, Rocky Mountain, and Southern. There are 92 research work units located at 67 sites throughout the United States. there are 80 Experimental Forests and Ranges that have been established progressively since 1908; many sites are more than 50 years old. The system provides places for long-term science and management studies in major vegetation types of the of public land administered by the Forest Service. Individual sites range from 47 to 22,500 ha in size.

Operations of Experimental Forests and Ranges are directed by local research teams for the individual sites, by Research Stations for the regions in which they are located, and at the level of the Forest Service.

Major themes in research at the Experimental Forests and Ranges includes:
develop of systems for managing and restoring forests, range lands, and watersheds; investigate the workings of forest and stream ecosystems; characterize plant and animal communities; observe and interpret long-term environmental change and many other themes.

=== Regions ===

There are nine regions in the Forest Service; numbered 1 through 10 (Region 7 was eliminated
in 1965 when the current Eastern Region was created from the former Eastern and
North Central regions.
). Each encompasses a broad geographic area and is headed by a regional forester who reports directly to the Chief. The regional forester has broad responsibility for coordinating activities among the various forests within the region, for providing overall leadership for regional natural resource and social programs, and for coordinated regional land use planning.
* Northern: based in Missoula, Montana, the Northern Region (R1) covers six states (Montana, Northern Idaho, North Dakota, Northwestern South Dakota, Northeast Washington, and Northwest Wyoming), twelve National Forests and one National Grassland.
* Rocky Mountain: based in Golden, Colorado, the Rocky Mountain Region (R2) covers five states (Colorado, Nebraska, Kansas and most of Wyoming and South Dakota), sixteen National Forests and seven National Grasslands.
* Southwestern: based in Albuquerque, New Mexico, the Southwestern Region (R3) covers two states (New Mexico and Arizona) and eleven National Forests.

* Intermountain: based in Ogden, Utah, the Intermountain Region (R4) covers four states (Southern Idaho, Nevada, Utah and Western Wyoming), twelve national forests.
* Pacific Southwest: based in Vallejo, California, The Pacific Southwest Region (R5) covers two states (California and Hawaii), eighteen National Forests and one Management Unit.
* Pacific Northwest: based in Portland, Oregon the Pacific Northwest Region (R6) covers two states (Washington and Oregon), seventeen National Forests, one National Scenic Area, one National Grassland, and two National Volcanic Monuments.
* Southern: based in Atlanta, Georgia, the Southern Region (R8) covers thirteen states (Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, North and South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Oklahoma and Virginia; and Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands), and thirty-four National Forests.
* Eastern: based in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, the Eastern Region (R9) covers twenty states (Maine, Illinois, Ohio, Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, Indiana, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Maryland, New York, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Vermont, New Hampshire, Delaware, and New Jersey), seventeen National Forests, one Grassland and America&#x27;s Outdoors Center for Conservation, Recreation, and Resources.
* Alaska: based in Juneau, Alaska, the Alaska Region (R10) covers one state (Alaska), and two National Forests.

=== National Forest or Grassland ===

The Forest Service oversees 155 national forests, 20 grasslands, and one tall-grass prairie. Each administrative unit typically comprises several ranger districts, under the overall direction of a forest supervisor. Within the supervisor&#x27;s office, the staff coordinates activities among districts, allocates the budget, and provides technical support to each district. Forest supervisors are line officers and report to regional foresters.

=== Ranger District ===
The administration of individual National Forests is subdivided into Ranger Districts. The Forest Service has over 600 ranger districts. Each district has a staff of 10 to 300 people under the direction of a district ranger, a line officer who reports to a forest supervisor. The districts vary in size from to more than . Most on-the-ground activities occur on ranger districts, including trail construction and maintenance, operation of campgrounds, oversight of a wide variety of special use permitted activities, management of vegetation and wildlife habitat, and cultural resource management.

== Major divisions ==

=== National Forest System ===
The of public land that are managed as national forests and grasslands are collectively known as the National Forest System. These lands are located in 44 states, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands and comprise about 9% of the total land area in the United States. The lands are organized into 155 national forests and 20 national grasslands. The mission of the National Forest System is to protect and manage the forest lands so they best demonstrate the sustainable multiple-use management concept, using an ecological approach, to meet the diverse needs of people.

Wildfire management and suppression is a significant subdivision of the National Forest System. Wildfire suppression and prevention programs comprise nearly 50% of the Forest Service’s overall budget and, during the peak fire season, it employs approximately 10,000-15,000 wildland firefighters. Wildland firefighters are often deployed on an interagency basis alongside firefighters from other federal and state land management agencies often with support from local and county structure fire departments. Additionally, Forest Service employees who are not normally full time firefighters are regularly called upon to respond to wildfire incidents in administrative, support, security, and even direct firefighting roles. For both primary fire and supplementary employees, fire assignments usually last 2–3 weeks at a time for each individual employee during which they typically work 16 hours on and eight hours off while sleeping in tents. After an assignment ends, the employee is granted three days of R&amp;R before either returning to their day job or going on another assignment.

For additional information, please visit Wildfire suppression and National Interagency Fire Center.

=== Law Enforcement &amp; Investigations ===
U.S. Forest Service Law Enforcement &amp; Investigations (LEI), headquartered in Washington, D.C., is a federal law enforcement agency of the U.S. government. It is responsible for enforcement of federal laws and regulations governing national forest lands and resources. All law enforcement officers and special agents receive their training through Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (FLETC).

Operations are divided into two major functional areas:
* Law enforcement: uniformed, high-visibility patrol officers
* Investigations: special agents who conduct more complex investigations including drug trafficking, large scale wildfire/arson, and theft/damage of natural resources and government property

Uniformed Law Enforcement Officers (LEOs) enforce federal laws and regulations governing national forest lands and resources. LEOs also enforce some or all state laws on National Forest Lands. As part of that mission, LEOs carry firearms, defensive equipment, make arrests, execute search warrants, complete reports, and testify in court. They establish a regular and recurring presence on a vast amount of public lands, roads, and recreation sites. The primary focus of their jobs is the protection of natural resources, protection of Forest Service employees and the protection of visitors. To cover the vast and varied terrain under their jurisdiction, they use modified 4x4 pickup trucks, Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptors, special service SUVs, horses, K-9 units, helicopters, snowmobiles, ATVs, ROVs, dirt bikes, and boats.

Special Agents are criminal investigators who plan and conduct investigations concerning possible violations of criminal and administrative provisions of the Forest Service and other statutes under the United States Code. Special agents are normally plainclothes officers who carry concealed firearms, and other defensive equipment, make arrests, carry out complex criminal investigations, present cases for prosecution to U.S. Attorneys, and prepare investigative reports. All field agents are required to travel a great deal and usually maintain a case load of ten to fifteen ongoing criminal investigations at one time. Criminal investigators also conduct internal and civil claim investigations. An example of the latter would be large scale wildfire liability cases in which the government is seeking civil restitution for major damage to National Forest Lands.

LEI is also responsible for the oversight, training, and administration of the Forest Protection Officer (FPO) program. FPOs are unarmed, non-law enforcement, field going employees who have been granted the authority to enforce class B misdemeanors within Title 36, Part 261 of the Code of Federal Regulations (the day to day laws primarily governing the use of forests by the public). They do this by writing citations and mandatory federal court appearances. They must volunteer to become FPOs, pass an additional background check performed by LEI, and attend an initial training plus yearly recertification to maintain their authority. FPO is a “collateral duty” one performs in addition to their primary job; because of this, the majority of FPOs are Recreation Technicians, Wilderness Rangers, or Fire Prevention Patrol Technicians, but the program is open to any field going employee who meets the requirements. Since they are unarmed and not LEOs, FPOs do not engage in enforcement contacts in situations that have a high probability for violence including those involving excessive alcohol intoxication, illegal substances, domestic disputes, assault, gang activity, etc instead disengaging and calling law enforcement immediately in such situations.

=== State, Private and Tribal Forestry ===
The goal of the State and Private Forestry program is to assist with financial and technical assistance to private landowners, state agencies, tribes, and community resource managers. It provides assistance by helping sustain the United States&#x27; urban and rural forests and their associated communities from wildland fires, insects, disease, and invasive organisms. Approximately 537 staff are employed in the program and is administered through National Forest System regions and the Northeastern Area of the United States.

=== Research and development ===
The research and development (R&amp;D) arm of the Forest Service works to improve the health and use of the United States&#x27; forests and grasslands. Research has been part of the Forest Service mission since the agency&#x27;s inception in 1905. Today, Forest Service researchers work in a range of biological, physical, and social science fields to promote sustainable management of United States&#x27; diverse forests and rangelands. Research employs about 550 scientists and several hundred technical and support staff, located at 67 sites throughout the United States and in Puerto Rico. Discovery and technology development and transfer is carried out through seven research stations.

Research focuses on informing policy and land management decisions and includes addressing invasive insects, degraded river ecosystems, or sustainable ways to harvest forest products. The researchers work independently and with a range of partners (formerly through a National Partnership Office), including other agencies, academia, nonprofit groups, and industry. The information and technology produced through basic and applied science programs is available to the public for its benefit and use.

In addition to the Research Stations, the USFS R&amp;D branch also leads several National Centers such as the National Genomics Center for Wildlife and Fish Conservation.

=== International programs ===
The Forest Service plays a key role in formulating policy and coordinating U.S. support for the protection and sound management of the world&#x27;s forest resources. It works closely with other agencies such as USAID, the State Department, and the Environmental Protection Agency, as well as with nonprofit development organizations, wildlife organizations, universities, and international assistance organizations. The Forest Service&#x27;s international work serves to link people and communities striving to protect and manage forests throughout the world. The program also promotes sustainable land management overseas and brings important technologies and innovations back to the United States. The program focuses on conserving key natural resource in cooperation with countries across the world.

== Responses to environmental challenges ==
Although a large volume of timber is logged every year, not all National Forests are entirely forested. There are tidewater glaciers in the Tongass National Forest in Alaska and ski areas such as Alta, Utah in the Wasatch-Cache National Forest. In addition, the Forest Service is responsible for managing National Grasslands in the midwest. Furthermore, areas designated as wilderness by acts of Congress, prohibit logging, mining, road and building construction and land leases for purposes of farming and or livestock grazing.

Since 1978, several Presidents have directed the USFS to administer National Monuments inside of preexisting National Forests.
* Admiralty Island National Monument – Alaska
* Giant Sequoia National Monument – California
* Misty Fjords National Monument – Alaska
* Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument – Washington
* Newberry National Volcanic Monument – Oregon
* Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains National Monument – California (jointly with the Bureau of Land Management)

The Forest Service also manages Grey Towers National Historic Site in Milford, Pennsylvania, the home and estate of its first Chief, Gifford Pinchot.

=== Fighting fires ===

By 1935, the U.S. Forest Service&#x27;s fire management policy stipulated that all wildfires were to be suppressed by 10 am the morning after they were first spotted.

In August 1944, to reduce the number of forest fires, the Forest Service and the Wartime Advertising Council began distributing fire education posters featuring a black bear. The poster campaign was a success; the black bear would later be named Smokey Bear, and would, for decades, be the &quot;spokesbear&quot; for the Forest Service. Smokey Bear has appeared in innumerable TV commercials; his popular catch phrase, &quot;Only YOU can prevent forest fires&quot;—later changed to wildfires—is one of the most widely recognized slogans in the United States. According to the Advertising Council, Smokey Bear is the most recognized icons in advertising history and has appeared almost everywhere via Public Service Announcements in print, radio, television. Smokey Bear, an icon protected by law, is jointly owned by the Forest Service, the Ad Council and the National Association of State Foresters.

In 1965, at the request of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Forest Service was commissioned by the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) to research the use of forest fire as a military weapon. A report was published in June 1970 and declassified in May 1983.

In September 2000, the Departments of Agriculture and the Interior developed a plan to respond to the fires of 2000, to reduce the impacts of these wildland fires on rural communities, and to ensure sufficient firefighting resources in the future. The report is entitled &quot;Managing the Impacts of Wildfire on Communities and the Environment: A Report to the President In Response to the Wildfires of 2000&quot;—The National Fire Plan for short. The National Fire Plan continues to be an integral part of the Forest Service today. The following are important operational features of the National Fire Plan:
* Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy: The 1995 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy and the subsequent 2001 Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy act as the foundation of the National Fire Plan.
* Basic Premise of the National Fire Plan: Investing now in an optimal firefighting force, hazardous fuels reduction, and overall community protection will provide for immediate protection and future cost savings.
* Funding: Initially (2001), the National Fire Plan provided for an additional $1,100,994,000 for the Forest Service for a total wildland fire management budget of $1,910,193,000. In 2008, the total amount for the Forest Service in wildland fire management (not including emergency fire suppression funding) is $1,974,276,000.

In August 2014, Tom Vilsack, the Secretary of Agriculture, announced that the agency would have to put $400 to $500 million in wildfire prevention projects on hold because funding for firefighting was running low as the fiscal year ended. The decision was meant to preserve resources for fighting active fires burning in California, Oregon, Washington and Idaho. Politicians of both parties indicated they believed the then-current funding structure was broken, but did not agree on steps to fix the funding allocation.

During the 2019–2020 bushfires in Australia, the US Forest Services sent a contingent of firefighters. They worked alongside firefighters from other American fire departments.

=== Climate adaptation ===

In April 2023, the U.S. Forest Service published a proposed rulemaking in response to climate change on the topic of improving climate resilience on the public lands that it manages. The agency introduced the need for such rulemaking as:

Climate change and related stressors, such as wildfire, drought, insects and disease, extreme weather events, and chronic stress on ecosystems are resulting in increasing impacts with rapid and variable rates of change on national forests and grasslands. These impacts can be compounded by fire suppression, development in the Wildland Urban Interface (WUI), and non-climate informed timber harvest and reforestation practices.

The foundational question pertained to climate adaptation: &quot;How should the Forest Service adapt current policies and develop new policies and actions to conserve and manage the national forests and grasslands for climate resilience, so that the Agency can provide for ecological integrity and support social and economic sustainability over time?&quot; Ancillary questions pertained to both &quot;adaptation planning&quot; and &quot;adaptation practices&quot;.

The background section of the proposed rulemaking includes a short history of how agency responsibilities have grown and evolved over its 118-year history in accordance with &quot;what the American people desire from their natural resources at any given point in time.&quot;

===Carbon capture and storage===
In the spring of 2023, the USDA proposed a change to its regulations to allow for the &quot;responsible deployment of&quot; carbon capture, utilization, and sequestration on National Forests lands.

== Budget ==
Although part of the Department of Agriculture, the Forest Service receives its budget through the Subcommittee on Appropriations—Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies.

== Popular culture ==

The Forest Service achieved widespread awareness during the 1960s, as it became the setting for the long running classic TV show &quot;Lassie&quot;, with storylines focusing on Lassie&#x27;s adventures with various forest rangers.

The iconic collie&#x27;s association with the Forest Service led to Lassie receiving numerous awards and citations from the U.S. Senate and the Department of Agriculture, and was partly responsible for a bill regarding soil and water pollution that was signed into law in early 1968 by President Lyndon Johnson, which was dubbed by some as &quot;The Lassie Program&quot;.

In the 2019 family comedy movie &quot;Playing With Fire&quot;, John Cena plays a U.S. Forest Service firefighter who (along with his crew) watches over a group of rambunctious children while searching for their parents after rescuing them from a fire in the wilderness during a family vacation.

== Controversies ==
The history of the Forest Service has been fraught with controversy, as various interests and national values have grappled with the appropriate management of the many resources within the forests. These values and resources include grazing, timber, mining, recreation, wildlife habitat, and wilderness. Because of continuing development elsewhere, the large size of National Forests have made them &quot;de facto&quot; wildlife reserves for a number of rare and common species. In recent decades, the importance of mature forest for the spotted owl and a number of other species led to great changes in timber harvest levels.

In 1910, the first Chief of the Forest Service, Gifford Pinchot, was dismissed by President Taft as a result of the Pinchot-Ballinger controversy.

In the 1990s, the agency was involved in a scandal when it illegally provided surplus military aircraft to private contractors for use as airtankers in 1980s.

The policy on road building within the National Forests is another controversial issue. In 1999, President Clinton ordered a temporary moratorium on new road construction in the National Forests to &quot;assess their ecological, economic, and social values and to evaluate long-term options for their management.&quot; The Bush administration replaced this years later, with a system where each state could petition the Forest Service to open forests in their territory to road building.

In 1997, the agency reported it was losing money on its timber sales.

A 2017 draft report describing the legal basis which provides federal land managers a scope of decision making authority exceeding that of state fish and game departments has proven unexpectedly controversial.

In 2018, the Forest Service was reprimanded by the 4th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals. The Service had issued permits for the Atlantic Coast Pipeline to build through parts of the George Washington and Monongahela National Forests and a right of way across the Appalachian Trail – in violation of both the National Forest Management Act of 1976 and the National Environmental Policy Act.

In 2020, Melody Starya Mobley, the first black female forester hired by the Forest Service, claimed she had been sexually assaulted by a colleague in the late 70s, citing misogyny and racism within the institution as reasons why she did not speak up at the time. She also stated that though there was a witness present, her assault was largely ignored when she disclosed it to the agency and the perpetrator was never punished.

==Notable members==

* Michael Dombeck
* Franklin B. Hough
* Annie E. Hoyle
* Orlando Jordan
* Aldo Leopold
* Ed Pulaski
* Jack Ward Thomas
* Theodore Woolsey
* James B. Yule
* Raphael Zon
== See also ==

* &quot;American Experience&quot; (season 27) &quot;The Big Burn&quot; (2014)
* Architects of the United States Forest Service
* Environmental history of the United States
* Forest ranger
* Forests of the United States
* List of legislation governing the United States Forest Service
* List of national forests of the United States
* National Forest Foundation
* Range Improvement Funds
* Recreation Residences
* Wildfire suppression

== References ==
== Further reading ==
===History sources===
* USDA Forest Service – The First Century
* 100 Years of Federal Forestry
* History of the Boone and Crockett Club Pg 64–80
* 

===Research===
* Historic technical reports from the Forest Service (and other Federal agencies) are available in the Technical Report Archive and Image Library (TRAIL)

===Education===
* The Greatest Good documentary
* &quot;The Greatest Good:100years&quot;
* Smokey Bear
* Wildlife Crossings Toolkit The Wildlife Crossings Toolkit provides information for terrestrial biologists, engineers, and transportation professionals to assist in maintaining or restoring habitat connectivity across transportation infrastructure on public lands.

== External links ==
* USFS Wildland Fire Assessment System WFAS (interactive map of wildfire risk)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="4" end="32" title="United States Forest Service" label="United States Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="34" end="38" title="United States Forest Service" label="USFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="64" end="94" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="U.S. Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q612741" start="134" end="150" title="United States National Forest" label="national forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q509827" start="158" end="177" title="United States National Grassland" label="national grasslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440540" start="401" end="414" title="federal lands" label="federal lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="485" end="516" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="U.S. Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="536" end="557" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="563" end="593" title="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="602" end="627" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491274" start="801" end="818" title="Franklin B. Hough" label="Franklin B. Hough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469089" start="938" end="964" title="Forest Reserve Act of 1891" label="Forest Reserve Act of 1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="1050" end="1076" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833991" start="1153" end="1173" title="Transfer Act of 1905" label="Transfer Act of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217020" start="1229" end="1262" title="United States General Land Office" label="United States General Land Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q534301" start="1371" end="1386" title="Gifford Pinchot" label="Gifford Pinchot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870566" start="1401" end="1429" title="United States Chief Foresters" label="United States Chief Forester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241110" start="1437" end="1469" title="Presidency of Theodore Roosevelt" label="Presidency of Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="1513" end="1534" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="1615" end="1640" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889916" start="1696" end="1711" title="United States Grazing Service" label="Grazing Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217020" start="1720" end="1753" title="United States General Land Office" label="United States General Land Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="1782" end="1807" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440277" start="1870" end="1908" title="Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976" label="Federal Land Policy and Management Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979527" start="2060" end="2069" title="Weeks Act" label="Weeks Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689981" start="2083" end="2109" title="Taylor Grazing Act of 1934" label="Taylor Grazing Act of 1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934864" start="2128" end="2170" title="Multiple Use – Sustained Yield Act of 1960" label="Multiple Use – Sustained Yield Act of 1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872810" start="2189" end="2203" title="Wilderness Act" label="Wilderness Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972768" start="2222" end="2252" title="National Forest Management Act" label="National Forest Management Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972479" start="2271" end="2304" title="National Environmental Policy Act" label="National Environmental Policy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167889" start="2323" end="2358" title="Cooperative Forestry Assistance Act" label="Cooperative Forestry Assistance Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469138" start="2381" end="2435" title="Forest and Rangelands Renewable Resources Planning Act" label="Forest and Rangelands Renewable Resources Planning Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q749118" start="2721" end="2753" title="Government Accountability Office" label="Government Accountability Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="2937" end="2958" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="2964" end="2989" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="2999" end="3024" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589416" start="3099" end="3116" title="Government performance auditing" label="performance audit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333882" start="4346" end="4378" title="Ecosystem management" label="ecosystem approach to management"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848343" start="5043" end="5057" title="inventoried roadless area" label="roadless areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503740" start="6303" end="6329" title="Forest Products Laboratory" label="Forest Products Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051189" start="6339" end="6383" title="International Institute of Tropical Forestry" label="International Institute of Tropical Forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355932" start="6540" end="6554" title="Rocky Mountain Research Station" label="Rocky Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q113493392" start="6560" end="6568" title="Southern Research Station" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q189602" start="8152" end="8169" title="Missoula, Montana" label="Missoula, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q983543" start="8406" end="8422" title="Golden, Colorado" label="Golden, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="8622" end="8645" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q52471" start="8775" end="8786" title="Ogden, Utah" label="Ogden, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q208445" start="8944" end="8963" title="Vallejo, California" label="Vallejo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="9123" end="9139" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="9353" end="9369" title="Atlanta, Georgia" label="Atlanta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="9656" end="9676" title="Milwaukee, Wisconsin" label="Milwaukee, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29445" start="10087" end="10101" title="Juneau, Alaska" label="Juneau, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="11402" end="11411" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262" start="11526" end="11540" title="Virgin Islands" label="Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659355" start="13042" end="13062" title="Wildfire suppression" label="Wildfire suppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336900" start="13067" end="13099" title="National Interagency Fire Center" label="National Interagency Fire Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="13228" end="13244" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6625085" start="13251" end="13281" title="List of law enforcement agencies" label="federal law enforcement agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503343" start="13423" end="13446" title="law enforcement officer" label="law enforcement officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655853" start="13452" end="13465" title="special agent" label="special agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400052" start="13498" end="13537" title="Federal Law Enforcement Training Center" label="Federal Law Enforcement Training Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655853" start="13684" end="13697" title="special agent" label="special agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770743" start="14140" end="14154" title="search warrant" label="search warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451157" start="14551" end="14589" title="Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptor" label="Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192152" start="14608" end="14611" title="SUV" label="SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q39235" start="14622" end="14631" title="Police dog" label="K-9 units"/>
<link wikidata="Q17240" start="14646" end="14656" title="snowmobile" label="snowmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655853" start="14695" end="14709" title="Special Agents" label="Special Agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196092" start="14897" end="14915" title="United States Code" label="United States Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094335" start="15118" end="15132" title="U.S. Attorneys" label="U.S. Attorneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="17216" end="17224" title="Invasive species" label="invasive"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="17433" end="17457" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="17569" end="17578" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="18010" end="18021" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="18213" end="18221" title="Invasive species" label="invasive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578576" start="18240" end="18255" title="river ecosystem" label="river ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q28226092" start="18734" end="18793" title="National Genomics Center for Wildlife and Fish Conservation" label="National Genomics Center for Wildlife and Fish Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="19038" end="19043" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="USAID"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="19049" end="19065" title="U.S. Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="19075" end="19106" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001056" start="19413" end="19440" title="sustainable land management" label="sustainable land management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="19702" end="19708" title="Lumber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="19712" end="19718" title="Logging" label="logged"/>
<link wikidata="Q612741" start="19739" end="19755" title="United States National Forest" label="National Forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502633" start="19815" end="19838" title="Tongass National Forest" label="Tongass National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="19842" end="19848" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q116129" start="19871" end="19881" title="Alta, Utah" label="Alta, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083447" start="19889" end="19918" title="Wasatch-Cache National Forest" label="Wasatch-Cache National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q509827" start="19980" end="19998" title="National Grassland" label="National Grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="20071" end="20079" title="U.S. Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="20225" end="20235" title="President of the United States" label="Presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="20273" end="20291" title="U.S. National Monument" label="National Monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q359266" start="20334" end="20368" title="Admiralty Island National Monument" label="Admiralty Island National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522734" start="20380" end="20411" title="Giant Sequoia National Monument" label="Giant Sequoia National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q578439" start="20427" end="20457" title="Misty Fjords National Monument" label="Misty Fjords National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326044" start="20469" end="20512" title="Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument" label="Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983417" start="20528" end="20563" title="Newberry National Volcanic Monument" label="Newberry National Volcanic Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223242" start="20575" end="20629" title="Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains National Monument" label="Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="20661" end="20686" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608253" start="20721" end="20755" title="Grey Towers National Historic Site" label="Grey Towers National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187809" start="20759" end="20780" title="Milford, Pennsylvania" label="Milford, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q534301" start="20822" end="20837" title="Gifford Pinchot" label="Gifford Pinchot"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="21072" end="21084" title="wildfire" label="forest fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678116" start="21113" end="21140" title="Wartime Advertising Council" label="Wartime Advertising Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="21195" end="21205" title="American black bear" label="black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q493361" start="21278" end="21289" title="Smokey Bear" label="Smokey Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678116" start="21608" end="21627" title="Advertising Council" label="Advertising Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970773" start="21892" end="21931" title="National Association of State Foresters" label="National Association of State Foresters"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="21965" end="21986" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="22031" end="22064" title="Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="24365" end="24379" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072637" start="24406" end="24424" title="climate resilience" label="climate resilience"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24432" end="24444" title="Public land#United States" label="public lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q260607" start="24986" end="25004" title="climate adaptation" label="climate adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41491" start="25847" end="25893" title="carbon capture, utilization, and sequestration" label="carbon capture, utilization, and sequestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q289537" start="26269" end="26275" title="Lassie (1954 TV series)" label="Lassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="26490" end="26501" title="U.S. Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="26662" end="26676" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q61774239" start="26777" end="26794" title="Playing with Fire (2019 film)" label="Playing With Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="26802" end="26811" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239189" start="27288" end="27295" title="grazing" label="grazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="27297" end="27303" title="Lumber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="27305" end="27311" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q184872" start="27313" end="27323" title="recreation" label="recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q911871" start="27347" end="27357" title="wilderness" label="wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q748921" start="27593" end="27604" title="spotted owl" label="spotted owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q534301" start="27731" end="27746" title="Gifford Pinchot" label="Gifford Pinchot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194943" start="27799" end="27828" title="Pinchot–Ballinger controversy" label="Pinchot-Ballinger controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863183" start="27860" end="27881" title="U.S. Forest Service airtanker scandal" label="involved in a scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15624835" start="27969" end="27978" title="airtanker" label="airtanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q513450" start="28963" end="28990" title="Monongahela National Forest" label="Monongahela National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q620648" start="29022" end="29039" title="Appalachian Trail" label="Appalachian Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972768" start="29067" end="29105" title="National Forest Management Act of 1976" label="National Forest Management Act of 1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972479" start="29114" end="29147" title="National Environmental Policy Act" label="National Environmental Policy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q128784716" start="29159" end="29179" title="Melody Starya Mobley" label="Melody Starya Mobley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829897" start="29602" end="29617" title="Michael Dombeck" label="Michael Dombeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491274" start="29620" end="29637" title="Franklin Hough" label="Franklin B. Hough"/>
<link wikidata="Q27825670" start="29640" end="29654" title="Annie E. Hoyle" label="Annie E. Hoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q562744" start="29657" end="29671" title="Orlando Jordan" label="Orlando Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q971382" start="29674" end="29686" title="Aldo Leopold" label="Aldo Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335296" start="29689" end="29699" title="Ed Pulaski" label="Ed Pulaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115660" start="29702" end="29718" title="Jack Ward Thomas" label="Jack Ward Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782028" start="29721" end="29737" title="Theodore Salisbury Woolsey, Jr." label="Theodore Woolsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q71334321" start="29740" end="29753" title="James B. Yule" label="James B. Yule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294029" start="29756" end="29767" title="Raphael Zon" label="Raphael Zon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222113" start="29786" end="29829" title="American Experience (season 27)" label="&amp;quot;American Experience&amp;quot; (season 27)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787018" start="29864" end="29910" title="Architects of the United States Forest Service" label="Architects of the United States Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q124669203" start="29913" end="29955" title="Environmental history of the United States" label="Environmental history of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479935" start="29958" end="29971" title="Forest ranger" label="Forest ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842702" start="29974" end="30002" title="Forests of the United States" label="Forests of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870566" start="30005" end="30067" title="List of legislation governing the United States Forest Service" label="List of legislation governing the United States Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249745" start="30070" end="30115" title="List of national forests of the United States" label="List of national forests of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972767" start="30118" end="30144" title="National Forest Foundation" label="National Forest Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292670" start="30147" end="30170" title="Range Improvement Funds" label="Range Improvement Funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q85811637" start="30173" end="30194" title="USFS Recreation Residences" label="Recreation Residences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659355" start="30197" end="30217" title="Wildfire suppression" label="Wildfire suppression"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42653" wikidata="Q612741" url="?curid=42653" title="National forest (United States)">
<text>In the United States, national forest is a classification of protected and managed federal lands that are largely forest and woodland areas. They are owned collectively by the American people through the federal government and managed by the United States Forest Service, a division of the United States Department of Agriculture. The U.S. Forest Service is also a forestry research organization which provides financial assistance to state and local forestry industry. There are 154 national forests in the United States.

==History==

The Land Revision Act of 1891, enacted during the presidency of Benjamin Harrison, allowed the president to set aside forest reserves on public lands. Harrison established 15 forest reserves containing more than 13 million acres of land. The bill was the result of concerted action by Los Angeles-area businessmen and property owners who were concerned by the harm being done to the watershed of the San Gabriel Mountains by ranchers and miners. Abbot Kinney and forester Theodore Lukens were key spokesmen for the effort.

===Timeline of legislation===
* 1897: The Organic Act was passed to protect watersheds and forests while still allowing the timber industry to continue.
* 1905: The Transfer Act of 1905 established the US Forest Service as a division of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). This agency was formed to map, maintain, and protect forests as well as provide water and timber for national benefit. Gifford Pinchot was appointed the head of the US Forest Service by President Roosevelt.
* 1907: 99 million acres were added to the national forests.
* 1922: Secretary of Agriculture authorized the selling of national forest land in exchange for private land of equal value, which changed the national forest service from a conservation organization to one that focuses on the logging industry.
* 1925: National forests were authorized to grant grazing permits for 10 years.
* 1944: The Sustained-Yield Forest Management Act was passed which encouraged the building of logging mills throughout the west.
* 1960: The Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act directs national forests to be managed for their timber, range, water, recreation, and wildlife, with no use greater than another.
* 1970: The National Environmental Policy Act was passed which required the environmental impact statements to be made for federal actions that may impact the environment. This allowed a legal standing to challenge the logging industry.
* 1973: The Endangered Species Act passed, giving forest advocates a legal basis to challenge logging if it threatened an endangered species.
* 1976: The National Forest Management Act was enacted to protect lands and ecosystems. It was to protect national forests from destructive logging practices, so Congress told the Forest System to develop regulations on the size of clearcuts, protect waterways, and restrict the rate of cutting to protect reforestation.
* 1994: The Northwest Forest Plan was announced by President Bill Clinton to try to slow logging in old-growth forests.

There have been multiple legislative acts to expand the scope of the national forest system, as well as shrinking it. In 2020, the Trump administration encouraged more forest products to be harvested in order to support a struggling economy. There was a plan to develop around 190 million acres of protected National Forests in order to increase logging, grazing, and energy resources. This would be facilitated through shrinking the rules and regulations required to get permits to conduct such business. In October 2020, the Trump administration proclaimed its goal of &quot;strengthening markets for wood products and incentivizing innovative manufacturing techniques&quot; and reported &quot;The Department of Agriculture’s Forest Service sold 3.3 billion board feet of timber from national forests in fiscal year 2019 — the highest output since 1997&quot;. Furthermore, President Trump signed an executive order to &quot;establish the United States One Trillion Trees Interagency Council&quot; in order to further the Federal Government&#x27;s participation in this effort and repeal the current $30 million annual funding cap for the Reforestation Trust Fund.

==Geography==
The United States national forest comprises about 132 million acres. There are 154 national forests and 20 national grasslands containing 193 million acres (297,000 mi2/769 000 km2) of land. These lands comprise 8.5 percent of the total land area of the United States, an area about the size of Texas. About 87 percent of national forest land lies in the Western United States, mostly in mountain ranges. Alaska has 12 percent of all national forest lands.

Within the national forest system, there are 1,200 sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places and 23 are National Historic Landmarks. The National Historic Preservation Act requires the Forest Service to identify, investigate, and protect cultural resources on lands it manages.

The U.S. Forest Service also manages all of the United States national grasslands and nearly 50% of the United States national recreation areas.

==Management==
Land management of these areas focuses on conservation, timber harvesting, livestock grazing, watershed protection, wildlife, and recreation. Unlike national parks and other federal lands managed by the National Park Service, extraction of natural resources from national forests is permitted, and in many cases encouraged. Forest products are the resources removed and harvested from national forests. They may be for commercial or personal use such as “lumber, paper, and firewood as well as &#x27;special forest products&#x27; such as medicinal herbs, fungi, edible fruits and nuts, and other natural products”. However, the first-designated wilderness areas, and some of the largest, are on national forest lands.

There are management decision conflicts between conservationists and environmentalists and natural resource extraction companies and lobbies (e.g. logging &amp; mining) over the protection and/or use of national forest lands. These conflicts center on endangered species protection, logging of old-growth forests, intensive clear cut logging, undervalued stumpage fees, mining operations and mining claim laws, and logging/mining access roadbuilding within national forests. Additional conflicts arise from concerns that the grasslands, shrublands, and forest understory are grazed by sheep, cattle, and more recently, rising numbers of elk and mule deer due to loss of predators.

Many ski resorts and summer resorts operate on leased land in national forests.

National forests include 14 national monuments where resource extraction is restricted.

== List of national forests ==
==See also==

* Weeks Act 1911 law for purchase of private lands
** Clarke–McNary Act, an expansion in 1924
* Environmental history of the United States
*Protected areas of the United States
*State forest

==References==
==External links==

*USDA Forest Service
* from the U.S. Forest Service, 1975.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="7" end="20" title="the United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q612741" start="22" end="37" title="National forest (United States)" label="national forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q473972" start="61" end="70" title="protected area" label="protected"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440540" start="83" end="96" title="federal lands" label="federal lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="114" end="120" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241565" start="125" end="133" title="woodland" label="woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="204" end="222" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="242" end="270" title="United States Forest Service" label="United States Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="290" end="329" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249745" start="480" end="500" title="List of U.S. National Forests" label="154 national forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469089" start="541" end="566" title="Land Revision Act of 1891" label="Land Revision Act of 1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q35678" start="601" end="618" title="Benjamin Harrison" label="Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="822" end="833" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419854" start="937" end="958" title="San Gabriel Mountains" label="San Gabriel Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664207" start="983" end="995" title="Abbot Kinney" label="Abbot Kinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781896" start="1009" end="1024" title="Theodore Lukens" label="Theodore Lukens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101796" start="1103" end="1114" title="Organic Act of 1897" label="Organic Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833991" start="1226" end="1246" title="Transfer Act of 1905" label="Transfer Act of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="1536" end="1555" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="President Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="1845" end="1852" title="logging" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934864" start="2084" end="2116" title="Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act of 1960" label="Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354340" start="2324" end="2354" title="environmental impact statement" label="environmental impact statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743374" start="2497" end="2519" title="Endangered Species Act of 1973" label="Endangered Species Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972768" start="2639" end="2669" title="National Forest Management Act of 1976" label="National Forest Management Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="3009" end="3021" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="3200" end="3220" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338798" start="3970" end="3985" title="executive order" label="executive order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="4545" end="4550" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="4605" end="4626" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="4655" end="4661" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="4779" end="4815" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="4827" end="4854" title="National Historic Landmarks" label="National Historic Landmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973378" start="4860" end="4894" title="National Historic Preservation Act" label="National Historic Preservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q509827" start="5050" end="5083" title="United States National Grassland" label="United States national grasslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132998" start="5106" end="5144" title="National Recreation Area" label="United States national recreation area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001056" start="5163" end="5178" title="Land management" label="Land management"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481436" start="5205" end="5217" title="habitat conservation" label="conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="5219" end="5236" title="timber harvesting" label="timber harvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="5238" end="5247" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239189" start="5248" end="5255" title="grazing" label="grazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="5257" end="5266" title="Drainage basin" label="watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q241741" start="5279" end="5287" title="wildlife" label="wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q184872" start="5293" end="5303" title="recreation" label="recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="5366" end="5387" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q587409" start="5808" end="5824" title="National Wilderness Preservation System" label="wilderness areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="5930" end="5946" title="conservation movement" label="conservationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="5951" end="5967" title="environmentalist" label="environmentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385203" start="5981" end="6000" title="Extractivism" label="resource extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="6134" end="6152" title="endangered species" label="endangered species"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="6176" end="6193" title="old-growth forest" label="old-growth forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721219" start="6206" end="6223" title="clear cut logging" label="clear cut logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628689" start="6237" end="6245" title="stumpage" label="stumpage"/>
<link wikidata="Q818909" start="6274" end="6286" title="mining claim" label="mining claim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="6407" end="6416" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q879641" start="6419" end="6428" title="shrubland" label="shrubland"/>
<link wikidata="Q422666" start="6442" end="6452" title="understory" label="understory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="6467" end="6472" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="6519" end="6522" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q338831" start="6527" end="6536" title="mule deer" label="mule deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="6552" end="6560" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q130003" start="6569" end="6579" title="ski resort" label="ski resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q875157" start="6592" end="6598" title="resort" label="resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="6673" end="6691" title="National monument (United States)" label="national monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979527" start="6781" end="6790" title="Weeks Act" label="Weeks Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127528" start="6833" end="6850" title="Clarke–McNary Act" label="Clarke–McNary Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q124669203" start="6875" end="6917" title="Environmental history of the United States" label="Environmental history of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q65148973" start="6919" end="6955" title="Protected areas of the United States" label="Protected areas of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324919" start="6957" end="6969" title="State forest" label="State forest"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42661" wikidata="Q2165032" url="?curid=42661" title="Myth (video game series)">
<text>Myth is a series of real-time tactics video games for Microsoft Windows and Mac OS. There are three main games in the series: &quot;&quot; (1997), &quot;Myth II: Soulblighter&quot; (1998), and &quot;Myth III: The Wolf Age&quot; (2001). &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; was developed by Bungie, and published by Bungie in North America and Eidos Interactive in Europe. &quot;Soulblighter&quot; was also developed by Bungie, and was published by Bungie in North America and GT Interactive in Europe. &quot;The Wolf Age&quot; was developed by MumboJumbo, and co-published by Take-Two Interactive and Gathering of Developers for Windows and by Take-Two and MacSoft for Mac.

All three games received generally positive reviews. &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; was especially lauded, and is credited as a defining title in the fledgling real-time tactics genre. Reviewers praised its plot, graphics, gameplay, level design, online multiplayer mode, and differentiation from traditional real-time strategy games. It went on to win multiple awards from publications such as &quot;PC Gamer&quot;, &quot;Computer Gaming World&quot;, &quot;Computer Games Strategy Plus&quot;, and &quot;Macworld&quot;. It was also a commercial success, selling over 350,000 units worldwide. &quot;Soulblighter&quot; was praised for improving on virtually every aspect of &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot;, with critics citing more detailed graphics, enhanced sound effects, more varied gameplay, better AI, and a more intricate level design. It also sold very well, considerably outselling the original. &quot;The Wolf Age&quot; was seen as inferior to the two previous games, although it still garnered positive reviews. Reviewers praised the storyline, graphics, and general gameplay. Major points of criticism included the many bugs in the Windows version, and a poorly implemented online multiplayer mode. Some critics felt the game was rushed to release, with several speculating the development team had not been given enough time to complete it satisfactorily.

The &quot;Myth&quot; series as a whole, and &quot;Soulblighter&quot; in particular, supported an active online community for over a decade after the official servers went offline. The first formally organized group of volunteer-programmers was MythDevelopers, who initially formed with the purpose of fixing the bug-ridden Windows version of &quot;The Wolf Age&quot;. MythDevelopers were given access to the source code of both the first games by Bungie and &quot;The Wolf Age&quot; by Take-Two. The most recently active &quot;Myth&quot; development group is Project Magma, an offshoot of MythDevelopers. These groups have worked to provide ongoing technical support for the games, update them to newer operating systems, fix bugs, release unofficial patches, create mods, and maintain online servers for multiplayer gaming. As of 2017, the IP is owned by Take-Two Interactive (which owned 20% of Bungie before Microsoft&#x27;s acquisition), but the trademark registration expired in 2021.

==Games==

* was developed by Bungie for Microsoft Windows and the Classic Mac OS. Published by Bungie in North America and by Eidos Interactive in Europe, it was released in North America for both Windows and Mac on November 25, 1997.
* Myth II: Soulblighter was also developed by Bungie for Microsoft Windows and Mac OS. Published by Bungie in North America and by GT Interactive in Europe, it was released in North America for both Windows and Mac on December 28, 1998. It was later ported to Linux by Loki Entertainment. On November 15, 1999, Bungie released a special edition called Myth: The Total Codex, which included &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot;, &quot;Soulblighter&quot;, the &quot;Soulblighter&quot; expansion pack &quot;Myth II: Chimera&quot;, and official &quot;Strategies and Secrets&quot; guides for both of the main games. In 2001, &quot;Soulblighter&quot; was also re-released twice by Take-Two Interactive. Firstly, included with Green Berets: Powered by Myth II, a fan made total conversion set in the Vietnam War, which was released on July 31, and secondly as Myth II: Worlds, a three-disk set published by Take-Two subsidiary Gathering of Developers, containing &quot;Soulblighter&quot; and two disks of fan-created single-player campaigns, multiplayer maps, and gameplay mods, which was released on October 2.
* Myth III: The Wolf Age was developed by MumboJumbo for Windows, Classic Mac OS and Mac OS X. Co-published by Take-Two and Gathering of Developers for Windows, and by Take-Two and MacSoft for Mac, the Windows version was released in North America on November 2, 2001.

==Gameplay==
All three &quot;Myth&quot; games are real-time tactics games. Unlike in real-time strategy gameplay, the player does not engage in resource micromanagement or economic macromanagement, does not construct a base or buildings, and does not gradually build up their army by acquiring resources and researching new technologies. Instead, each level begins with the player&#x27;s army already assembled and ready for combat. During the game, the player controls forces of various sizes made up of different units, each possessing their own strengths and weaknesses. In single-player mode, only Light units are playable, but in online multiplayer mode, the player can control both Light and Dark units.
Basic gameplay in all three games consists of the player selecting and commanding units. The player clicks a unit to select it. A selected unit is marked by a surrounding yellow rectangle, beside which is a health meter, which diminishes as the unit takes damage. In &quot;Soulblighter&quot; and &quot;The Wolf Age&quot;, units capable of using magic also have a mana meter, which diminishes through magic use and slowly regenerates over time. Units do not regenerate health, and there is no way to construct new units (although in some single-player missions, reinforcements are automatically received at predetermined points). When the player double-clicks on any unit, all nearby units of the same type are also selected. To select multiple units of different types, the player can either &quot;shift click&quot; (hold down the shift key while clicking individual units) or use &quot;band-selection&quot; (click and drag the cursor across the screen, selecting all units within the inscribed rectangle). All units on screen, irrespective of type, can be selected by pressing the enter key. The player can also assign manually selected groups of units to a specific key on the keyboard; pressing that key then instantly selects the units in the desired group. In &quot;The Wolf Age&quot;, the HUD also includes a &quot;Unit Grouping Bar&quot; which allows the player to select their group by clicking on the corresponding number rather than using the keyboard.

Once one or more units have been selected, the player can click on the ground to make them walk to the selected spot, or click on an enemy to make them attack. Units with projectile weapons, such as archers and dwarves can also be ordered to attack a specific spot on the ground, rather than an enemy. It is also important that the player have their units facing in the correct direction. In &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot;, this is accomplished by &quot;gesture clicking&quot;: using the mouse to indicate which way the units will face when they reach their destination. In &quot;Soulblighter&quot; and &quot;The Wolf Age&quot;, it can be accomplished by either gesture clicking, or by pressing the left or right arrow key as the units move to the selected location. Facing the correct direction is especially relevant when using formations. After selecting a group of units, the player must press the corresponding formation button on the keyboard, and then click on the ground where they want the units to form. The player can also order all selected units to scatter and to retreat. In &quot;Soulblighter&quot; and &quot;The Wolf Age&quot;, all formations—as well as commands such as stopping, guarding, scattering, retreating, and reversing direction—are also available via a single click in the Control Bar at the bottom of the screen.
When a single unit is selected, information about that unit appears in the &quot;Status Bar&quot; at the top of the HUD: the unit&#x27;s name, biography, number of kills, number of battles survived, and (if he is capable of carrying items) inventory. When multiple units are selected, only the names, types, and quantity of units appear. The HUD also features a transparent overhead mini-map, which displays information about the current battlefield—the player&#x27;s field of vision is indicated by a yellow trapezoid, enemy units appear as red dots, friendly non-playable units as blue dots, and the player&#x27;s army as green dots. The player can click anywhere on the mini-map to instantly jump to that location. However, the mini-map does not initially display the entire battlefield; the player must explore the area for it to become fully mapped. In &quot;Soulblighter&quot;, the player can also order troops to move to any location on the mapped area of the battlefield by right-clicking on that area in the mini-map.
The player has full control over the camera throughout the game, and can move, orbit, pan, and zoom the camera via the keyboard. In &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot;, the mouse can be used to move the camera forwards, backwards, left, and right by moving the cursor to the top, bottom, left, or right of the screen, respectively. In &quot;Soulblighter&quot; and &quot;The Wolf Age&quot;, the player can also select preferences to enable rotation and orbiting via the mouse by moving the cursor to the top and bottom corners of the screen, respectively.

Selecting and commanding units only forms the basic interactions of the &quot;Myth&quot; games. Battles are more complex than simply commanding units to attack the enemy—strategy, battlefield conditions, and even weather all play important roles. For example, due to the game&#x27;s physics engine, objects collide with each another and the terrain. This can manifest itself simply in a severed head bouncing off one of the player&#x27;s units and changing direction, but it can also have more serious consequences, such as friendly fire. For instance, archers firing at enemies engaged in melee combat risk hitting allied units, causing the same amount of damage. Also, projectiles are not guaranteed to hit; they are merely propelled in the direction instructed by the physics engine. Thus, for example, a dwarf could throw a molotov cocktail at an enemy on a hillside and miss, with the projectile rolling back down the hill towards the player&#x27;s own units. Arrows may miss their intended target due to a small degree of simulated aiming error that becomes more significant at long range, or the target may move out of the way or behind cover.

Weather also influences gameplay. Rain or snow can extinguish explosive-based attacks, and in &quot;The Wolf Age&quot;, strong wind can cause problems for archers in hitting their targets. It is also much easier for projectile units to hit enemies below them rather than above them, and as such, positioning of the player&#x27;s units is an important aspect of the game.

=== Single-player ===
In each of the three games&#x27; single-player campaigns, the player starts each mission with a group of soldiers and must use that group to accomplish a specific goal or set of goals. These goals can involve killing a certain number of enemies, defending a location, reaching a certain point on the map, escorting a unit safely to a certain area, or destroying a specific object or enemy. The focus of the single-player campaign is on a smaller force defeating a much larger enemy force; in every mission, the Light units are outnumbered by enemies, often vastly, and so the player must use the terrain, employ the specific skills of their individual units, and gradually decrease the enemy force, or attempt to avoid it altogether. Units in the single-player campaign acquire experience with each kill. Experience increases attack rate, accuracy, and defence, and any unit that survives a battle will carry over to the next battle with their accumulated experience (assuming the next battle features units of that type). In the single-player campaign in &quot;The Wolf Age&quot;, players can avail of a &quot;morale boost&quot; for normal units when fighting alongside &quot;Champion&quot; units; any normal unit engaged in combat whilst in close proximity to a Champion unit will gain experience at a faster rate than normal.

=== Multiplayer ===
Upon release, &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; and &quot;Soulblighter&quot; could be used for multiplayer gaming on Bungie.net, or via a LAN on PC or AppleTalk on Mac, whilst &quot;The Wolf Age&quot; could be played on GameSpy, or via a LAN on PC or AppleTalk on Mac. In multiplayer, the player starts with an army, and can customize it by trading units with other players, using point values that approximate the value of the units being traded.

All three games have similar, but not identical, multiplayer modes. The following modes are common to each of the three games:

* &quot;King of the Hill&quot; – A hill on the map is marked with a flag. The hill becomes &quot;captured&quot; when one or more of a team&#x27;s units move within a certain range of the flag and eliminate any enemy units in the same area. The winner is the team who controls the hill for the longest amount of time.
* &quot;Steal the Bacon&quot; – Somewhere on the battlefield is a ball; the objective is to get the ball and keep it away from the opponents, with the winner being the last team to touch the ball.
* &quot;Balls on Parade&quot; – Each team has a ball; the objective is to capture as many of the opponents&#x27; balls as possible, with winner being the team in possession of the most balls at the end of the game.
* &quot;Flag Rally&quot; – Multiple flags are on the battlefield, with the winner being the first player to touch them all.
* &quot;Capture the Flag&quot; – Each team begins the game with one flag, with the winner being the first team to capture the other team&#x27;s flag.
* &quot;Scavenger Hunt&quot; – Multiple balls are on the battlefield, with the winner being the first player to touch them all.
* &quot;Captures&quot; – Multiple balls are on the battlefield, with the winner being the player who is in possession of the most balls at the end of the match.
* &quot;Body Count&quot; – Team deathmatch.
* &quot;Last Man on the Hill&quot; – Whichever player &quot;owns&quot; the hill when time runs out is the winner.

Unique to &quot;Soulblighter&quot; and &quot;The Wolf Age&quot; are the following modes:

* &quot;Assassin&quot; – Each team has a &quot;target unit&quot;, with the winner being the team who kills the opponents&#x27; target first.
* &quot;Hunting&quot; – Each team must kill as much wildlife as possible; each animal has a point value, and the winner is the team with the most points at the end of the game.
* &quot;Stampede!&quot; – Each team starts with a herd of animals and a number of flags; the object is to shepherd the herd to the enemy flags, with each successfully herded animal earning the team one point. The winner is the team with the most points at the end of the game.

Unique to &quot;Soulblighter&quot; is &quot;Choke the Chicken&quot; (identical to Assassin, except the target unit assigned to each team is a non-playable chicken). Unique to &quot;The Wolf Age&quot; is &quot;Assault&quot; (teams alternative defending a flag from their opponent; the attacking team scores a point if they touch the flag, the defending team score a point if they prevent the flag being touched. The winner is the team with the most points after both teams have attacked and defended).

==History==
===Development===
====&quot;The Fallen Lords&quot;====

&quot;&quot; was originally conceived by Jason Jones as Bungie was nearing the end of development of &quot;Marathon Infinity&quot; in late 1995. They had planned to do another first-person shooter as their next game. However, when Jones saw the first screenshots from id Software&#x27;s &quot;Quake&quot;, he became concerned that Bungie&#x27;s new game would be too similar. As such, he approached his colleagues with the question: &quot;What do you think about having this world with 100 guys fighting 100 other guys in 3D?&quot; His idea was to bring Bungie&#x27;s experience in 3D action games to a real-time strategy (RTS) game. The team agreed their new shooter was developing along lines too similar to &quot;Quake&quot;, and, as such, they abandoned the project, and switched focus to what ultimately became &quot;Myth&quot;.

Dubbed &quot;The Giant Bloody War Game&quot;, initial inspirations were films such as Mel Gibson&#x27;s &quot;Braveheart&quot; and literature such as Glen Cook&#x27;s &quot;The Black Company&quot;. Doug Zartman, Bungie&#x27;s director of public relations and one of the game&#x27;s writers, explained: &quot;We wanted to capture the feeling that you get watching large groups of people clashing on the open field&quot;. He was also eager to differentiate the game from standard RTS games:

Once they had decided on the basic game mechanics, which ultimately became known as &quot;real-time tactics&quot;, they drew up a list of elements they wanted to avoid (RTS clichés, references to Middle-earth, allusions to the Arthurian legend, any narrative involving &quot;little boys coming of age and saving the world&quot;) and those they wanted to incorporate (&quot;any ideas that contributed to the visual realism of the game&quot;, such as a 3D landscape, polygonal buildings, particle-based weather, and battlefields littered with body parts). They were also determined to include a robust online multiplayer mode as a key gameplay feature.

Work on the game began in January 1996, with a major early decision being to develop and release the game simultaneously for both Mac OS and Microsoft Windows. At the time, Bungie&#x27;s only Windows game had been a port of &quot;Marathon 2: Durandal&quot;, with which they had been unhappy, and they were determined &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; be a genuine cross-platform release. As such, 90% of the game&#x27;s source code was platform-independent, with 5% written for Windows subroutines and 5% for Mac-specific functionality. All of the game&#x27;s data was stored in platform-independent data files called &quot;tags&quot;, which were automatically byte-swapped when necessary and accessed via a cross-platform file manager.

Although &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; employs a fully 3D terrain, with 3D polygonal buildings, the characters are 2D sprites. To bring the 3D environment and the 2D characters together, the team developed four separate programming tools: &quot;Tag Editor&quot; (edited the constants in the cross-platform data files), &quot;Extractor&quot; (handled the 2D sprites and the sequencing of their animations), &quot;Loathing&quot; (the map editor), and &quot;Fear&quot; (dealt with the 3D polygonal models such as houses, pillars, and walls). Of the four programs, Jones explained:

By November 1996, Bungie had a demo with rudimentary gameplay in place. In an effort to create media buzz, they took the demo to several gaming magazines. Speaking in 2000, Doug Zartman explained the physics engine was a major factor in the game even at this early stage:

&quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; originally supported both software rendering and 3dfx&#x27;s Glide hardware acceleration. Soon after it was released, Bungie released a v1.1 upgrade patch, which added support for Rendition&#x27;s Redline, and 3dfx&#x27;s Voodoo Rush.

====&quot;Soulblighter&quot;====
&quot;Myth II: Soulblighter&quot; went into development immediately after &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; proved a commercial success. One of Bungie&#x27;s main goals with the sequel was to include gameplay aspects and game mechanics which they had wanted to feature in &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot;, but had been unable to implement due to time constraints. Of the initial planning for &quot;Soulblighter&quot;, Alex Seropian, Bungie&#x27;s co-founder, said:

New to &quot;Soulblighter&quot; were moving 3D models within the gaming world, something none of Bungie staff had ever created before. For example, the opening level features a fully functional windmill, and a later level features a drawbridge that closes as the level begins, and which the player must then lower so their army can gain access to a castle. Although the original game featured the same kind of 3D polygonal models, none of them moved, and implementing this feature proved to be one of the biggest challenges the team encountered in making the game. Another challenge also involved something not seen in the first game: a level set indoors. For this level, which is set in a large castle, the AI had to be rewritten as two enemy units could be right beside one another but not be able to see each other because of a wall between them. Previously, two units standing beside one another would automatically attack. Writing this new code into the AI scripting language proved especially difficult for the programmers.

In terms of the game&#x27;s graphics, as with &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot;, each level in &quot;Soulblighter&quot; is constructed on a polygonal mesh. However, the mesh used in the sequel is four times finer than in the original, and hence the graphics are more detailed and smoother. Like the first game, although the game world itself is fully 3D, the characters populating each level are 2D sprites. The sprites in &quot;Soulblighter&quot; have many more frames of animation than those in &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot;, and so move more smoothly. Explaining why the team stuck with the concept of using 2D sprites in a 3D terrain, producer Tuncer Deniz stated:

&quot;Soulblighter&quot; originally supported software rendering, all 3dfx and Rendition GPUs, and any graphics cards that supported Direct3D for Windows and QuickDraw 3D for Mac. The game also supported 3D audio, specifically Aureal Semiconductor&#x27;s A3D and Creative Labs&#x27; EAX.

When &quot;Soulblighter&quot; was released, Bungie included the &quot;Fear&quot; and &quot;Loathing&quot; programming tools, which allowed players to create new units and maps. Bungie themselves strongly encouraged the creativity of their fan base in using these tools. For example, in April 1999, they issued a press release regarding the World War II total conversion, &quot;Myth II: Recon&quot;, saying: &quot;This kind of plug-in was exactly what the &quot;Myth II&quot; tools were intended to inspire, and is an excellent sign that &quot;Myth&quot; mapmakers are taking this game world in fascinating new directions.&quot;

====&quot;The Wolf Age&quot;====
In 1999, Bungie sold 19.9% of their shares to Take-Two Interactive. In June 2000, Bungie was purchased outright by Microsoft, with Take-Two acquiring the &quot;Oni&quot; and &quot;Myth&quot; intellectual properties. &quot;Myth III: The Wolf Age&quot; was announced by Take-Two subsidiary Gathering of Developers in January 2001, when they revealed MumboJumbo were developing the game for Windows and Mac OS. &quot;The Wolf Age&quot; would be MumboJumbo&#x27;s first game.

Addressing the issue of remaining faithful to the two previous games whilst still introducing new elements to the franchise, MumboJumbo president Mark Dochtermann explained the developers did not intend to reinvent the series&#x27; basic gameplay, although they were keen to try out new things: &quot;There&#x27;s a lot left to explore in the &quot;Myth&quot; franchise even before we go in a somewhat different route. Although, we are taking a [new] route in terms of adding 3D acceleration, 3D models, and doing stuff with the terrain engine and physics that are still way beyond what the other RTS games are doing right now.&quot; Similarly, producer and lead designer Scott Campbell stated: &quot;We intend to pay respect to &quot;Myth&quot; and its fans. We don&#x27;t care to change the whole appeal of the game just so we can call it ours.&quot; With this in mind, MumboJumbo hired three members of &quot;Soulblighter&quot;″s modding community to work on the game. Although initially hired to work on technical aspects, they became invaluable to MumboJumbo in terms of writing the storyline. Executive producer Mike Donges explained that &quot;they&#x27;re our &quot;Myth&quot; lore experts, so if we try to put in something new, they have the ability to [reject it]&quot;.
Although &quot;The Wolf Age&quot; was built using &quot;Soulblighter&quot; source code, the developers made significant changes, the single biggest of which was that everything in &quot;The Wolf Age&quot; is rendered in OpenGL 3D, including the characters and all environmental objects. &quot;The Wolf Age&quot; was the first &quot;Myth&quot; game to feature fully 3D characters, rather than 2D sprites in a 3D environment. Of the move to full 3D, Dochtermann points out that the 3D engine allows for things not possible in the previous games: &quot;There&#x27;s some very cool kinematics stuff. So when you have explosions, and when your units move through the world, the trees will respond. And not just blowing them up. You&#x27;ll see the shock waves from explosions, and you&#x27;re affecting the environment a lot more. It&#x27;s a lot more realistic.&quot; The new game engine also supported real-time shadows and dynamic lighting, as well as being capable of blending six to seven different texture layers, depending on how close the camera is to the action.

Regarding the programming tools used to create the game, MumboJumbo initially began by using Bungie&#x27;s &quot;Fear&quot; and &quot;Loathing&quot;. However, they never intended to use them for very long, with the plan always being to develop their own tool. Speaking a few months into development, Campbell stated: &quot;We are planning on doing a merger of the tools later on [...] we&#x27;re actually making tools right now that we will be using for &quot;Myth III&quot; that are not only cross-platform compatible, but will also allow you to do all the neat new things, use all the new scripting commands and the new models and 3D units and stuff that we&#x27;re using in this game.&quot; The new tool was eventually called &quot;Vengeance&quot;. At the E3 event in May 2001, MumboJumbo promised that Vengeance would ship with the game.

&quot;The Wolf Age&quot; went gold on October 17, 2001, completing a development cycle of only ten months, a relatively fast time to develop a major video game. Soon before the game&#x27;s release, &quot;PC Gamer&quot;″s Jim Preston wrote he was skeptical as to whether the developer had been given enough time to satisfactorily complete the game.

On November 16, lead programmer Andrew Meggs posted on Mythvillage.org that the entire &quot;Myth III&quot; PC team had been laid off by MumboJumbo the same day the game had been released, November 2. In a post titled &quot;Some ugly, but honest truths&quot;, Meggs wrote:

Meggs explained the team knew there were problems with the Windows version of the game that needed addressing, but, as they had been fired, they were unable to do so. He stated they had been working on a patch to fix many of these problems when they were let go, and he was unsure if this patch would be released. He also acknowledged that many of the criticisms regarding bugs in the game would be addressed by the patch. The same day Meggs made his post, November 16, MumboJumbo closed their offices in Irvine, California, with a view to consolidate their resources in their Dallas headquarters.

Three days later, MumboJumbo denied the &quot;Myth III&quot; team had been laid off, saying all staff members had been invited to work in the Dallas office. They also announced the patch Meggs had spoken of would be released within the week. On December 19, Mark Dochtermann promised the patch would be released before Christmas, along with Vengeance, which had not been shipped with the game. The patch was never officially released by MumboJumbo.

=== End-of-support ===
After Bungie released the &quot;Total Codex&quot; bundle in 1999, which contained &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; v1.3, &quot;Soulblighter&quot; v1.3, and the &quot;Soulblighter&quot; expansion pack, &quot;Myth II: Chimera&quot;, they ceased working to develop the game&#x27;s source code, as Microsoft wanted them to concentrate on &quot;&quot;. The official Bungie &quot;Myth&quot; servers were closed in February 2002.

===Community-driven development===
Despite the official end-of-life, the &quot;Myth&quot; series continued to have an active online fanbase, particularly &quot;Soulblighter&quot;. The first organised group of programmers, artists, and coders from the game&#x27;s community was known as MythDevelopers, who requested and were granted access to the source code so as to continue its development. With the permission of Take-Two, Bungie released their entire archive of &quot;Myth&quot;-related materials to MythDevelopers, including the source code, artwork, all creative files (such as maps, 3D models, scripts, etc.), and documentation, over 80 gigabytes of material. MythDevelopers was also granted access to the source code for &quot;The Wolf Age&quot;. Bungie also open-sourced their &quot;Myth&quot; metaserver source code in 2002.

MythDevelopers used this material to improve and further develop the games. Although their initial focus was on the bug-ridden release version of &quot;The Wolf Age&quot;, they also worked to update the first two games to newer operating systems on both Mac and PC, fix bugs, and create unofficial patches to enhance both the games themselves and the mapmaking tools. They also developed their own library, dubbed the Myth Core Library, which provided networking, input routines, and other low-level functions. This enabled MythDevelopers to avoid the necessity of licensing any external libraries, and instead allowed them to develop everything in-house. This was part of their deal with Take-Two, as they couldn&#x27;t incorporate anything into the games which they would be unable to give Take-Two the rights to should the company ever ask for the source code back; all modifications remained the intellectual property of Take-Two, who were free to use them in a future commercial version of &quot;Myth&quot;, if they ever wanted to re-release an upgraded version of one or more of the games, or incorporate the modifications into the development of a new &quot;Myth&quot; game.

In April 2003, MythDevelopers released a v1.1 patch for &quot;The Wolf Age&quot; for both Windows and Mac. Fixing over forty gameplay and stability issues, and addressing numerous bugs, the patch also included new multiplayer maps and gameplay modes. MythDevelopers disbanded in December 2003, with Project Magma becoming the main development group for &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; and &quot;Soulblighter&quot;, and FlyingFlip Studios for &quot;The Wolf Age&quot;. Magma&#x27;s final patch for &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; was v1.5, released in 2005, which added support for OpenGL 1.3 for both PC and Mac. FlyingFlip&#x27;s final patch for &quot;The Wolf Age&quot; was v1.3, released in 2004, which introduced multiple gameplay and stability improvements, as well as bug fixes, and performance enhancements. FlyingFlip disbanded in 2007.

&quot;Soulblighter&quot; received considerably more attention from the modding community than either &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; or &quot;The Wolf Age&quot;. Between 2003 and 2013, Project Magma released multiple major patches, each of which included fixes for bugs, graphical problems, gameplay problems, and interface issues, as well as improve the Fear and Loathing tools and the online multiplayer mode. However, each patch also tended to feature one or more &quot;major&quot; enhancement. For example, v1.3.2, developed in association with MythDevelopers in 2003, allowed &quot;Soulblighter&quot; to run natively under OS X. Also developed in association with MythDevelopers in 2003 was v1.4, which introduced OpenGL support for the OS X version and allowed the player to play &quot;Soulblighter&quot; with &quot;Fallen Lords&quot; style gameplay (dubbed v&quot;TFL&quot;). In 2004, Magma released their first standalone patch, v1.5, which was originally intended as a minor clean-up patch for some of the problems introduced in v1.4. For example, v1.4 broke a number of fan-developed plug-ins. Additionally, as the developers did not have access to &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; source code when designing v&quot;TFL&quot;, the feature was unreliable. Magma&#x27;s plan with v1.5 was to get the gameplay and plug-in compatibility back to the standard of Bungie&#x27;s last official version of the game, but retain the v1.4 features that worked. During development of v1.5, they also gained access to &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; source code, and so completely rewrote the v&quot;TFL&quot; option. Magma&#x27;s final patch, v1.8, was released in 2013, and added several new game modes to multiplayer gaming, improved the usage of CPU resources, added a new texture decompression code which loads sprite frames twice as fast as before, enhanced both the texture mapping and the pixel shader, and included (for the first time in a Magma patch) Linux-specific improvements.

In May 2023, an archive said to be the largest historic collection of Myth items was placed on the Internet Archive. At well over 1,200 Myth maps, the source centers on 3rd party versions of solo, network, and scenario entries between the initial November 1997 Myth release through early 2023.

===Community servers===
Prior to disbanding, MythDevelopers created and operated PlayMyth.net, the most popular online &quot;Myth&quot; server after the official servers were taken offline. Although built using the &quot;Soulblighter&quot; server, PlayMyth could also run both &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; and &quot;The Wolf Age&quot;, which was developed by MumboJumbo using a network gameplay system designed to run on GameSpy rather than Bungie. PlayMyth went offline in October 2007 after it was repeatedly hacked, with the most popular servers becoming MariusNet.com and GateofStorms.net.

MariusNet had been online since just prior to Bungie&#x27;s &quot;Myth&quot; servers going offline, and was officially approved by Bungie. The original impetus behind the project was as a temporary replacement for &quot;Myth&quot; players in case the original servers were shut down, which had been rumored for some time. The Bungie servers had not supported &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; since November 2001, and the community believed the servers would soon close for &quot;Soulblighter&quot; as well. When &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; servers closed in November, the only way to play a multiplayer game was via a LAN or AppleTalk, and MariusNet was created as a Bungie &quot;emulator&quot;, which, like PlayMyth, supported all three &quot;Myth&quot; games, and thus gave players a way to play &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; online. At the time, Bungie had not open-sourced the metaserver source code, so creating a network for &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; was accomplished via reverse engineering. Dave Carlile, the main programmer of the server, explained:

MariusNet closed in 2014 when the server company shut down, and the hardware was damaged whilst being moved to its new location. GateofStorms, which was created by Project Magma and only supports &quot;Soulblighter&quot; v1.8 (released by Magma in 2013), remains active, and continues to host individual games and tournaments.

==Reception==
All three main games in the &quot;Myth&quot; series received positive reviews, especially &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; and &quot;Soulblighter&quot;, which were universally acclaimed. Although &quot;The Wolf Age&quot; was generally well reviewed, it was seen as considerably inferior to the two previous games.

GameSpot&#x27;s Michael E. Ryan wrote of &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; that it &quot;can claim its place among the best strategy games on the market&quot;, calling it &quot;one of the most impressive games you&#x27;ll see this year&quot;, and &quot;a truly remarkable real-time strategy game&quot;. Game Revolution&#x27;s Calvin Hubble called it &quot;one of the most impressive looking strategy games to hit the market&quot;.

Ryan called &quot;Soulblighter&quot; &quot;as good as a computer game can possibly be&quot; and &quot;one of the best games to be released this year&quot;. Hubble called it &quot;both one of the best sequels to hit the scene and one of the finest titles on the RTS market&quot;. IGN&#x27;s Tal Blevins said the game &quot;lives up to (and surpasses) all of the hype surrounding [it]&quot;.

IGN&#x27;s Dan Adams wrote of &quot;The Wolf Age&quot;: &quot;Fans of the series shouldn&#x27;t be disappointed by MumboJumbo&#x27;s effort to follow in the mighty footsteps that Bungie left behind&quot;. GameSpot&#x27;s Sam Parker wrote that &quot;[…] &quot;Myth III&quot;″s single-player game represents the best the &quot;Myth&quot; series has to offer&quot;. However, he was critical of the absence of many promised multiplayer features, the absence of the Vengeance mapmaking tool, and compatibility issues with Windows XP. GameSpy&#x27;s William Abner wrote: &quot;[…] &quot;The Wolf Age&quot; isn&#x27;t a complete product. It&#x27;s close. And parts of it are just as fun, if not more so, than the earlier games, but a laundry list of bugs, hardware glitches, and severe multiplayer issues keep the game from reaching its potential.&quot; He too was critical of the absence of Vengeance and of multiplayer mode.

===Sales and awards===
According to Bungie co-founder Alex Seropian, &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; cost roughly $2 million to produce and market, by far Bungie&#x27;s most expensive game up to that time, and as such, they needed it to be financially successful, especially as it was their first original PC game. The game did prove to be a commercial success, selling over 350,000 units worldwide at roughly $40 per unit, earning the company $14 million, and becoming Bungie&#x27;s most successful game thus far. By 2000, the game had over 100,000 people registered with online accounts at Bungie for multiplayer games. The success of the game also helped Bungie rank #101 in &quot;Inc.&quot;″s 1998 list of the 500 fastest growing private corporations in North America. Primarily due to the success of &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot;, Bungie&#x27;s profits had increased by 2,228% from 1993 to 1997.

&quot;The Fallen Lords&quot; also won numerous awards, including &quot;Real-Time Strategy Game of the Year&quot; from &quot;PC Gamer&quot;, &quot;Strategy Game of the Year&quot; from &quot;Computer Gaming World&quot;, and &quot;Game of the Year&quot; from both &quot;Computer Games Strategy Plus&quot; and &quot;Macworld&quot;. &quot;Online Game Review&quot; named it one of the fifty greatest games ever made.

&quot;Soulblighter&quot; considerably outsold &quot;The Fallen Lords&quot;. In North America, pre-orders for the game reached 140,000 units. When v1.1 was released on January 7, day one sales reached roughly the same number of units the original sold worldwide.

==References==
==External links==
* Project Magma</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2313710" start="20" end="37" title="real-time tactics" label="real-time tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="38" end="48" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="54" end="71" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q43627" start="76" end="82" title="Mac OS" label="Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="" start="153" end="174" title="Myth II: Soulblighter" label="Myth II: Soulblighter"/>
<link wikidata="" start="199" end="221" title="Myth III: The Wolf Age" label="Myth III: The Wolf Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q735267" start="282" end="288" title="Bungie" label="Bungie"/>
<link wikidata="Q679933" start="335" end="352" title="Eidos Interactive" label="Eidos Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q527336" start="468" end="482" title="GT Interactive" label="GT Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q14001326" start="536" end="546" title="MumboJumbo" label="MumboJumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q94933" start="568" end="588" title="Take-Two Interactive" label="Take-Two Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495819" start="593" end="616" title="Gathering of Developers" label="Gathering of Developers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123991" start="649" end="656" title="MacSoft" label="MacSoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927914" start="878" end="886" title="Video game graphics" label="graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331296" start="888" end="896" title="gameplay" label="gameplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="898" end="910" title="level design" label="level design"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="919" end="930" title="Multiplayer video game" label="multiplayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="974" end="992" title="real-time strategy" label="real-time strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283786" start="1066" end="1074" title="PC Gamer" label="PC Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q707182" start="1088" end="1109" title="Computer Gaming World" label="Computer Gaming World"/>
<link wikidata="Q868628" start="1123" end="1151" title="Computer Games Magazine" label="Computer Games Strategy Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q631823" start="1169" end="1177" title="Macworld" label="Macworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q768807" start="1420" end="1432" title="sound effect" label="sound effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="1464" end="1466" title="Artificial intelligence" label="AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="1792" end="1796" title="Software bug" label="bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="2188" end="2195" title="Server (computing)" label="servers"/>
<link wikidata="Q863368" start="2258" end="2269" title="Game programmer" label="programmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="2438" end="2449" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q366580" start="2679" end="2696" title="technical support" label="technical support"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="2733" end="2749" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645952" start="2770" end="2786" title="unofficial patch" label="unofficial patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q865493" start="2797" end="2801" title="Mod (video gaming)" label="mods"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="2871" end="2873" title="Intellectual property" label="IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q735267" start="3051" end="3057" title="Bungie" label="Bungie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="3062" end="3079" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="3088" end="3102" title="Classic Mac OS" label="Classic Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q679933" start="3148" end="3165" title="Eidos Interactive" label="Eidos Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3259" end="3280" title="Myth II: Soulblighter" label="Myth II: Soulblighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q527336" start="3388" end="3402" title="GT Interactive" label="GT Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="3517" end="3522" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868589" start="3526" end="3544" title="Loki Entertainment" label="Loki Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q107466928" start="3732" end="3746" title="expansion pack" label="expansion pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q94933" start="3924" end="3944" title="Take-Two Interactive" label="Take-Two Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4014" end="4030" title="Mod (video gaming)#Total conversion" label="total conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="4042" end="4053" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495819" start="4169" end="4192" title="Gathering of Developers" label="Gathering of Developers"/>
<link wikidata="Q208850" start="4259" end="4272" title="Single-player video game" label="single-player"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="4284" end="4295" title="Multiplayer online game" label="multiplayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q865493" start="4315" end="4319" title="Mod (video gaming)" label="mods"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4356" end="4378" title="Myth III: The Wolf Age" label="Myth III: The Wolf Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q14001326" start="4396" end="4406" title="MumboJumbo" label="MumboJumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123991" start="4535" end="4542" title="MacSoft" label="MacSoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313710" start="4674" end="4691" title="real-time tactics" label="real-time tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="4709" end="4727" title="real-time strategy" label="real-time strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331296" start="4728" end="4736" title="gameplay" label="gameplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639826" start="4777" end="4792" title="Micromanagement (gameplay)" label="micromanagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459738" start="4805" end="4820" title="macromanagement" label="macromanagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="4976" end="4981" title="Level (video gaming)" label="level"/>
<link wikidata="Q208850" start="5201" end="5219" title="Single-player video game" label="single-player mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="5259" end="5282" title="Multiplayer online game" label="online multiplayer mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q668136" start="5541" end="5547" title="Health (gaming)" label="health"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="5679" end="5684" title="Magic (paranormal)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888593" start="5697" end="5701" title="Mana (gaming)" label="mana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369585" start="5979" end="5991" title="double-click" label="double-click"/>
<link wikidata="Q827156" start="6165" end="6174" title="shift key" label="shift key"/>
<link wikidata="Q107602" start="6262" end="6268" title="Cursor (user interface)" label="cursor"/>
<link wikidata="Q651095" start="6416" end="6425" title="enter key" label="enter key"/>
<link wikidata="Q250" start="6513" end="6521" title="Computer keyboard" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q518461" start="6629" end="6632" title="Head-up display" label="HUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="6997" end="7004" title="Archery" label="archers"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="7009" end="7016" title="Dwarf (mythology)" label="dwarves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069238" start="7626" end="7636" title="Tactical formation" label="formations"/>
<link wikidata="Q602481" start="8520" end="8528" title="mini-map" label="mini-map"/>
<link wikidata="Q46303" start="8646" end="8655" title="trapezoid" label="trapezoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q466466" start="8698" end="8716" title="Non-player character" label="non-playable units"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561045" start="9201" end="9207" title="Virtual camera system" label="camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116837" start="9250" end="9253" title="Panning (camera)" label="pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q62505" start="9996" end="10010" title="physics engine" label="physics engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q167096" start="10541" end="10557" title="molotov cocktail" label="molotov cocktail"/>
<link wikidata="Q45922" start="10678" end="10683" title="Arrow" label="Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q735267" start="12721" end="12731" title="Bungie.net" label="Bungie.net"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="12742" end="12745" title="Local area network" label="LAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="12749" end="12751" title="Personal computer" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200606" start="12755" end="12764" title="AppleTalk" label="AppleTalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="12768" end="12771" title="Mac (computer)" label="Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q281239" start="12824" end="12831" title="GameSpy" label="GameSpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268536" start="13189" end="13205" title="King of the Hill (game)" label="King of the Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035213" start="14042" end="14058" title="Capture the flag" label="Capture the Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q48510" start="14505" end="14515" title="Deathmatch (video games)" label="deathmatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890715" start="15929" end="15940" title="Jason Jones (programmer)" label="Jason Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q735267" start="15944" end="15950" title="Bungie" label="Bungie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756410" start="15995" end="16012" title="Marathon Infinity" label="Marathon Infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="16064" end="16084" title="first-person shooter" label="first-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q204474" start="16156" end="16167" title="id Software" label="id Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q217423" start="16181" end="16186" title="Quake (video game)" label="Quake"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="16410" end="16412" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q270948" start="16473" end="16484" title="action game" label="action game"/>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="16491" end="16509" title="real-time strategy" label="real-time strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42229" start="16809" end="16819" title="Mel Gibson" label="Mel Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q162729" start="16833" end="16843" title="Braveheart" label="Braveheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q922071" start="16873" end="16882" title="Glen Cook" label="Glen Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636351" start="16896" end="16913" title="The Black Company" label="The Black Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="16961" end="16977" title="public relations" label="public relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751513" start="17248" end="17262" title="game mechanics" label="game mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313710" start="17303" end="17320" title="real-time tactics" label="real-time tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q156351" start="17386" end="17392" title="cliché" label="cliché"/>
<link wikidata="Q79734" start="17409" end="17421" title="Middle-earth" label="Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="17440" end="17456" title="King Arthur" label="Arthurian legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276654" start="17678" end="17687" title="Polygon (computer graphics)" label="polygonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757458" start="17699" end="17713" title="Particle system" label="particle-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="17813" end="17836" title="Multiplayer online game" label="online multiplayer mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="17995" end="18001" title="Classic Mac OS" label="Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="18006" end="18023" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18095" end="18115" title="Marathon 2: Durandal" label="Marathon 2: Durandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="18280" end="18291" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="18346" end="18356" title="subroutine" label="subroutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="18521" end="18525" title="byte" label="byte"/>
<link wikidata="Q732970" start="18583" end="18595" title="file manager" label="file manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194763" start="18712" end="18714" title="2D computer graphics" label="2D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333015" start="18715" end="18722" title="Sprite (computer graphics)" label="sprites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077784" start="18817" end="18833" title="programming tool" label="programming tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284190" start="18871" end="18880" title="Constant (computer programming)" label="constants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="18990" end="19000" title="Computer animation" label="animations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="19029" end="19039" title="Level editor" label="map editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q568742" start="19092" end="19098" title="3D modeling" label="models"/>
<link wikidata="Q62505" start="19376" end="19390" title="physics engine" label="physics engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297645" start="19504" end="19522" title="software rendering" label="software rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q229698" start="19527" end="19531" title="3dfx Interactive" label="3dfx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323676" start="19539" end="19544" title="Glide API" label="Glide"/>
<link wikidata="Q208218" start="19627" end="19632" title="Patch (computing)" label="patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q179822" start="19658" end="19667" title="Rendition (company)" label="Rendition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19675" end="19682" title="Redline (API)" label="Redline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19700" end="19711" title="3dfx Interactive#Voodoo Rush" label="Voodoo Rush"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19753" end="19774" title="Myth II: Soulblighter" label="Myth II: Soulblighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717777" start="20156" end="20169" title="Alex Seropian" label="Alex Seropian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="20364" end="20369" title="Level (video gaming)" label="level"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="21166" end="21184" title="scripting language" label="scripting language"/>
<link wikidata="Q863368" start="21221" end="21232" title="Game programmer" label="programmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154597" start="21370" end="21384" title="Polygon mesh" label="polygonal mesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702296" start="21868" end="21876" title="Video game producer" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="21988" end="21991" title="Graphics processing unit" label="GPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308" start="22002" end="22016" title="Video card" label="graphics cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q939208" start="22032" end="22040" title="Direct3D" label="Direct3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927832" start="22057" end="22069" title="QuickDraw 3D" label="QuickDraw 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636316" start="22103" end="22111" title="3D audio effect" label="3D audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034580" start="22126" end="22146" title="Aureal Semiconductor" label="Aureal Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034580" start="22154" end="22157" title="A3D" label="A3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q477016" start="22162" end="22175" title="Creative Technology Limited" label="Creative Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202192" start="22182" end="22185" title="Environmental Audio Extensions" label="EAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="22528" end="22540" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22541" end="22557" title="Mod (video gaming)#Total conversion" label="total conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q184148" start="22614" end="22621" title="Plug-in (computing)" label="plug-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q11692" start="22886" end="22892" title="Share (finance)" label="shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q94933" start="22896" end="22916" title="Take-Two Interactive" label="Take-Two Interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="22965" end="22974" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573435" start="23010" end="23013" title="Oni (video game)" label="Oni"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="23041" end="23064" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual properties"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23072" end="23094" title="Myth III: The Wolf Age" label="Myth III: The Wolf Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495819" start="23138" end="23161" title="Gathering of Developers" label="Gathering of Developers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14001326" start="23198" end="23208" title="MumboJumbo" label="MumboJumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178570" start="24824" end="24830" title="OpenGL" label="OpenGL"/>
<link wikidata="Q11476" start="25182" end="25192" title="kinematics" label="kinematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816476" start="25503" end="25512" title="Real-time computer graphics" label="real-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478122" start="25513" end="25520" title="Shadow mapping" label="shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157551" start="25525" end="25541" title="Computer graphics lighting" label="dynamic lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q752176" start="25603" end="25610" title="Texture mapping" label="texture"/>
<link wikidata="Q336168" start="26431" end="26433" title="Electronic Entertainment Expo" label="E3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26540" end="26549" title="Software release life cycle#RTM" label="went gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283786" start="26719" end="26727" title="PC Gamer" label="PC Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="27511" end="27515" title="Software bug" label="bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49219" start="27643" end="27661" title="Irvine, California" label="Irvine, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="27715" end="27721" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q107466928" start="28391" end="28405" title="expansion pack" label="expansion pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q224887" start="28686" end="28697" title="End-of-life (product)" label="end-of-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="28977" end="28988" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="29275" end="29284" title="Gigabyte" label="gigabytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="29398" end="29410" title="Open-source software" label="open-sourced"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823206" start="29434" end="29444" title="metaserver" label="metaserver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="29695" end="29711" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645952" start="29754" end="29770" title="unofficial patch" label="unofficial patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q558937" start="29957" end="29976" title="Low-level programming language" label="low-level functions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31225" end="31235" title="OpenGL#OpenGL 1.3" label="OpenGL 1.3"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="32115" end="32119" title="OS X" label="OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="33225" end="33228" title="Central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33372" end="33384" title="Shader#Pixel shaders" label="pixel shader"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="33437" end="33442" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="33566" end="33582" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q281239" start="34183" end="34190" title="GameSpy" label="GameSpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798820" start="34273" end="34279" title="Hacker (computer security)" label="hacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="34972" end="34975" title="Local area network" label="LAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q200606" start="34979" end="34988" title="AppleTalk" label="AppleTalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q269608" start="35334" end="35353" title="reverse engineering" label="reverse engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966" start="35484" end="35492" title="Computer hardware" label="hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q45836" start="36069" end="36077" title="GameSpot" label="GameSpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310127" start="36367" end="36382" title="Game Revolution" label="Game Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="36775" end="36778" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="37404" end="37414" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q281239" start="37416" end="37423" title="GameSpy" label="GameSpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q954455" start="38489" end="38493" title="Inc. (magazine)" label="Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1589009" start="38539" end="38559" title="Privately held company" label="private corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283786" start="38830" end="38838" title="PC Gamer" label="PC Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q707182" start="38895" end="38916" title="Computer Gaming World" label="Computer Gaming World"/>
<link wikidata="Q868628" start="38973" end="39001" title="Computer Games Magazine" label="Computer Games Strategy Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q631823" start="39018" end="39026" title="Macworld" label="Macworld"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42666" wikidata="Q845913" url="?curid=42666" title="Zerg">
<text>The Zerg are a fictional race of insectoid aliens obsessed with assimilating other races into their swarm in pursuit of genetic perfection, and the overriding antagonists for much of the &quot;StarCraft&quot; franchise. Unlike the fictional universe&#x27;s other primary races, the Protoss and Terrans, the Zerg lack technological inclination. Instead, they &quot;force-evolve&quot; genetic traits by directed mutation in order to match such technology. Operating as a hive mind-linked &quot;chain of command&quot;, the Zerg strive for &quot;genetic perfection&quot; by assimilating the unique genetic code of advanced species deemed &quot;worthy&quot; into their own gene pool, creating numerous variations of specialized strains of Zerg gifted with unique adaptations. Despite being notoriously cunning and ruthlessly efficient, the majority of Zerg species have low intelligence, becoming mindless beasts if not connected to a &quot;hive-cluster&quot; or a &quot;command entity&quot;.

As with the other races, the Zerg are the subject of a full single-player campaign in each of the series&#x27; real-time strategy video games. Zerg units are designed to be cost-efficient and fast to produce, encouraging players to overwhelm their opponents with sheer numerical advantage. Since the release of &quot;StarCraft&quot;, the Zerg have become a gaming icon, described by &quot;PC Gamer UK&quot; as &quot;the best race in strategy history&quot;. The term &quot;Zerg Rush&quot;, or &quot;zerging&quot;, is now commonly used to describe sacrificing economic development in favor of using many cheap, yet weak units to overwhelm an enemy by attrition or sheer numbers. The tactic is infamous; most experienced real-time strategy players are familiar with the tactic in one form or another.

== Attributes ==

=== Biology ===
Zerg have two cell types at birth — one which creates random mutations, and another that hunts these mutations — the result being that any mutations that survive are the strongest of all. Despite being a hive-minded species, the Zerg understand the principles of evolution and incorporate this into the development of their species. Zerg purposely situate themselves in harsh climates in order to further their own evolution through natural selection. Only the strongest with the best mutations survive, and they assimilate only the strongest species into their gene pool.

=== Society ===
It was stated in an interview by Blizzard employees that the Zerg Swarm are universally feared, hated, and hunted by all the sapient species of the Milky Way. The Zerg are a collective consciousness of a variety of different species assimilated into the Zerg genome. The Swarms&#x27; organization, psychological and economic, is more like that of ants or termites: they are communal entities, a people efficiently adapted by evolution. Every thousand Zerg warriors killed at a cost of one Terran soldier was a net victory for the Zerg; the Zerg Swarm didn&#x27;t care any more about expending warriors than the Terrans cared about expending ammunition.

The Zerg were originally commanded by and unified by their absolute obedience to the Zerg collective sentience known as the Zerg Overmind, a manifestation of this hive mind, and under the Overmind&#x27;s control the Zerg strove for genetic perfection by assimilating the favorable traits of other species. Zerg creatures are rapidly and selectively evolved into deadly and efficient killers to further the driving Zerg imperative of achieving absolute domination. After a species has been assimilated into the Swarm, it is mutated toward a different function within its hierarchy, from being a hive worker to a warrior strain. &quot;StarCraft&quot;&#x27;s manual notes that some species bear little resemblance to their original forms after just a short time into assimilation (an example would be the formerly peaceful Slothien species, which was assimilated and mutated into the vicious Hydralisk strain and so on). The Overmind controls the Swarm through secondary agents called cerebrates. Cerebrates command an individual brood of Zerg, each with a distinct tactical role within the hierarchy. Cerebrates further delegate power through the use of overlords for battlefield direction and queens for hive watch.

The quest for &#x27;genetic perfection&#x27; is a pseudo-religious concept to Zerg that drives them on a steady state of evolution and conflict; the zerg believed there was a state that the zerg could reach where they no longer needed to evolve, that their evolutionary form would never have to change again because they could already adapt to any situation. Abathur, an evolution master, doubted that this was possible, but reasoned that &quot;chasing the illusion of perfection&quot; was, regardless, tactically sound.

The vast majority of the Zerg do not have any free will as they are genetically forced to obey the commands of those further up the Zerg hierarchy, although they are sufficiently intelligent to form strategies and work as a team on the battlefield. Despite this, the average Zerg has no sense of self preservation. Along with the Overmind, the cerebrates are the only Zerg with full sapience, each with its own personality and methods, although they too are genetically incapable of disobeying the Overmind. The Overmind also possesses the ability to reincarnate its cerebrates should their bodies be killed, although Protoss dark templar energies are capable of disrupting this process. If a cerebrate is completely dead and cannot be reincarnated, the Overmind loses control of the cerebrate&#x27;s brood, causing it to mindlessly rampage and attack anything. As a result of the Overmind&#x27;s death in &quot;StarCraft&quot; and the subsequent destruction of a new Overmind in &quot;Brood War&quot;, the remaining cerebrates perished, as they could not survive without an Overmind. Sarah Kerrigan replaced the cerebrates with &quot;brood mothers&quot;. These creatures fulfil much the same purpose, but are loyal to Kerrigan and could survive her temporary departure during the events of &quot;Starcraft 2&quot;.

An exception to all of this would be the Primal Zerg, who inhabit the original Zerg homeworld of Zerus (as seen in &quot;Heart of the Swarm&quot;). The Zerg Hive Mind was created to control the Zerg, and eventually put them under the control of the main antagonist of the series, the fallen Xel&#x27;Naga Amon. Some Zerg, however, managed to avoid being subsumed. These are the Primal Zerg, who have much the same genetic abilities but are not bound to the Overmind. These creatures are each independently sapient, and if they follow a leader it is because they choose to. Their lack of a Hive Mind also shields them from specific psionic attacks engineered to counter the Zerg Hive Mind.

=== Zerg worlds ===
Zerg have conquered and/or infested many worlds, but only two of them are important:

*Zerus: Jungle world. Located in the galactic core&#x27; Theta quadrant of the Milky Way. It is the birthworld of the zerg. The position of the Zerus is known from the manual. It is situated near the Galaxy core. The Galaxy disc has a radius of 49 000 LY. The Zerg covered some 30-40 000 LY during their search for Protoss homeworld.
*Char: Volcanic world. Current Zerg capital world. Former Terran Dominions world. The new Overmind grew here, but later it was enslaved by the United Earth Directorate (UED). Eventually the planet was regained by the Zerg under Kerrigan&#x27;s control. The Zerg settled to infest other Terran worlds during their search, lies on the borders of the Terran sector. Because the Zerg ran across the Terrans first, it can implicate, that the Koprulu sector lies approximately on the line with Zerus, Char and Aiur.

=== Depiction ===
The Zerg were created from the native lifeforms of Zerus, who had the natural ability to absorb the &quot;essence&quot; of creatures they killed, transforming their bodies to gain new adaptations. The Xel&#x27;Naga created the Overmind and bound the primal Zerg to its will. They gave the Overmind a powerful desire to travel across the stars and absorb useful lifeforms into the Swarm, particularly the Protoss, their previous creation, so as to become the ultimate lifeform.

The Zerg are a completely organic race, making no use of lifeless technology and instead using specialized organisms for every function efficiently fulfilled through biological adaptation and planned mutation of the Zerg strains. Their buildings are specialized organs within the living, growing organism of a Zerg nest, as are the Leviathans &quot;space ships&quot; that carry them across space. Zerg colonies produce a carpet of bio-matter referred to as the &quot;creep&quot;, which essentially provides nourishment for Zerg structures and creatures. The visual aesthetic of the Zerg greatly resembles that of invertebrates such as crustaceans and insects (and certainly draws inspiration from the creatures from the Alien movies). The Zerg are shown to be highly dependent on their command structure: if a Zerg should lose its connection to the hive mind, it may turn passive and incapable of action, or become completely uncontrollable and attack allies and enemies alike.

Zerg buildings and units are entirely organic in-game, and all Zerg can regenerate slowly without assistance (though not as quickly as Protoss shields or Terran medivac). Zerg production is far more centralized than with the Terrans and Protoss; a central hatchery must be utilized to create new Zerg, with other structures providing the necessary technology tree assets, whereas the other two races can produce units from several structures. Zerg units tend to be weaker than those of the other two races, but are also cheaper, allowing for rush tactics to be used. Some Zerg units are capable of infesting enemies with various parasites that range from being able to see what an enemy unit sees to spawning Zerg inside an enemy unit. In addition, Zerg can infest some Terran buildings, allowing for the production of special infested Terran units.

== Appearances ==
In &quot;StarCraft&quot;, the Zerg are obsessed with the pursuit of genetic purity, and are the focus of the game&#x27;s second episode. With the Xel&#x27;Naga–empowered Protoss targeted as the ultimate lifeform, the Zerg invade the Terran colonies in the Koprulu Sector to assimilate the Terrans&#x27; psionic potential and give the Zerg an edge over the Protoss. Through the actions of the Sons of Korhal, the Zerg are lured to the Confederate capital Tarsonis, where they capture the psionic ghost agent Sarah Kerrigan and infest her. Returning to the Zerg base of operations on Char, the Zerg are attacked by the dark templar Zeratul, who accidentally gives the location of the Protoss homeworld Aiur to the Zerg Overmind. With victory in sight, the Overmind launches an invasion of Aiur and manifests itself on the planet. However, at the end of the game, the Protoss high templar Tassadar sacrifices himself to destroy the Overmind, leaving the Zerg to run rampant and leaderless across the planet.

The Zerg return in &quot;&quot; initially as uncontrolled indiscriminate killers without the will of the Overmind to guide them. Through the early portions of &quot;Brood War&quot;, Sarah Kerrigan is at odds with the surviving cerebrates, who have formed a new Overmind to restore control of the Swarm. Through allying herself with the Protoss, Kerrigan strikes at the cerebrates, causing disruption of their plans. Eventually, the UED fleet takes control of Char and pacifies the new Overmind with drugs, putting the cerebrates and most of the Zerg under their control. Kerrigan retaliates by forming a tenuous alliance with the remnants of the Dominion and the forces of Jim Raynor and Fenix, their subsequent victories turning the tide against the UED. However, she later betrays the alliance by dealing long-term damage to the infrastructures of her allies and killing Fenix. Proceeding to blackmail Zeratul into killing the new Overmind, Kerrigan&#x27;s forces destroy the remnants of the UED fleet, giving her full control of the Zerg and establishing the Swarm as the most powerful faction in the sector.

In &quot;StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty&quot;, Jim Raynor and the rebel forces who oppose both the Dominion and the Zerg, manage to secure an ancient Xel&#x27;Naga artifact and after successfully infiltrating Char, they use it to subjugate the Zerg and restore Kerrigan&#x27;s human form. Once again without a unified leadership, the Zerg get divided into multiple broods feuding over control of the Swarm. This situation persists until the events of &quot;StarCraft II: Heart of the Swarm&quot;. Kerrigan, believing Raynor to have been killed in a Dominion surprise attack, enters the original Zerg spawning pool to become the Queen of Blades again. This time she is no longer motivated to destroy humanity, having kept more of her original mindset due to the non-interference of the Zerg Hive Mind, and by extension, the Dark Voice, Amon.

Kerrigan is the protagonist and player character of StarCraft II: Heart of the Swarm. After being deinfested, she was taken in Valerian Mengsk&#x27;s hideout to research on her, until the Dominion attacks the facility, she escaped along with the rest of the facility, except Raynor, who was captured by Nova. She later learned that Raynor was executed and seeks revenge on Arcturus. As she enters a Leviathan, she controls the local Swarm inside, and starts rebuilding her forces from scratch. She later evolved into a Primal Zerg after a confrontation with Zeratul, leading her to the origins of the Zerg. She became a Primal, after absorbing the spawning pool and killing Primal Leaders to collect essence. With her newfound power, she initially takes the fight to the Dominion after subduing countless Queens. She was later shocked after she knows that Raynor survived and held by Dominion as a bargaining chip. She organizes a raid, rescuing Raynor but the man fell into disbelief that the one he saved, returns to being a monster. She also confronted an ancient Shapeshifter creating Hybrids at the behest of her former rival named Alexei Stukov. She later prepared to end Arcturus Mengsk&#x27;s reign by killing him in his palace in Korhal. She later left to confront the Shapeshifter&#x27;s master and only by allied effort, they finished them. Kerrigan left them to her Broodmother Zagara&#x27;s control.

==Critical reception==
One of the main factors responsible for &quot;StarCraft&quot;&#x27;s positive reception is the attention paid to the three unique playable races, for each of which Blizzard developed completely different characteristics, graphics, backstories, and styles of gameplay, while keeping them balanced in performance against each other. Previous to this, most real-time strategy games consisted of factions and races with the same basic &quot;chess&quot; play styles and units with only superficial differences. The use of unique sides and asymmetric warfare in &quot;StarCraft&quot; has been credited with popularizing the concept within the real-time strategy genre. Contemporary reviews of the game have mostly praised the attention to the gameplay balance between the species, as well as the fictional narratives built around them.

In their review for &quot;StarCraft&quot;, IGN&#x27;s Tom Chick stated that the balance and difference between the races was &quot;remarkable&quot;, continuing to praise the game&#x27;s &quot;radical&quot; approach to different races and its high degree of success when compared with other games in the genre. IGN was also positive about the unit arrangements for the three races, crediting Blizzard Entertainment for not letting units become obsolete during extended play and for showing an &quot;extraordinary amount of patience in balancing them.&quot; GameSpot was complimentary of the species in its review for &quot;StarCraft&quot;, describing the races as being full of personality. Stating that the use of distinct races allowed for the game &quot;to avoid the problem [of equal sides] that has plagued every other game in the genre&quot;, GameSpot praised Blizzard Entertainment for keeping it &quot;well balanced despite the great diversity.&quot;

Other reviews have echoed much of this positive reception. The site The Gamers&#x27; Temple described the species as &quot;very diverse but well-balanced, &quot; stating that this allowed for &quot;a challenging and fun gaming experience.&quot; Allgame stated that the inclusion of three &quot;dynamic&quot; species &quot;raises the bar&quot; for real-time strategy games, complimenting the game for forcing the player to &quot;learn how [the aliens&#x27;] minds work and not think like a human&quot;. Commentators have also praised the aesthetic design of the three races; in particular, the powered armor worn by the Terran Marine was rated eleventh on in a &quot;Maxim&quot; feature on the top armor suits in video games, and ninth in a similar feature by Machinima.com.

This positive view, however, is not universally held. For example, &quot;Computer and Video Games&quot;, while describing the game as &quot;highly playable, &quot; nevertheless described a &quot;slight feeling of déjà vu&quot; between the three races.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q845913" start="4" end="8" title="Zerg" label="Zerg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463788" start="33" end="42" title="Insectoids in science fiction" label="insectoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q290106" start="193" end="202" title="StarCraft" label="StarCraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q559618" start="231" end="249" title="fictional universe" label="fictional universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611246" start="469" end="478" title="Group mind (science fiction)" label="hive mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q189800" start="668" end="677" title="gene pool" label="gene pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653898" start="1258" end="1277" title="Swarming (military)" label="numerical advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283786" start="1378" end="1389" title="PC Gamer UK" label="PC Gamer UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890036" start="1461" end="1470" title="Zerg Rush" label="Zerg Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="1638" end="1647" title="Attrition warfare" label="attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467464" start="1651" end="1664" title="Force concentration" label="sheer numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q189800" start="2384" end="2393" title="gene pool" label="gene pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q205418" start="2445" end="2453" title="Blizzard" label="Blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q845913" start="2473" end="2483" title="Zerg" label="Zerg Swarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="2560" end="2569" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q430880" start="2586" end="2610" title="collective consciousness" label="collective consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3190" end="3203" title="Characters of StarCraft#The Overmind" label="Zerg Overmind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641393" start="5100" end="5117" title="self preservation" label="self preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q290106" start="7394" end="7418" title="United Earth Directorate" label="United Earth Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q290106" start="7981" end="7994" title="Xel&amp;#x27;Naga" label="Xel&amp;#x27;Naga"/>
<link wikidata="Q103569" start="8978" end="8983" title="Alien (film)" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333552" start="9493" end="9501" title="hatchery" label="hatchery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199501" start="9585" end="9600" title="technology tree" label="technology tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890036" start="9779" end="9791" title="rush (video gaming)" label="rush tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q165929" start="10115" end="10124" title="StarCraft (video game)" label="StarCraft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10560" end="10568" title="Koprulu Sector#Tarsonis" label="Tarsonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q286359" start="10613" end="10627" title="Sarah Kerrigan" label="Sarah Kerrigan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10688" end="10692" title="Koprulu Sector#Char" label="Char"/>
<link wikidata="Q853610" start="10736" end="10743" title="Zeratul" label="Zeratul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10806" end="10810" title="Koprulu Sector#Aiur" label="Aiur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10992" end="11000" title="Characters of StarCraft#Tassadar" label="Tassadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622279" start="11785" end="11795" title="Jim Raynor" label="Jim Raynor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11800" end="11805" title="Characters of StarCraft#Fenix" label="Fenix"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12234" end="12264" title="StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty" label="StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12682" end="12714" title="StarCraft II: Heart of the Swarm" label="StarCraft II: Heart of the Swarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="14941" end="14946" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q752673" start="15038" end="15056" title="asymmetric warfare" label="asymmetric warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="15378" end="15388" title="IGN" label="IGN&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q45836" start="15891" end="15899" title="GameSpot" label="GameSpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118540" start="16539" end="16546" title="Allgame" label="Allgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q938523" start="16887" end="16900" title="powered exoskeleton" label="powered armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552325" start="16960" end="16965" title="Maxim (magazine)" label="Maxim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043544" start="17053" end="17066" title="Machinima.com" label="Machinima.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q277666" start="17142" end="17166" title="Computer and Video Games" label="Computer and Video Games"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42673" wikidata="Q3398593" url="?curid=42673" title="How Green Was My Valley">
<text>How Green Was My Valley is a 1939 novel by Richard Llewellyn, narrated by Huw Morgan, the main character, about his Welsh family and the mining community in which they live. The author had claimed that he based the book on his own experiences, but this was found after his death to be untrue; Llewellyn was English-born and spent little time in Wales, though he was of Welsh descent. Llewellyn gathered material for the novel from conversations with local mining families in the village of Gilfach Goch, in southeast Wales.

In the United States, Llewellyn won the National Book Award for favourite novel of 1940, voted by members of the American Booksellers Association.

==Plot summary==

The novel is set in South Wales during the reigns of Queen Victoria and King Edward VII. It tells the story of the Morgans, a respectable mining family of the South Wales Valleys, through the eyes of the youngest son, Huw Morgan.

Huw&#x27;s academic ability sets him apart from his elder brothers and enables him to consider a future away from the dangerous coal mines. He loses his opportunity because of fighting with a schoolmaster who punishes children for speaking Welsh. His five brothers and his father are miners. After his eldest brother, Ivor, is killed in a mining accident, Huw moves in with Ivor&#x27;s young widow, Bronwen, with whom he has always secretly been in love.

One of Huw&#x27;s three sisters, Angharad, marries Iestyn Evans, the wealthy mine owner&#x27;s son – whom she does not love – and the marriage is an unhappy one. She never overcomes her romantic relationship with Merddyn Gruffydd, a local minister, who had declined to marry her because of his poverty.

Huw&#x27;s father is later killed in a mine disaster. After everyone Huw has known either dies or moves away, and the village is reduced to a contaminated shell, and the house is being destroyed by a slag heap, he too decides to leave, and tells the story of his life just before going away.

==Characters==
The Older Morgans:
*Gwilym Morgan, Huw&#x27;s father: wants things done properly, with attention to manners, and a minding of one&#x27;s own business
*Beth Morgan, Huw&#x27;s mother: devoted to her children and husband, uneducated, struggles with her temper
*Ivor Morgan, Huw&#x27;s eldest brother, marries Bronwen, sides with the father against the strike, defends sister Angharad against Iestyn Evans&#x27; initial familiarity
*Bronwen Morgan, Huw&#x27;s sister-in-law: a gentle, insightful woman to whom Huw goes when he is troubled or wants to learn information that the adults hold from him. She is the mother of young boys, Gareth and Taliesin

The Middle Brothers:
These are Huw&#x27;s young adult brothers. Ianto goes to London to find work early in the book, but returns unhappily; Owen and Gwilym do the same later.

*Ianto Morgan, Huw&#x27;s second-oldest brother
*Davy Morgan, a leader in the miners&#x27; union, marries Ethelwyn Rowlands
*Owen Morgan, an inventor, often found in the shed behind the house working on an engine
*Gwilym Morgan (junior), married to Marged Evans after Owen breaks off with her

The Younger Morgans: 
*Angharad Morgan, Huw&#x27;s sister, marries Iestyn Evans
*Ceridwen Morgan, Huw&#x27;s sister, marries Blethyn Llywarch
*Huw Morgan, the Narrator
*Olwen Morgan, Huw&#x27;s youngest sister
Other characters:
*Merddyn Gruffydd, the preacher who is loved by Angharad, helps Huw recover from his illness, and is supportive of the Morgans
*Iestyn Evans, an arrogant dandy, son of the mine owner, who courts Angharad. According to Young Gwilym, &quot;a purse-proud ninny&quot; 
*Master Elijah Jonas-Sessions, a harsh teacher who makes Huw&#x27;s life miserable. He is pro-English, and ashamed of his Welsh heritage 
*Ceinwen Phillips, a manipulative young girl in love with Huw 
*Abishai Elias the Shop, enemy of the Morgan family 
*Dai Bando, Huw&#x27;s boxing teacher
*Cyfartha Lewis, Dai&#x27;s close friend

==First printing==
The first edition was published in 1939 by Michael Joseph Ltd, London. The first printing included a limited edition run of 200, numbered and signed by Richard Llewellyn. The original print run also included a glossary covering Welsh words and terms at the end of the book. 

==Sequels==
The author continued the story of Huw Morgan&#x27;s life in three sequels:
*&quot;Up, into the Singing Mountain&quot; (1960) – Huw emigrates to the Welsh colony in Patagonia, Argentina
*&quot;Down Where the Moon is Small&quot; (1966) – Huw&#x27;s life in Argentina
*&quot;Green, Green My Valley Now&quot; (1975) – Huw returns to Wales

==Adaptations==

The 1941 Hollywood film adaptation, which was highly successful, had a cast that included Walter Pidgeon, Maureen O&#x27;Hara, Anna Lee, Roddy McDowall (as Huw), Donald Crisp, and Barry Fitzgerald. None of the leading players was Welsh (though Welsh actor Rhys Williams made his screen debut in the film in a minor role). Directed by John Ford, &quot;How Green Was My Valley&quot; was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry. &quot;How Green Was My Valley&quot; is available on DVD from 20th Century Fox as part of their 20th Century Fox Studio Classics collection.

The book has twice been adapted by the BBC for television, in 1960 and 1975. The 1960 adaptation featured Eynon Evans, Rachel Thomas and Glyn Houston. The 1975 production, scripted by Elaine Morgan, starred Stanley Baker, (Dame) Siân Phillips, and Nerys Hughes.

The novel was adapted as a Broadway musical, called &quot;A Time for Singing&quot;, which opened at the Broadway Theatre, New York, on 21 May 1966. The music was by John Morris; book and lyrics were by Gerald Freedman and John Morris. The production was directed by Mr. Freedman, and it starred Ivor Emmanuel, Tessie O&#x27;Shea, Shani Wallis, and Laurence Naismith.

A stage version, adapted by Shaun McKenna was performed at the Theatre Royal in Northampton in 1990. It marked the stage debut of Aled Jones as the teenage Huw. It was directed by Michael Napier Brown and designed by Ray Lett.

In 2017, the book was also adapted as a short film, parts of which are shown in the music video for the song Pleader by the band alt-J.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q561435" start="43" end="60" title="Richard Llewellyn" label="Richard Llewellyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865597" start="137" end="143" title="Mining in Wales" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401786" start="490" end="502" title="Gilfach Goch" label="Gilfach Goch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="565" end="584" title="List of National Book Award winners#1935 to 1941" label="National Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743232" start="638" end="670" title="American Booksellers Association" label="American Booksellers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="711" end="722" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="744" end="758" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="763" end="778" title="Edward VII of the United Kingdom" label="King Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400474" start="850" end="869" title="South Wales Valleys" label="South Wales Valleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550225" start="1261" end="1276" title="mining accident" label="mining accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999138" start="4000" end="4018" title="Michael Joseph (publisher)" label="Michael Joseph Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q107708359" start="4327" end="4356" title="Up, into the Singing Mountain" label="Up, into the Singing Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q478236" start="4393" end="4405" title="Y Wladfa" label="Welsh colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="4409" end="4418" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602174" start="4517" end="4543" title="Green, Green My Valley Now" label="Green, Green My Valley Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q350640" start="4688" end="4702" title="Walter Pidgeon" label="Walter Pidgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q229276" start="4704" end="4723" title="Maureen O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="Maureen O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q460474" start="4725" end="4733" title="Anna Lee" label="Anna Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q283988" start="4735" end="4749" title="Roddy McDowall" label="Roddy McDowall"/>
<link wikidata="Q367073" start="4760" end="4772" title="Donald Crisp" label="Donald Crisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q290666" start="4778" end="4794" title="Barry Fitzgerald" label="Barry Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="5030" end="5052" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="5115" end="5131" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5234" end="5237" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q97585889" start="5276" end="5291" title="How Green Was My Valley (1960 TV series)" label="1960 adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422950" start="5301" end="5312" title="Eynon Evans" label="Eynon Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279427" start="5314" end="5327" title="Rachel Thomas (actress)" label="Rachel Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109365" start="5332" end="5344" title="Glyn Houston" label="Glyn Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917736" start="5350" end="5365" title="How Green Was My Valley (mini-series)" label="1975 production"/>
<link wikidata="Q449734" start="5379" end="5392" title="Elaine Morgan" label="Elaine Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306352" start="5402" end="5415" title="Stanley Baker" label="Stanley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5417" end="5437" title="(Dame) Siân Phillips" label="(Dame) Siân Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q13130360" start="5443" end="5455" title="Nerys Hughes" label="Nerys Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660153" start="5516" end="5534" title="A Time for Singing" label="A Time for Singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490911" start="5854" end="5867" title="Shaun McKenna" label="Shaun McKenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q15273466" start="5889" end="5902" title="Royal Theatre (Northampton)" label="Theatre Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192240" start="5906" end="5917" title="Northampton" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849861" start="5956" end="5966" title="Aled Jones" label="Aled Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q16104622" start="6006" end="6026" title="Michael Napier Brown" label="Michael Napier Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q47996" start="6183" end="6188" title="alt-J" label="alt-J"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42674" wikidata="Q940334" url="?curid=42674" title="Shor's algorithm">
<text>Shor&#x27;s algorithm is a quantum algorithm for finding the prime factors of an integer. It was developed in 1994 by the American mathematician Peter Shor. It is one of the few known quantum algorithms with compelling potential applications and strong evidence of superpolynomial speedup compared to best known classical (non-quantum) algorithms. On the other hand, factoring numbers of practical significance requires far more qubits than available in the near future. Another concern is that noise in quantum circuits may undermine results, requiring additional qubits for quantum error correction.

Shor proposed multiple similar algorithms for solving the factoring problem, the discrete logarithm problem, and the period-finding problem. &quot;Shor&#x27;s algorithm&quot; usually refers to the factoring algorithm, but may refer to any of the three algorithms. The discrete logarithm algorithm and the factoring algorithm are instances of the period-finding algorithm, and all three are instances of the hidden subgroup problem.

On a quantum computer, to factor an integer formula_1, Shor&#x27;s algorithm runs in polynomial time, meaning the time taken is polynomial in formula_2. It takes quantum gates of order formula_3 using fast multiplication, or even formula_4 utilizing the asymptotically fastest multiplication algorithm currently known due to Harvey and Van Der Hoven, thus demonstrating that the integer factorization problem can be efficiently solved on a quantum computer and is consequently in the complexity class [[BQP]]. This is significantly faster than the most efficient known classical factoring algorithm, the general number field sieve, which works in sub-exponential time: formula_5.

== Feasibility and impact ==

If a quantum computer with a sufficient number of qubits could operate without succumbing to quantum noise and other quantum-decoherence phenomena, then Shor&#x27;s algorithm could be used to break public-key cryptography schemes, such as

* The RSA scheme
* The finite-field Diffie–Hellman key exchange
* The elliptic-curve Diffie–Hellman key exchange

RSA can be broken if factoring large integers is computationally feasible. As far as is known, this is not possible using classical (non-quantum) computers; no classical algorithm is known that can factor integers in polynomial time. However, Shor&#x27;s algorithm shows that factoring integers is efficient on an ideal quantum computer, so it may be feasible to defeat RSA by constructing a large quantum computer. It was also a powerful motivator for the design and construction of quantum computers, and for the study of new quantum-computer algorithms. It has also facilitated research on new cryptosystems that are secure from quantum computers, collectively called post-quantum cryptography.

=== Physical implementation ===
Given the high error rates of contemporary quantum computers and too few qubits to use quantum error correction, laboratory demonstrations obtain correct results only in a fraction of attempts.

In 2001, Shor&#x27;s algorithm was demonstrated by a group at IBM, who factored formula_6 into formula_7, using an NMR implementation of a quantum computer with seven qubits. After IBM&#x27;s implementation, two independent groups implemented Shor&#x27;s algorithm using photonic qubits, emphasizing that multi-qubit entanglement was observed when running the Shor&#x27;s algorithm circuits. In 2012, the factorization of formula_6 was performed with solid-state qubits. Later, in 2012, the factorization of formula_9 was achieved. In 2016, the factorization of formula_6 was performed again using trapped-ion qubits with a recycling technique. In 2019, an attempt was made to factor the number formula_11 using Shor&#x27;s algorithm on an IBM Q System One, but the algorithm failed because of accumulating errors. However, all these demonstrations have compiled the algorithm by making use of prior knowledge of the answer, and some have even oversimplified the algorithm in a way that makes it equivalent to coin flipping. Furthermore, attempts using quantum computers with other algorithms have been made. However, these algorithms are similar to classical brute-force checking of factors, so unlike Shor&#x27;s algorithm, they are not expected to ever perform better than classical factoring algorithms.

Theoretical analyses of Shor&#x27;s algorithm assume a quantum computer free of noise and errors. However, near-term practical implementations will have to deal with such undesired phenomena (when more qubits are available, quantum error correction can help). In 2023, Jin-Yi Cai showed that in the presence of noise, Shor&#x27;s algorithm fails asymptotically almost surely for large semiprimes that are products of two primes in . These primes formula_12 have the property that formula_13 has a prime factor larger than formula_14, and have a positive density in the set of all primes. Hence error correction will be needed to be able to factor all numbers with Shor&#x27;s algorithm.

== Algorithm ==
The problem that we are trying to solve is: &quot;given an odd composite number formula_1, find its integer factors&quot;.

To achieve this, Shor&#x27;s algorithm consists of two parts:

# A classical reduction of the factoring problem to the problem of order-finding. This reduction is similar to that used for other factoring algorithms, such as the quadratic sieve.
# A quantum algorithm to solve the order-finding problem.

=== Classical reduction ===
A complete factoring algorithm is possible if we&#x27;re able to efficiently factor arbitrary formula_1 into just two integers formula_17 and formula_18 greater than 1, since if either formula_17 or formula_18 are not prime, then the factoring algorithm can in turn be run on those until only primes remain.

A basic observation is that, using Euclid&#x27;s algorithm, we can always compute the GCD between two integers efficiently. In particular, this means we can check efficiently whether formula_1 is even, in which case 2 is trivially a factor. Let us thus assume that formula_1 is odd for the remainder of this discussion. Afterwards, we can use efficient classical algorithms to check whether formula_1 is a prime power. For prime powers, efficient classical factorization algorithms exist, hence the rest of the quantum algorithm may assume that formula_1 is not a prime power.

If those easy cases do not produce a nontrivial factor of formula_1, the algorithm proceeds to handle the remaining case. We pick a random integer formula_26. A possible nontrivial divisor of formula_1 can be found by computing formula_28, which can be done classically and efficiently using the Euclidean algorithm. If this produces a nontrivial factor (meaning formula_29), the algorithm is finished, and the other nontrivial factor is formula_30. If a nontrivial factor was not identified, then this means that formula_1 and the choice of formula_32 are coprime, so formula_33 is contained in the multiplicative group of integers modulo formula_34, having a multiplicative inverse modulo formula_34. Thus, formula_33 has a multiplicative order formula_37 modulo formula_34, meaning
: formula_39
and formula_40 is the smallest positive integer satisfying this congruence.

The quantum subroutine finds formula_40. It can be seen from the congruence that formula_1 divides formula_43, written formula_44. This can be factored using difference of squares:
formula_45
Since we have factored the expression in this way, the algorithm doesn&#x27;t work for odd formula_37 (because formula_47 must be an integer), meaning that the algorithm would have to restart with a new formula_32. Hereafter we can therefore assume that formula_37 is even. It cannot be the case that formula_50, since this would imply formula_51, which would contradictorily imply that formula_52 would be the order of formula_32, which was already formula_37. At this point, it may or may not be the case that formula_55. If it is not true that formula_55, then this means that we are able to find a nontrivial factor of formula_1. We compute
formula_58
If formula_59, then formula_55 was true, and a nontrivial factor of formula_1 cannot be achieved from formula_32, and the algorithm must restart with a new formula_32. Otherwise, we have found a nontrivial factor of formula_1, with the other being formula_65, and the algorithm is finished. For this step, it is also equivalent to compute formula_66; it will produce a nontrivial factor if formula_67 is nontrivial, and will not if it&#x27;s trivial (where formula_55).

The algorithm restated shortly follows: let formula_1 be odd, and not a prime power. We want to output two nontrivial factors of formula_1.
# Pick a random number formula_71.
# Compute formula_72, the greatest common divisor of formula_32 and formula_1.
# If formula_75, then formula_76 is a nontrivial factor of formula_1, with the other factor being formula_78, and we are done.
# Otherwise, use the quantum subroutine to find the order formula_37 of formula_33.
# If formula_37 is odd, then go back to step 1.
# Compute formula_82. If formula_83 is nontrivial, the other factor is formula_84, and we&#x27;re done. Otherwise, go back to step 1.

It has been shown that this will be likely to succeed after a few runs. In practice, a single call to the quantum order-finding subroutine is enough to completely factor formula_34 with very high probability of success if one uses a more advanced reduction.

=== Quantum order-finding subroutine ===
The goal of the quantum subroutine of Shor&#x27;s algorithm is, given coprime integers formula_1 and formula_87, to find the order formula_37 of formula_33 modulo formula_34, which is the smallest positive integer such that formula_91. To achieve this, Shor&#x27;s algorithm uses a quantum circuit involving two registers. The second register uses formula_92 qubits, where formula_92 is the smallest integer such that formula_94, i.e., formula_95. The size of the first register determines how accurate of an approximation the circuit produces. It can be shown that using formula_96 qubits gives sufficient accuracy to find formula_37. The exact quantum circuit depends on the parameters formula_33 and formula_34, which define the problem. The following description of the algorithm uses bra–ket notation to denote quantum states, and formula_100 to denote the tensor product, rather than logical AND.

The algorithm consists of two main steps:

# Use quantum phase estimation with unitary formula_101 representing the operation of multiplying by formula_33 (modulo formula_34), and input state formula_104 (where the second register is formula_105 made from formula_106 qubits). The eigenvalues of this formula_101 encode information about the period, and formula_105 can be seen to be writable as a sum of its eigenvectors. Thanks to these properties, the quantum phase estimation stage gives as output a random integer of the form formula_109 for random formula_110.
# Use the continued fractions algorithm to extract the period formula_40 from the measurement outcomes obtained in the previous stage. This is a procedure to post-process (with a classical computer) the measurement data obtained from measuring the output quantum states, and retrieve the period.

The connection with quantum phase estimation was not discussed in the original formulation of Shor&#x27;s algorithm, but was later proposed by Kitaev.

==== Quantum phase estimation ====

In general the quantum phase estimation algorithm, for any unitary formula_101 and eigenstate formula_113 such that formula_114, sends input states formula_115 to output states close to formula_116, where formula_117 is a superposition of integers close to formula_118. In other words, it sends each eigenstate formula_119 of formula_101 to a state containing information close to the associated eigenvalue. For the purposes of quantum order-finding, we employ this strategy using the unitary defined by the action
formula_121
The action of formula_101 on states formula_123 with formula_124 is not crucial to the functioning of the algorithm, but needs to be included to ensure that the overall transformation is a well-defined quantum gate. Implementing the circuit for quantum phase estimation with formula_101 requires being able to efficiently implement the gates formula_126. This can be accomplished via modular exponentiation, which is the slowest part of the algorithm.

The gate thus defined satisfies formula_127, which immediately implies that its eigenvalues are the formula_40-th roots of unity formula_129. Furthermore, each eigenvalue formula_130 has an eigenvector of the form formula_131, and these eigenvectors are such that
formula_132
where the last identity follows from the geometric series formula, which implies formula_133.

Using quantum phase estimation on an input state formula_134 would then return the integer formula_135 with high probability. More precisely, the quantum phase estimation circuit sends formula_134 to formula_137 such that the resulting probability distribution formula_138 is peaked around formula_139, with formula_140. This probability can be made arbitrarily close to 1 using extra qubits.

Applying the above reasoning to the input formula_141, quantum phase estimation thus results in the evolution
formula_142
Measuring the first register, we now have a balanced probability formula_143 to find each formula_144, each one giving an integer approximation to formula_145, which can be divided by formula_146 to get a decimal approximation for formula_147.

==== Continued-fraction algorithm to retrieve the period ====
Then, we apply the continued-fraction algorithm to find integers formula_148 and formula_149, where formula_150 gives the best fraction approximation for the approximation measured from the circuit, for formula_151 and coprime formula_148 and formula_149. The number of qubits in the first register, formula_154, which determines the accuracy of the approximation, guarantees that
formula_155
given the best approximation from the superposition of formula_144 was measured (which can be made arbitrarily likely by using extra bits and truncating the output). However, while formula_148 and formula_149 are coprime, it may be the case that formula_159 and formula_40 are not coprime. Because of that, formula_148 and formula_149 may have lost some factors that were in formula_159 and formula_40. This can be remedied by rerunning the quantum order-finding subroutine an arbitrary number of times, to produce a list of fraction approximations
formula_165
where formula_166 is the number of times the subroutine was run. Each formula_167 will have different factors taken out of it because the circuit will (likely) have measured multiple different possible values of formula_159. To recover the actual formula_40 value, we can take the least common multiple of each formula_167:
formula_171
The least common multiple will be the order formula_40 of the original integer formula_33 with high probability. In practice, a single run of the quantum order-finding subroutine is in general enough if more advanced post-processing is used.

==== Choosing the size of the first register ====
Phase estimation requires choosing the size of the first register to determine the accuracy of the algorithm, and for the quantum subroutine of Shor&#x27;s algorithm, formula_154 qubits is sufficient to guarantee that the optimal bitstring measured from phase estimation (meaning the formula_123 where formula_176 is the most accurate approximation of the phase from phase estimation) will allow the actual value of formula_40 to be recovered.

Each formula_144 before measurement in Shor&#x27;s algorithm represents a superposition of integers approximating formula_145. Let formula_123 represent the most optimal integer in formula_144. The following theorem guarantees that the continued fractions algorithm will recover formula_147 from formula_183:

 As formula_184 is the optimal bitstring from phase estimation, formula_183 is accurate to formula_147 by formula_154 bits. Thus,formula_188which implies that the continued fractions algorithm will recover formula_159 and formula_40 (or with their greatest common divisor taken out).

=== The bottleneck ===
The runtime bottleneck of Shor&#x27;s algorithm is quantum modular exponentiation, which is by far slower than the quantum Fourier transform and classical pre-/post-processing. There are several approaches to constructing and optimizing circuits for modular exponentiation. The simplest and (currently) most practical approach is to mimic conventional arithmetic circuits with reversible gates, starting with ripple-carry adders. Knowing the base and the modulus of exponentiation facilitates further optimizations. Reversible circuits typically use on the order of formula_191 gates for formula_106 qubits. Alternative techniques asymptotically improve gate counts by using quantum Fourier transforms, but are not competitive with fewer than 600 qubits owing to high constants.

== Period finding and discrete logarithms ==
Shor&#x27;s algorithms for the discrete log and the order finding problems are instances of an algorithm solving the period finding problem.. All three are instances of the hidden subgroup problem.

=== Shor&#x27;s algorithm for discrete logarithms ===
Given a group formula_193 with order formula_17 and generator formula_195, suppose we know that formula_196, for some formula_197, and we wish to compute formula_37, which is the discrete logarithm: formula_199. Consider the abelian group formula_200, where each factor corresponds to modular addition of values. Now, consider the function

:formula_201

This gives us an abelian hidden subgroup problem, where formula_202 corresponds to a group homomorphism. The kernel corresponds to the multiples of formula_203. So, if we can find the kernel, we can find formula_37. A quantum algorithm for solving this problem exists. This algorithm is, like the factor-finding algorithm, due to Peter Shor and both are implemented by creating a superposition through using Hadamard gates, followed by implementing formula_202 as a quantum transform, followed finally by a quantum Fourier transform. Due to this, the quantum algorithm for computing the discrete logarithm is also occasionally referred to as &quot;Shor&#x27;s Algorithm.&quot;

The order-finding problem can also be viewed as a hidden subgroup problem. To see this, consider the group of integers under addition, and for a given formula_206 such that: formula_207, the function
:formula_208
For any finite abelian group formula_193, a quantum algorithm exists for solving the hidden subgroup for formula_193 in polynomial time.

==Shor&#x27;s algorithm Qiskit implementation==
The quantum circuit shown here is from a simple example of how Shor&#x27;s algorithm can be implemented in Python using Qiskit, an open-source quantum computing software development framework by IBM.

== See also ==
* GEECM, a factorization algorithm said to be &quot;often much faster than Shor&#x27;s&quot;
* Grover&#x27;s algorithm

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* &quot;Explanation for the man in the street&quot; by Scott Aaronson, &quot;approved&quot; by Peter Shor. (Shor wrote &quot;Great article, Scott! That’s the best job of explaining quantum computing to the man on the street that I’ve seen.&quot;). An alternate metaphor for the QFT was presented in one of the comments. Scott Aaronson suggests the following 12 references as further reading (out of &quot;the 10105000 quantum algorithm tutorials that are already on the web.&quot;):
* . Revised version of the original paper by Peter Shor (&quot;28 pages, LaTeX. This is an expanded version of a paper that appeared in the Proceedings of the 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, Santa Fe, NM, Nov. 20--22, 1994. Minor revisions made January, 1996&quot;).
* Quantum Computing and Shor&#x27;s Algorithm, Matthew Hayward&#x27;s Quantum Algorithms Page, 2005-02-17, imsa.edu, LaTeX2HTML version of the original LaTeX document, also available as PDF or postscript document.
* Quantum Computation and Shor&#x27;s Factoring Algorithm, Ronald de Wolf, CWI and University of Amsterdam, January 12, 1999, 9 page postscript document.
* Shor&#x27;s Factoring Algorithm, Notes from Lecture 9 of Berkeley CS 294–2, dated 4 Oct 2004, 7 page postscript document.
* Chapter 6 Quantum Computation , 91 page postscript document, Caltech, Preskill, PH229.
* Quantum computation: a tutorial by Samuel L. Braunstein.
* The Quantum States of Shor&#x27;s Algorithm, by Neal Young, Last modified: Tue May 21 11:47:38 1996.
* III. Breaking RSA Encryption with a Quantum Computer: Shor&#x27;s Factoring Algorithm, Lecture notes on Quantum computation, Cornell University, Physics 481–681, CS 483; Spring, 2006 by N. David Mermin. Last revised 2006-03-28, 30 page PDF document.
* This paper is a written version of a one-hour lecture given on Peter Shor&#x27;s quantum factoring algorithm. 22 pages.
* Chapter 20 Quantum Computation, from &quot;Computational Complexity: A Modern Approach&quot;, Draft of a book: Dated January 2007, Sanjeev Arora and Boaz Barak, Princeton University. Published as Chapter 10 Quantum Computation of Sanjeev Arora, Boaz Barak, &quot;Computational Complexity: A Modern Approach&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 2009, 
* A Step Toward Quantum Computing: Entangling 10 Billion Particles , from &quot;Discover Magazine&quot;, Dated January 19, 2011.
* Josef Gruska - &quot;Quantum Computing Challenges&quot; also in Mathematics unlimited: 2001 and beyond, Editors Björn Engquist, Wilfried Schmid, Springer, 2001, 

==External links==
* Version 1.0.0 of libquantum: contains a C language implementation of Shor&#x27;s algorithm with their simulated quantum computer library, but the width variable in shor.c should be set to 1 to improve the runtime complexity.
* PBS Infinite Series created two videos explaining the math behind Shor&#x27;s algorithm, &quot;How to Break Cryptography&quot; and &quot;Hacking at Quantum Speed with Shor&#x27;s Algorithm&quot;.
* Complete implementation of Shor&#x27;s algorithm with Classiq</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q940334" start="0" end="21" title="Shor&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Shor&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623817" start="27" end="44" title="quantum algorithm" label="quantum algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="61" end="73" title="prime factor" label="prime factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q370071" start="145" end="155" title="Peter Shor" label="Peter Shor"/>
<link wikidata="Q378201" start="429" end="435" title="qubit" label="qubits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536431" start="576" end="600" title="quantum error correction" label="quantum error correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846249" start="661" end="678" title="Integer factorization" label="factoring problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q864003" start="684" end="710" title="Discrete logarithm" label="discrete logarithm problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752087" start="1010" end="1033" title="hidden subgroup problem" label="hidden subgroup problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="1121" end="1136" title="polynomial time" label="polynomial time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118982" start="1198" end="1211" title="quantum logic gate" label="quantum gates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1372" end="1385" title="Van Der Hoven" label="Van Der Hoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846249" start="1415" end="1436" title="integer factorization" label="integer factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q908207" start="1520" end="1536" title="complexity class" label="complexity class"/>
<link wikidata="Q940334" start="1537" end="1544" title="Shor&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="[[BQP]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q140770" start="1640" end="1666" title="general number field sieve" label="general number field sieve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1683" end="1703" title="Time complexity#Sub-exponential time" label="sub-exponential time"/>
<link wikidata="Q378201" start="1797" end="1802" title="qubit" label="qubit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269075" start="1840" end="1853" title="quantum noise" label="quantum noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q578430" start="1864" end="1883" title="quantum decoherence" label="quantum-decoherence"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="1945" end="1968" title="public-key cryptography" label="public-key cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q181551" start="1993" end="1996" title="RSA (cryptosystem)" label="RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q623447" start="2023" end="2037" title="Diffie–Hellman" label="Diffie–Hellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233576" start="2772" end="2797" title="post-quantum cryptography" label="post-quantum cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536431" start="2919" end="2943" title="quantum error correction" label="quantum error correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="3089" end="3092" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q847019" start="3142" end="3160" title="Nuclear magnetic resonance quantum computer" label="NMR implementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q467054" start="3298" end="3306" title="Photonics" label="photonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215675" start="3344" end="3356" title="quantum entanglement" label="entanglement"/>
<link wikidata="Q60626630" start="3771" end="3783" title="IBM Q System One" label="Q System One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536431" start="4560" end="4584" title="quantum error correction" label="quantum error correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q62559624" start="4605" end="4615" title="Jin-Yi Cai" label="Jin-Yi Cai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434353" start="4682" end="4710" title="asymptotically almost surely" label="asymptotically almost surely"/>
<link wikidata="Q50707" start="5103" end="5119" title="composite number" label="composite number"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846249" start="5140" end="5155" title="Integer factorization" label="integer factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q589491" start="5294" end="5299" title="Order (group theory)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846249" start="5358" end="5378" title="integer factorization" label="factoring algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151850" start="5392" end="5407" title="quadratic sieve" label="quadratic sieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q230848" start="5840" end="5863" title="Euclidean algorithm" label="Euclid&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q131752" start="5891" end="5894" title="Greatest common divisor" label="GCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667469" start="6211" end="6222" title="prime power" label="prime power"/>
<link wikidata="Q230848" start="6679" end="6698" title="Euclidean algorithm" label="Euclidean algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q104752" start="6940" end="6947" title="coprime" label="coprime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169249" start="6983" end="7033" title="multiplicative group of integers modulo n" label="multiplicative group of integers modulo formula_34"/>
<link wikidata="Q216906" start="7044" end="7066" title="multiplicative inverse" label="multiplicative inverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q282723" start="7109" end="7129" title="multiplicative order" label="multiplicative order"/>
<link wikidata="Q50708" start="7349" end="7356" title="divides" label="divides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017274" start="7416" end="7437" title="difference of squares" label="difference of squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q131752" start="8778" end="8801" title="greatest common divisor" label="greatest common divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q945127" start="8869" end="8879" title="nontrivial" label="nontrivial"/>
<link wikidata="Q104752" start="9595" end="9611" title="coprime integers" label="coprime integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q282723" start="9650" end="9698" title="Multiplicative order" label="order formula_37 of formula_33 modulo formula_34"/>
<link wikidata="Q59090" start="10314" end="10330" title="bra–ket notation" label="bra–ket notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163016" start="10387" end="10401" title="tensor product" label="tensor product"/>
<link wikidata="Q191081" start="10415" end="10426" title="logical AND" label="logical AND"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835770" start="10478" end="10502" title="Quantum phase estimation algorithm" label="quantum phase estimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q206816" start="11006" end="11035" title="simple continued fraction" label="continued fractions algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835770" start="11496" end="11530" title="quantum phase estimation algorithm" label="quantum phase estimation algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228841" start="12392" end="12414" title="modular exponentiation" label="modular exponentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q756747" start="12575" end="12589" title="Root of unity" label="roots of unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306887" start="12778" end="12794" title="geometric series" label="geometric series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835770" start="12838" end="12862" title="Quantum phase estimation algorithm" label="quantum phase estimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115724" start="13674" end="13692" title="continued fraction" label="continued-fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q104752" start="13874" end="13881" title="Coprime integers" label="coprime"/>
<link wikidata="Q102761" start="14890" end="14911" title="least common multiple" label="least common multiple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228841" start="16360" end="16382" title="modular exponentiation" label="modular exponentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464944" start="16416" end="16441" title="quantum Fourier transform" label="quantum Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q185410" start="16678" end="16694" title="reversible computing" label="reversible gates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16710" end="16729" title="Adder (electronics)#Ripple-carry adder" label="ripple-carry adders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464944" start="16976" end="17001" title="quantum Fourier transform" label="quantum Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q864003" start="17157" end="17169" title="Discrete logarithm" label="discrete log"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752087" start="17299" end="17322" title="hidden subgroup problem" label="hidden subgroup problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="17387" end="17392" title="Group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q643669" start="17431" end="17440" title="Generator (mathematics)" label="generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q864003" start="17558" end="17576" title="discrete logarithm" label="discrete logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="17604" end="17617" title="abelian group" label="abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752087" start="17759" end="17782" title="hidden subgroup problem" label="hidden subgroup problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q868169" start="17819" end="17837" title="group homomorphism" label="group homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q574844" start="17843" end="17849" title="Kernel (algebra)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q70490607" start="18931" end="18937" title="Qiskit" label="Qiskit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19029" end="19034" title="Lenstra elliptic-curve factorization#Quantum version (GEECM)" label="GEECM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028292" start="19122" end="19145" title="Grover&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Grover&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4054157" start="19244" end="19258" title="Scott Aaronson" label="Scott Aaronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18152037" start="21975" end="21994" title="PBS Digital Studios" label="PBS Infinite Series"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42676" wikidata="Q6895745" url="?curid=42676" title="Mold health issues">
<text>Mold health issues refer to the harmful health effects of molds (&quot;moulds&quot; in British English) and their mycotoxins.

Molds are ubiquitous in the biosphere, and mold spores are a common component of household and workplace dust. The vast majority of molds are not hazardous to humans, and reaction to molds can vary between individuals, with relatively minor allergic reactions being the most common. The United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported in its June 2006 report, &#x27;Mold Prevention Strategies and Possible Health Effects in the Aftermath of Hurricanes and Major Floods,&#x27; that &quot;excessive exposure to mold-contaminated materials can cause adverse health effects in susceptible persons regardless of the type of mold or the extent of contamination.&quot; When mold spores are present in abnormally high quantities, they can present especially hazardous health risks to humans after prolonged exposure, including allergic reactions or poisoning by mycotoxins, or causing fungal infection (mycosis).

==Health effects==

People who are atopic (sensitive), already have allergies, asthma, or compromised immune systems and occupy damp or moldy buildings are at an increased risk of health problems such as inflammatory responses to mold spores, metabolites such as mycotoxins, and other components. Other problems are respiratory and/or immune system responses including respiratory symptoms, respiratory infections, exacerbation of asthma, and rarely hypersensitivity pneumonitis, allergic alveolitis, chronic rhinosinusitis and allergic fungal sinusitis. A person&#x27;s reaction to mold depends on their sensitivity and other health conditions, the amount of mold present, length of exposure, and the type of mold or mold products.

The five most common genera of indoor molds are &quot;Cladosporium&quot;, &quot;Penicillium&quot;, &quot;Aspergillus&quot;, &quot;Alternaria&quot;, and &quot;Trichoderma&quot;.

Damp environments that allow mold to grow can also allow the proliferation of bacteria and release volatile organic compounds.

===Symptoms of mold exposure===

Symptoms of mold exposure can include:
* Nasal and sinus congestion, runny nose
* Respiratory problems, such as wheezing and difficulty breathing, chest tightness
* Cough 
* Throat irritation
* Sneezing
==== Health effects linking to asthma ====
Adverse respiratory health effects are associated with occupancy in buildings with moisture and mold damage. Infants in homes with mold have a much greater risk of developing asthma and allergic rhinitis. Infants may develop respiratory symptoms due to exposure to a specific type of fungal mold, called &quot;Penicillium&quot;. Signs that an infant may have mold-related respiratory problems include (but are not limited to) a persistent cough and wheeze. Increased exposure increases the probability of developing respiratory symptoms during their first year of life. As many as 21% of asthma cases may result from exposure to mold.

Mold exposures have a variety of health effects depending on the person. Some people are more sensitive to mold than others. Exposure to mold can cause several health issues such as; throat irritation, nasal stuffiness, eye irritation, cough, and wheezing, as well as skin irritation in some cases. Exposure to mold may also cause heightened sensitivity depending on the time and nature of exposure. People at higher risk for mold allergies are people with chronic lung illnesses and weak immune systems, which can often result in more severe reactions when exposed to mold.

There has been sufficient evidence that damp indoor environments are correlated with upper respiratory tract symptoms such as coughing, and wheezing in people with asthma.

===Flood-specific mold health effects===
Among children and adolescents, the most common health effect post-flooding was lower respiratory tract symptoms, though there was a lack of association with measurements of total fungi. Another study found that these respiratory symptoms were positively associated with exposure to water damaged homes, exposure included being inside without participating in clean up. Despite lower respiratory effects among all children, there was a significant difference in health outcomes between children with pre-existing conditions and children without. Children with pre-existing conditions were at greater risk that can likely be attributed to the greater disruption of care in the face of flooding and natural disaster.

Although mold is the primary focus post flooding for residents, the effects of dampness alone must also be considered. According to the Institute of Medicine, there is a significant association between dampness in the home and wheeze, cough, and upper respiratory symptoms. A later analysis determined that 30% to 50% of asthma-related health outcomes are associated with not only mold, but also dampness in buildings.

While there is a proven correlation between mold exposure and the development of upper and lower respiratory syndromes, there are still fewer incidences of negative health effects than one might expect. Barbeau and colleagues suggested that studies do not show a greater impact from mold exposure for several reasons: 1) the types of health effects are not severe and are therefore not caught; 2) people whose homes have flooded find alternative housing to prevent exposure; 3) self-selection, the healthier people participated in mold clean-up and were less likely to get sick; 4) exposures were time-limited as result of remediation efforts and; 5) the lack of access to health care post-flooding may result in fewer illnesses being discovered and reported for their association with mold. There are also certain notable scientific limitations in studying the exposure effects of dampness and molds on individuals because there are currently no known biomarkers that can prove that a person was exclusively exposed to molds. Thus, it is currently impossible to prove correlation between mold exposure and symptoms.

== Mold-associated conditions ==
Health problems associated with high levels of airborne mold spores include allergic reactions, asthma episodes, irritations of the eye, nose and throat, sinus congestion, and other respiratory problems. Several studies and reviews have suggested that childhood exposure to dampness and mold might contribute to the development of asthma. For example, residents of homes with mold are at an elevated risk for both respiratory infections and bronchitis. When mold spores are inhaled by an immunocompromised individual, some mold spores may begin to grow on living tissue, attaching to cells along the respiratory tract and causing further problems. Generally, when this occurs, the illness is an epiphenomenon and not the primary pathology. Also, mold may produce mycotoxins, either before or after exposure to humans, potentially causing toxicity.

===Fungal infection===

A serious health threat from mold exposure for immunocompromised individuals is systemic fungal infection (systemic mycosis). Immunocompromised individuals exposed to high levels of mold, or individuals with chronic exposure may become infected. Sinuses and digestive tract infections are most common; lung and skin infections are also possible. Mycotoxins may or may not be produced by the invading mold.

Dermatophytes are the parasitic fungi that cause skin infections such as athlete&#x27;s foot and tinea cruris. Most dermatophyte fungi take the form of mold, as opposed to a yeast, with an appearance (when cultured) that is similar to other molds.

Opportunistic infection by molds such as &quot;Talaromyces marneffei&quot; and &quot;Aspergillus fumigatus&quot; is a common cause of illness and death among immunocompromised people, including people with AIDS or asthma.

===Mold-induced hypersensitivity===
The most common form of hypersensitivity is caused by the direct exposure to inhaled mold spores that can be dead or alive or hyphal fragments which can lead to allergic asthma or allergic rhinitis. The most common effects are rhinorrhea (runny nose), watery eyes, coughing and asthma attacks. Another form of hypersensitivity is hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Exposure can occur at home, at work or in other settings. It is predicted that about 5% of people have some airway symptoms due to allergic reactions to molds in their lifetimes.

Hypersensitivity may also be a reaction toward an established fungal infection in allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.

===Mycotoxin toxicity===

Some molds excrete toxic compounds called mycotoxins, secondary metabolites produced by fungi under certain environmental conditions. These environmental conditions affect the production of mycotoxins at the transcription level. Temperature, water activity and pH, strongly influence mycotoxin biosynthesis by increasing the level of transcription within the fungal spore. It has also been found that low levels of fungicides can boost mycotoxin synthesis. Certain mycotoxins can be harmful or lethal to humans and animals when exposure is high enough.

Extreme exposure to very high levels of mycotoxins can lead to neurological problems and, in some cases, death; fortunately, such exposures rarely to never occur in normal exposure scenarios, even in residences with serious mold problems. Prolonged exposure, such as daily workplace exposure, can be particularly harmful.

It is thought that all molds may produce mycotoxins, and thus all molds may be potentially toxic if large enough quantities are ingested, or the human becomes exposed to extreme quantities of mold. Mycotoxins are not produced all the time, but only under specific growing conditions. Mycotoxins are harmful or lethal to humans and animals only when exposure is high enough.

Mycotoxins can be found on the mold spore and mold fragments, and therefore they can also be found on the substrate upon which the mold grows. Routes of entry for these insults can include ingestion, dermal exposure, and inhalation.

Aflatoxin is an example of a mycotoxin. It is a cancer-causing poison produced by certain fungi in or on foods and feeds, especially in field corn and peanuts.

== Exposure sources and prevention ==
The primary sources of mold exposure are from the indoor air in buildings with substantial mold growth and the ingestion of food with mold growths.

===Air===

While mold and related microbial agents can be found both inside and outside, specific factors can lead to significantly higher levels of these microbes, creating a potential health hazard. Several notable factors are water damage in buildings, the use of building materials which provide a suitable substrate and source of food to amplify mold growth, relative humidity, and energy-efficient building designs, which can prevent proper circulation of outside air and create a unique ecology in the built environment. A common issue with mold hazards in the household can be the placement of furniture, resulting in a lack of ventilation of the nearby wall. The simplest method of avoiding mold in a home so affected is to move the furniture in question.

More than half of adult workers in moldy/humid buildings suffer from nasal or sinus symptoms due to mold exposure.

Prevention of mold exposure and its ensuing health issues begins with the prevention of mold growth in the first place by avoiding a mold-supporting environment. Extensive flooding and water damage can support extensive mold growth. Following hurricanes, homes with greater flood damage, especially those with more than of indoor flooding, demonstrated far higher levels of mold growth compared with homes with little or no flooding.

It is useful to perform an assessment of the location and extent of the mold hazard in a structure. Various practices of remediation can be followed to mitigate mold issues in buildings, the most important of which is to reduce moisture levels. Removal of affected materials after the source of moisture has been reduced and/or eliminated may be necessary, as some materials cannot be remediated. Thus, the concept of mold growth, assessment, and remediation is essential in preventing health issues arising due to the presence of dampness and mold.

Molds may excrete liquids or low-volatility gases, but the concentrations are so low that frequently they cannot be detected even with sensitive analytical sampling techniques. Sometimes, these by-products are detectable by odor, in which case they are referred to as &quot;ergonomic odors&quot;, meaning the odors are noticeable but do not indicate toxicologically significant exposures.

===Food===

Molds that are often found on meat and poultry include members of the genera &quot;Alternaria&quot;, &quot;Aspergillus&quot;, &quot;Botrytis&quot;, &quot;Cladosporium&quot;, &quot;Fusarium&quot;, &quot;Geotrichum&quot;, &quot;Mortierella&quot;, &quot;Mucor&quot;, &quot;Neurospora&quot;, &quot;Paecilomyces&quot;, &quot;Penicillium&quot;, and &quot;Rhizopus&quot;. Grain crops in particular incur considerable losses both in field and storage due to pathogens, post-harvest spoilage, and insect damage. A number of common microfungi are important agents of post-harvest spoilage, notably members of the genera &quot;Aspergillus&quot;, &quot;Fusarium&quot;, and &quot;Penicillium&quot;. A number of these produce mycotoxins (soluble, non-volatile toxins produced by a range of microfungi that demonstrate specific and potent toxic properties on human and animal cells) that can render foods unfit for consumption. When ingested, inhaled, or absorbed through skin, mycotoxins may cause or contribute to a range of effects from reduced appetite and general malaise to acute illness or death in rare cases. Mycotoxins may also contribute to cancer. Dietary exposure to the mycotoxin aflatoxin B1, commonly produced by growth of the fungus &quot;Aspergillus flavus&quot; on improperly stored ground nuts in many areas of the developing world, is known to independently (and synergistically with Hepatitis B virus) induce liver cancer. Mycotoxin-contaminated grain and other food products have a significant impact on human and animal health globally. According to the World Health Organization, roughly 25% of the world&#x27;s food may be contaminated by mycotoxins.

Prevention of mold exposure from food is generally to consume food that has no mold growths on it. Also, mold growth in the first place can be prevented by the same concept of mold growth, assessment, and remediation that prevents air exposure. Also, it is especially useful to clean the inside of the refrigerator and to ensure dishcloths, towels, sponges, and mops are clean.

Ruminants are considered to have increased resistance to some mycotoxins, presumably due to the superior mycotoxin-degrading capabilities of their gut microbiota. The passage of mycotoxins through the food chain may also have important consequences on human health. For example, in China in December 2011, high levels of carcinogen aflatoxin M1 in Mengniu brand milk were found to be associated with the consumption of mold-contaminated feed by dairy cattle.

===Bedding===
Bacteria, fungi, allergens, and particle-bound semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOCs) can all be found in bedding and pillows with possible consequences for human health given the high amount of exposure each day. Over 47 species of fungi have been identified in pillows, although the typical range of species found in a single pillow varied between four and sixteen. Compared to feather pillows, synthetic pillows typically display a slightly greater variety of fungal species and significantly higher levels of β‐(1,3)‐glucan, which can cause inflammatory responses. The authors concluded that these and related results suggest feather bedding might be a more appropriate choice for asthmatics than synthetics. Some newer bedding products incorporate silver nanoparticles due to their antibacterial, antifungal, and antiviral properties; however, the long-term safety of this additional exposure to these nanoparticles is relatively unknown, and a conservative approach to the use of these products is recommended.

=== Flooding ===
Flooding in houses causes a unique opportunity for mold growth, which may be attributed to adverse health effects in people exposed to the mold, especially children and adolescents. In a study on the health effects of mold exposure after hurricanes Katrina and Rita, the predominant types of mold were &quot;Aspergillus&quot;, &quot;Penicillium&quot;, and &quot;Cladosporium&quot; with indoor spore counts ranging from 6,142 – 735,123 spores m−3. Molds isolated following flooding were different from mold previously reported for non-water damaged homes in the area. Further research found that homes with greater than three feet of indoor flooding demonstrated significantly higher levels of mold than those with little or no flooding.

==== Mitigation ====

Recommended strategies to prevent mold include avoiding mold-contamination; utilization of environmental controls; the use of personal protective equipment (PPE), including skin and eye protection and respiratory protection; and environmental controls such as ventilation and suppression of dust. When mold cannot be prevented, the CDC recommends clean-up protocol including first taking emergency action to stop water intrusion. Second, they recommend determining the extent of water damage and mold contamination. And third, they recommend planning remediation activities such as establishing containment and protection for workers and occupants; eliminating water or moisture sources if possible; decontaminating or removing damaged materials and drying any wet materials; evaluating whether space has been successfully remediated; and reassembling the space to control sources of moisture.

== History ==
In 1698, the physician Sir John Floyer published the first edition of &quot;A Treatise of the Asthma&quot;, the first English textbook on the malady. In it, he describes how dampness and mold could trigger an asthmatic attack, specifically, &quot;damp houses and fenny [boggy] countries&quot;. He also writes of an asthmatic &quot;who fell into a violent fit by going into a Wine-Cellar&quot;, presumably due to the &quot;fumes&quot; in the air.

In the 1930s, mold was identified as the cause behind the mysterious deaths of farm animals in Russia and other countries. &quot;Stachybotrys chartarum&quot; was found growing on the wet grain used for animal feed. Illness and death also occurred in humans when starving peasants ate large quantities of rotten food grains and cereals heavily overgrown with the &quot;Stachybotrys&quot; mold.

In the 1970s, building construction techniques changed in response to changing economic realities, including the energy crisis. As a result, homes, and buildings became more airtight. Also, cheaper materials such as drywall came into common use. The newer building materials reduced the drying potential of the structures, making moisture problems more prevalent. This combination of increased moisture and suitable substrates contributed to increased mold growth inside buildings.

Today, the US Food and Drug Administration and the agriculture industry closely monitor mold and mycotoxin levels in grains and foodstuffs to keep the contamination of animal feed and human food supplies below specific levels. In 2005, Diamond Pet Foods, a US pet food manufacturer, experienced a significant rise in the number of corn shipments containing elevated levels of aflatoxin. This mold toxin eventually made it into the pet food supply, and dozens of dogs and cats died before the company was forced to recall affected products.

In November 2022, a UK coroner recorded that a two-year-old child, Awaab Ishak from Rochdale, England, died in 2020 of &quot;acute airway oedema with severe granulomatous tracheobronchitis due to environmental mould exposure&quot; in his home. While not specified in the coroner&#x27;s report or outputs from official proceedings, the death was widely reported as due to specifically &#x27;toxic&#x27; or &#x27;toxic black&#x27; mold. The finding led to a 2023 change in UK law, known as Awaab&#x27;s Law, which will require social housing providers to remedy reported damp and mould within certain time limits. 

== See also ==

* Environmental engineering
* Environmental health
* Occupational asthma
* Occupational safety and health

== References ==
== Further reading ==


== External links ==
* CDC.gov Mold
* US EPA: Mold Information – U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
* US EPA: EPA Publication #402-K-02-003 &quot;A Brief Guide to Mold, Moisture, and Your Home&quot;
* NIBS: Whole Building Design Guide: Air Decontamination
* NPIC: Mold Pest Control Information – National Pesticide Information Center
* Mycotoxins in grains and the food supply:
** indianacrop.org
** cropwatch.unl.edu
** agbiopubs.sdstate.edu (PDF)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6895745" start="0" end="18" title="Mold health issues" label="Mold health issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q159341" start="58" end="62" title="Mold (fungus)" label="mold"/>
<link wikidata="Q422449" start="114" end="123" title="mycotoxin" label="mycotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q177332" start="175" end="181" title="spores" label="spores"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="428" end="470" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="970" end="988" title="Allergy" label="allergic reactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q422449" start="1005" end="1014" title="mycotoxin" label="mycotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q464067" start="1046" end="1053" title="mycosis" label="mycosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q757678" start="1092" end="1098" title="atopic" label="atopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="1125" end="1134" title="allergies" label="allergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="1136" end="1142" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="1159" end="1172" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q754447" start="1448" end="1470" title="respiratory infections" label="respiratory infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q35890" start="1507" end="1535" title="hypersensitivity pneumonitis" label="hypersensitivity pneumonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35890" start="1537" end="1556" title="allergic alveolitis" label="allergic alveolitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148123" start="1566" end="1580" title="rhinosinusitis" label="rhinosinusitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183344" start="1601" end="1610" title="sinusitis" label="sinusitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134055" start="1845" end="1857" title="Cladosporium" label="Cladosporium"/>
<link wikidata="Q843136" start="1871" end="1882" title="Penicillium" label="Penicillium"/>
<link wikidata="Q335130" start="1896" end="1907" title="Aspergillus" label="Aspergillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133266" start="1921" end="1931" title="Alternaria" label="Alternaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q135322" start="1949" end="1960" title="Trichoderma" label="Trichoderma"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="2068" end="2094" title="volatile organic compounds" label="volatile organic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="2551" end="2557" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q272436" start="2562" end="2579" title="allergic rhinitis" label="allergic rhinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="2964" end="2970" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895745" start="6145" end="6155" title="mold spore" label="mold spore"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="6165" end="6182" title="allergic reaction" label="allergic reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="6185" end="6191" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q281473" start="6243" end="6248" title="Sinus cavity" label="sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q641307" start="6577" end="6593" title="Immunodeficiency" label="immunocompromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400765" start="6689" end="6706" title="respiratory tract" label="respiratory tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q587129" start="6784" end="6797" title="epiphenomenon" label="epiphenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q464067" start="7078" end="7085" title="mycosis" label="mycosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="7220" end="7235" title="digestive tract" label="digestive tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="7264" end="7268" title="human lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259911" start="7273" end="7277" title="human skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q613894" start="7369" end="7381" title="Dermatophyte" label="Dermatophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609817" start="7442" end="7461" title="athlete&amp;#x27;s foot" label="athlete&amp;#x27;s foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243807" start="7466" end="7478" title="tinea cruris" label="tinea cruris"/>
<link wikidata="Q835718" start="7618" end="7641" title="Opportunistic infection" label="Opportunistic infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317277" start="7665" end="7686" title="Talaromyces marneffei" label="Talaromyces marneffei"/>
<link wikidata="Q134359" start="7703" end="7724" title="Aspergillus fumigatus" label="Aspergillus fumigatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q641307" start="7776" end="7792" title="Immunodeficiency" label="immunocompromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="7824" end="7828" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="7832" end="7838" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958765" start="7901" end="7917" title="hypersensitivity" label="hypersensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193129" start="8003" end="8008" title="hypha" label="hypha"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="8038" end="8053" title="allergic asthma" label="allergic asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q272436" start="8057" end="8074" title="allergic rhinitis" label="allergic rhinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115038" start="8104" end="8114" title="rhinorrhea" label="rhinorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35890" start="8207" end="8235" title="hypersensitivity pneumonitis" label="hypersensitivity pneumonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430844" start="8499" end="8538" title="allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis" label="allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q422449" start="8609" end="8618" title="mycotoxin" label="mycotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212936" start="10053" end="10062" title="Aflatoxin" label="Aflatoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133266" start="12754" end="12764" title="Alternaria" label="Alternaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q335130" start="12778" end="12789" title="Aspergillus" label="Aspergillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15890892" start="12797" end="12817" title="Botryotinia" label="&amp;quot;Botrytis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q134055" start="12825" end="12837" title="Cladosporium" label="Cladosporium"/>
<link wikidata="Q131672" start="12851" end="12859" title="Fusarium" label="Fusarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527872" start="12873" end="12883" title="Geotrichum" label="Geotrichum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301189" start="12897" end="12908" title="Mortierella" label="Mortierella"/>
<link wikidata="Q310801" start="12922" end="12927" title="Mucor" label="Mucor"/>
<link wikidata="Q309943" start="12941" end="12951" title="Neurospora" label="Neurospora"/>
<link wikidata="Q147306" start="12965" end="12977" title="Paecilomyces" label="Paecilomyces"/>
<link wikidata="Q843136" start="12991" end="13002" title="Penicillium" label="Penicillium"/>
<link wikidata="Q134258" start="13020" end="13028" title="Rhizopus" label="Rhizopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q137096" start="13912" end="13930" title="Aspergillus flavus" label="Aspergillus flavus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895739" start="14510" end="14550" title="mold growth, assessment, and remediation" label="mold growth, assessment, and remediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q61231" start="15948" end="15960" title="nanoparticle" label="nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="16472" end="16479" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q737890" start="16484" end="16488" title="Hurricane Rita" label="Rita"/>
<link wikidata="Q335130" start="16531" end="16542" title="Aspergillus" label="Aspergillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q843136" start="16556" end="16567" title="Penicillium" label="Penicillium"/>
<link wikidata="Q134055" start="16585" end="16597" title="Cladosporium" label="Cladosporium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069249" start="18468" end="18490" title="Stachybotrys chartarum" label="Stachybotrys chartarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="18756" end="18768" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341376" start="18846" end="18859" title="energy crisis" label="energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="18949" end="18956" title="drywall" label="drywall"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="19227" end="19258" title="Food and Drug Administration (United States)" label="US Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q212936" start="19592" end="19601" title="aflatoxin" label="aflatoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134614" start="19780" end="19787" title="coroner" label="coroner"/>
<link wikidata="Q115805945" start="19824" end="19835" title="Death of Awaab Ishak" label="Awaab Ishak"/>
<link wikidata="Q474605" start="19841" end="19849" title="Rochdale" label="Rochdale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20245" end="20261" title="Social Housing (Regulation) Act 2023#Awaab&amp;#x27;s Law" label="Awaab&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585398" start="20282" end="20306" title="Public housing in the United Kingdom" label="social housing providers"/>
<link wikidata="Q146326" start="20389" end="20414" title="Environmental engineering" label="Environmental engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q932068" start="20417" end="20437" title="Environmental health" label="Environmental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551913" start="20440" end="20459" title="Occupational asthma" label="Occupational asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q629029" start="20462" end="20492" title="Occupational safety and health" label="Occupational safety and health"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42677" wikidata="Q855736" url="?curid=42677" title="Celtic Tiger">
<text>The &quot;Celtic Tiger&quot; () is a term referring to the economy of Ireland from the mid-1990s to the late 2000s, a period of rapid real economic growth fuelled by foreign direct investment. The boom was dampened by a subsequent property bubble which resulted in a severe economic downturn.

At the start of the 1990s, Ireland was a relatively poor country by Western European standards, with high poverty, high unemployment, inflation, and low economic growth. The Irish economy expanded at an average rate of 9.4% between 1995 and 2000, and continued to grow at an average rate of 5.9% during the following decade until 2008, when it fell into recession. Ireland&#x27;s rapid economic growth has been described as a rare example of a Western country matching the growth of East Asian nations, i.e. the &#x27;Four Asian Tigers&#x27;.

The economy underwent a dramatic reversal from 2008, affected by the Great Recession and ensuing European debt crisis, with GDP contracting by 14% and unemployment levels rising to 14% by 2011. The recession lasted until 2014. In 2015, the economy posted a growth rate of 6.7% marked the beginning of a new period of strong economic growth.

== Term ==
The colloquial term &quot;Celtic Tiger&quot; has been used to refer to the country itself, and to the years associated with the boom. The first recorded use of the phrase is in a 1994 Morgan Stanley report by Kevin Gardiner. The term refers to Ireland&#x27;s similarity to the East Asian Tigers: Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan during their periods of rapid growth between the early 1960s and late 1990s. &quot;An Tíogar Ceilteach&quot;, the Irish language version of the term, appears in the Foras na Gaeilge terminology database and has been used in government and administrative contexts since at least 2005.

The Celtic Tiger period has also been called &quot;The Boom&quot; or &quot;Ireland&#x27;s Economic Miracle&quot;. During that time, the country experienced a period of economic growth that transformed it from one of Western Europe&#x27;s poorer countries into one of its wealthiest. The causes of Ireland&#x27;s growth are the subject of some debate, but credit has been primarily given to state-driven economic development; social partnership among employers, government and trade unions; increased participation by women in the labour force; decades of investment in domestic higher education; targeting of foreign direct investment; a low corporation tax rate; an English-speaking workforce; and membership of the European Union, which provided transfer payments and export access to the Single Market.

By mid-2007, during the 2007–2008 financial crisis, the Celtic Tiger had all but died. Some critics, such as David McWilliams, who had been warning about impending collapse for some time, concluded: &quot;The case is clear: an economically challenged government, perniciously influenced by the interests of the housing lobby, blew it. The entire Irish episode will be studied internationally in years to come as an example of how not to do things.&quot;

Historian Richard Aldous stated the Celtic Tiger has now gone the &quot;way of the dodo&quot;. In early 2008, many commentators thought a soft landing was likely, but by January 2009, it seemed possible the country could experience a depression. In early January 2009, &quot;The Irish Times&quot;, in an editorial, declared:
&quot;We have gone from the Celtic Tiger to an era of financial fear with the suddenness of a &quot;Titanic&quot;-style shipwreck, thrown from comfort, even luxury, into a cold sea of uncertainty.&quot; In February 2010, a report by Davy Research concluded that Ireland had &quot;largely wasted” its years of high income during the boom, with private enterprise investing its wealth &quot;in the wrong places&quot;. It compared Ireland&#x27;s growth to other small eurozone countries such as Finland and Belgium – noting that the physical wealth of those countries exceeds that of Ireland because of their &quot;vastly superior&quot; transport infrastructure, telecommunications network, and public services.

== Tiger economy ==
From 1995 to 2000, GDP growth rate ranged between 7.8 and 11.5%; it then slowed to between 4.4 and 6.5% from 2001 to 2007. During that period, the Irish GDP per capita rose dramatically to equal, then eventually surpass, that of all but one state in Western Europe. Although GDP does not represent the standard of living, and the GNP remained lower than the GDP, in 2007, the GNP achieved the same level as of some other Western European countries&#x27;. 

=== Causes ===
Historian R. F. Foster argues the cause was a combination of a new sense of initiative and the entry of American corporations such as Intel. He concludes the chief factors were low taxation, pro-business regulatory policies, and a young, tech-savvy workforce. For many multinationals, the decision to do business in Ireland was made easier still by generous incentives from the Industrial Development Authority. In addition European Union membership was helpful, giving the country lucrative access to markets that it had previously reached only through the United Kingdom, and pumping huge subsidies and investment capital into the Irish economy. Frederic Mishkin has also suggested that the economic boom partly resulted from the austerity plan of Charles Haughey (Taoiseach from 1987 to 1992). People and businesses expected a stable economy, boosting their confidence to spend and invest due to anticipated stability in output.

==== Tax policy ====
Many economists credit Ireland&#x27;s growth to a low corporate taxation rate (10 to 12.5% throughout the late 1990s). Since 1956, successive Irish governments have pursued low-taxation policies.

==== European Union Structural and Cohesion Funds ====
Since joining the EU in 1973, Ireland has received over €17 billion in EU Structural and Cohesion Funds. These are made up of the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) and the European Social Fund (ESF) and were used to increase investment in the education system and to build physical infrastructure. These transfer payments from members of the European Union, such as Germany and France, were as high as 4% of Ireland&#x27;s gross national product (GNP). Ireland is unique among cohesion countries, having allocated up to 35% of its Structural Funds to human resource investments, compared with an average of around 25% for other cohesion fund recipients. The Irish economy&#x27;s increased productive capacity is sometimes attributed to these investments, which made Ireland more attractive to high-tech businesses, though the libertarian Cato Institute has suggested that the EU transfer payments were economically inefficient and may have actually slowed growth. The conservative Heritage Foundation also attributed to transfer payments no significant role in causing growth.

==== Trade within the European Union ====
Ireland&#x27;s membership in the EU since 1973 helped the country gain access to Europe&#x27;s large markets. Ireland&#x27;s trade had previously been predominantly with the United Kingdom.

==== Industrial policies ====
In the 1990s, the provision of subsidies and investment capital by Irish state organisations (such as IDA Ireland) encouraged high-profile companies, such as Dell, Intel, and Microsoft, to locate in Ireland; these companies were attracted to Ireland because of its EU membership, relatively low wages, government grants, and low tax rates. Enterprise Ireland, a state agency, provides financial, technical, and social support to start-up businesses. Additionally, the building of the International Financial Services Centre in Dublin led to the creation of 14,000 high-value jobs in the accounting, legal, and financial management sectors.

In July 2003, the government established the Science Foundation Ireland on a statutory basis to promote education for highly skilled careers, particularly in biotechnology and information and communications technology, with the additional purpose to invest in science initiatives that aim to further Ireland&#x27;s knowledge economy.

==== Geography and demographics ====
The time zone difference allows Irish and British employees to work the first part of each day while US workers sleep. US firms were drawn to Ireland by cheap wage costs compared to the UK, and by the limited government intervention in business compared to other EU members, and particularly to countries in Eastern Europe. Growing stability in Northern Ireland brought about by the Good Friday Agreement further established Ireland&#x27;s ability to provide a stable business environment.

Irish workers can communicate effectively with Americans – especially compared to those in other low-wage, non-English-speaking EU nations, such as Portugal and Spain; this factor was vital to U.S. companies&#x27; choosing Ireland for their European headquarters. It has also been argued that the demographic dividend from the rising ratio of workers to dependents due to falling fertility, and increased female labour market participation, increased income per capita.

== Impact of economic growth ==

Ireland was transformed from one of the poorest countries in Western Europe to one of the wealthiest. Disposable income soared to record levels, enabling a huge rise in consumer spending with foreign holidays accounting for over 91% of total holiday expenditure in 2004. However, the gap between the highest and lowest income households widened in the five-year period to 2004–2005; in response, the Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) stated in 2002: &quot;On balance, budgets over the past 10 to 20 years have been more favourable to high income groups than low income groups, but particularly so during periods of high growth&quot;. Unemployment fell from 18% in the late 1980s to 4.5% by the end of 2007, and average industrial wages grew at one of the highest rates in Europe. Inflation brushed 5% per annum towards the end of the &quot;Tiger&quot; period, pushing Irish prices up to those of Nordic Europe, even though wage rates are roughly the same as in the UK. The national debt had remained constant during the boom, but the GDP to debt ratio rose, due to the dramatic rise in GDP.

The new wealth resulted in large investments in modernising Irish infrastructure and cities. The National Development Plan led to improvements in roads, and new transport services were developed, such as the Luas light rail lines, the Dublin Port Tunnel, and the extension of the Cork Suburban Rail. Local authorities enhanced city streets and built monuments such as the Spire of Dublin. An academic said in 2008 that the jumbo breakfast roll became &quot;perhaps the ultimate symbol of our contemporary Celtic Tigerland&quot;, product of Irish conglomerate IAWS and eaten by busy workers buying food in filling station convenience stores.

Ireland&#x27;s trend of net emigration was reversed as the republic became a destination for immigrants. This significantly changed Irish demographics and resulted in expanding multiculturalism, particularly in the Dublin, Cork, Limerick, and Galway areas. It was estimated in 2007 that 10% of Irish residents were foreign-born; most of the new arrivals were citizens of Poland and the Baltic states, many of whom found work in the retail and service sectors. A study conducted in 2006 found that many Irish people regarded immigration as an important factor for economic progress. Within Ireland, many young people left the rural countryside to live and work in urban centres.
Many people in Ireland believe that the growing consumerism during the boom years eroded the country&#x27;s culture, with the adoption of American capitalist ideals. While Ireland&#x27;s historical economic ties to the UK had often been the subject of criticism, Peader Kirby argued that the new ties to the US economy were met with a &quot;satisfied silence&quot;. Nevertheless, voices on the political left have decried the &quot;closer to Boston than Berlin&quot; philosophy of the Fianna Fáil-Progressive Democrat government. Writers such as William Wall, Mike McCormick, and Gerry Murphy have satirised these developments. Growing wealth was blamed for rising crime levels among youths, particularly alcohol-related violence resulting from increased spending power. However, it was also accompanied by rapidly increased life expectancy and very high quality of life ratings; the country ranked first in &quot;The Economist&quot;&#x27;s 2005 quality of life index, dropping to 12th by 2013.

The growing success of Ireland&#x27;s economy encouraged entrepreneurship and risk-taking, qualities that had been dormant during poor economic periods. However, whilst some semblance of a culture of entrepreneurship exists, foreign-owned companies account for 93% of Ireland&#x27;s exports.

== Slowdown in growth, 2001–2003 ==
The Celtic Tiger&#x27;s growth slowed along with the slowing in the world economy in 2002 after seven years of high growth.

The economy was adversely affected by a large reduction in investment in the worldwide information technology (IT) industry. The industry had over-expanded in the late 1990s, and its stock market equity declined sharply. Ireland was a major player in the IT industry: in 2002, it had exported US$10.4 billion worth of computer services, compared to $6.9 billion from the US. Ireland accounted for approximately 50% of all mass-market packaged software sold in Europe in 2002 (OECD, 2002; OECD, 2004).

Foot and mouth disease and the 11 September 2001 attacks damaged Ireland&#x27;s tourism and agricultural sectors , deterring U.S. and British tourists. Several companies moved operations to Eastern Europe and the People&#x27;s Republic of China because of a rise in Irish wage costs, insurance premiums, and a general reduction in Ireland&#x27;s economic competitiveness. The rising value of the Euro hit non-EMU exports, particularly those to the U.S. and the United Kingdom.

At the same time, economies globally experienced a slowdown. The US economy grew only 0.3% in April, May, and June 2002 from a year earlier, and the Federal Reserve made 11 rate cuts that year in an attempt to stimulate the US economy. The EU scarcely grew throughout the whole of 2002, and many members&#x27; governments (notably in Germany and France) lost control of public finances, causing large deficits that broke the terms of the EMU Stability and Growth Pact.

The economic downturn in Ireland was not a recession but a slowdown in the rate of economic expansion. Signs of a recovery became evident in late 2003, as US investment levels increased once again. Many senior economists have heavily criticised the government for the economic imbalance in favour of the construction industry, and the prospect of sustaining economic growth in the future.

=== Post-2003 resurgence ===

After the slowdown in 2001 and 2002, Irish economic growth began to accelerate again in late 2003 and 2004. Some of the media considered that an opportunity to document the return of the Celtic Tiger – occasionally referred to in the press as the &quot;Celtic Tiger 2&quot; and &quot;Celtic Tiger Mark 2&quot;. In 2004, Irish growth was the highest, at 4.5%, of the EU-15 states, and a similar figure was forecast for 2005. Those rates contrast with growth rates of 1% to 3% for many other European economies, including France, Germany, and Italy. The pace of expansion in lending to households from 2003 to 2007 was among the highest in the euro area

In 2006, there was a surge in Foreign Direct Investment and a net increase of 3,795 in IDA supported jobs, with International and Financial Services having the highest growth rate. The reasons for the continuation of the Irish economic boom were somewhat controversial within Ireland. Some Economists, Civil Rights Activists and Social Commentators have said that the growth throughout this period was merely due to a great increase in property values, and to catch-up growth in employment in the construction sector.

Globally, the U.S. recovery boosted Ireland&#x27;s economy due to Ireland&#x27;s close economic ties to the US. The decline in tourism as a result of foot and mouth disease and the 11 September 2001 attacks had reversed itself. The recovery of the global information technology industry was also a factor; Ireland produced 25% of all European PCs, and Apple, Dell (whose major European manufacturing plant was in Limerick), HP, and IBM all had sizeable Irish operations.

There had been a renewed investment by multinational firms. Intel had resumed its Irish expansion, Google created an office in Dublin, Abbott Laboratories was building a new Irish facility, and Bell Labs planned to open a future facility.
Domestically, a new state body, Science Foundation Ireland, was established to promote new science companies in Ireland Maturing funds from the SSIA government savings scheme relaxed consumers&#x27; concerns about spending and thus fueled retail sales growth.

In September 2009, Tánaiste Mary Coughlan said Ireland had lost ground in international competitiveness every year since 2000.

== Challenges ==

=== Property market ===
The return of the boom in 2004 was claimed to be primarily the result of the large construction sector&#x27;s catching up with the demand caused by the first boom. The construction sector represented nearly 12% of GDP and a large proportion of employment among young, unskilled men. A number of sources, including &quot;The Economist,&quot; warned of excessive Irish property values. 2004 saw the construction of 80,000 new homes, compared to the UK&#x27;s 160,000 – a nation that has 15 times Ireland&#x27;s population. House prices doubled between 2000 and 2006; tax incentives were a key driver of this price rise, and the Fianna Fáil-Progressive Democrats government subsequently received substantial criticism for these policies.

In January 2009, UCD economist Morgan Kelly predicted that house prices would fall by 80% from peak to trough in real terms.

=== Loss of competitiveness ===
Rising wages, inflation, and excessive public spending led to a loss of competitiveness in the Irish economy. Irish wages were substantially above the EU average, particularly in the Dublin region, though many poorer Eastern European states had joined the EU since 2004, substantially lowering the average EU wage below its 1995 level. Low-paid sectors, such as retail and hospitality, remained below the EU-15 average, however. The pressures primarily affect unskilled, semi-skilled, and manufacturing jobs. Outsourcing of professional jobs also increased, with Poland in 2008 gaining several hundred former Irish jobs from the accountancy divisions of Philips and Dell.

=== Promotion of indigenous industry ===
One of the major challenges facing Ireland is the successful promotion of indigenous industry. Although Ireland boasted a few large international companies, such as AIB, CRH, Élan, Kerry Group, Ryanair, and Smurfit Kappa, there are few companies with over one billion euros in annual revenue. The government has charged Enterprise Ireland with the task of boosting Ireland&#x27;s indigenous industry and launched a website in 2003 with the objective of streamlining and marketing the process of starting a business in Ireland.

=== Reliance on foreign energy sources ===
Ireland relies on imported fossil fuels for over 80% of its energy. Ireland for many years in the middle twentieth century limited its dependence on external energy sources by developing its peat bogs, building various hydroelectric projects, including a dam at Ardnacrusha on the River Shannon in 1928, developing offshore gas fields, and diversifying into coal in the 1970s. As gas, peat, and hydroelectric power have been almost fully exploited in Ireland, there is a continuously increasing need for imported fossil fuels at a time of increasing concerns about security of supply and global warming. One solution is to develop alternative energy sources, including wind power and, to a lesser extent, wave power.

An offshore wind farm is currently under construction off the east coast near Arklow, and many remote locations in the west show potential for wind farm development. A report by Sustainable Energy Ireland indicated that if wind power were properly developed, Ireland could one day be exporting excess wind power if the natural difficulties of integrating wind power into the national grid are solved. Wind power by November 2009 already accounted for 15.4% of total installed generating capacity in the state. By 2020, the Irish government forecasts that 40% of the country&#x27;s energy needs will come from renewable sources, well above the EU average.

=== Distribution of wealth ===
Ireland&#x27;s new wealth is unevenly distributed. The United Nations reported in 2004 that Ireland was second only to the US in inequality among Western nations. There is some opposition to the theory that Ireland&#x27;s wealth has been unusually unevenly distributed, among them economist and journalist David McWilliams. He cites Eurostat figures which indicate that Ireland is just above average in terms equality by one type of measurement. Moreover, Ireland&#x27;s inequality persists by other measurements. According to an ESRI report published in December 2006, Ireland&#x27;s child poverty level ranks 22nd out of the 26 richest countries, and it is the 2nd most unequal country in Europe.

=== Banking scandals ===
&quot;The New York Times&quot; in 2005 described Ireland as the &quot;Wild West of European finance&quot;, a perception that helped prompt the creation of the Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority. Despite its mandate for stricter oversight, the agency never imposed major sanctions on any Irish institution, even though Ireland had experienced several major banking scandals in overcharging of their customers. Industry representatives disputed the idea that Ireland may be home to unchecked financial frauds. In December 2008, irregularities in directors&#x27; loans that had been kept off one bank&#x27;s balance sheet for eight years forced the resignation of the Financial Regulator. Economic commentator David McWilliams has described the collapse of Anglo Irish Bank as Ireland&#x27;s Enron.

== Contraction of the Tiger ==
In an economic analysis, the Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) on 24 June 2008 forecast the possibility the Irish economy would experience marginal negative growth in 2008. This would be the first time since 1983. Outlining possible prospects for the economy for 2008, the ESRI said output of goods and services might fall that year—which would have been the Irish definition of a mild recession. It also predicted a recovery in 2009 and 2010.

In September 2008, Ireland became the first eurozone country to officially enter recession. The recession was confirmed by figures from the Central Statistics Office showing the bursting of the property bubble and a collapse in consumer spending that terminated the boom that was the Celtic Tiger. The figures show the gross domestic product (GDP), which measures the value of all the goods and services produced in the State, fell 0.8% in the second three months of 2008 compared with the same quarter of 2007. That was the second successive quarter of negative economic growth, which is one definition of a recession. The Celtic Tiger was declared dead by October 2008.

In a November 2008 interview in&quot; Hot Press,&quot; in a grim assessment of where Ireland stood, then Taoiseach Brian Cowen said many people still did not realise how badly shaken the public finances were.
By 30 January 2009, Ireland&#x27;s government debt had become the riskiest in the euro zone, surpassing Greece&#x27;s sovereign bonds, according to credit-default swap prices. In February 2009, Taoiseach Brian Cowen said that Ireland&#x27;s economy appeared on course to contract by 6.5% in 2009.

== Aftermath ==
Former Taoiseach Garret FitzGerald blamed Ireland&#x27;s dire economic state in 2009 on a series of &quot;calamitous&quot; government policy errors. Between the years of 2000 and 2003 the then Finance Minister Charlie McCreevy boosted public spending by 48% while cutting income tax. A second problem occurred when government policies allowed, or even encouraged, a housing bubble to develop, &quot;on an immense scale&quot;. However, he wrote nothing of the impact of the European Central Bank&#x27;s low interest rates which funded the property bubble and further exacerbated the overheating economy

Nobel laureate Paul Krugman had a bleak prediction,
&quot;“As far as responding to the recession goes, Ireland appears to be really, truly without options, other than to hope for an export-led recovery, if and when the rest of the world bounces back.”&quot;

The International Monetary Fund in mid-April 2009 forecast a very poor outlook for Ireland. It projected that the Irish economy would contract by 8 per cent in 2009 and by 3 per cent in 2010 – and that might be on the optimistic side.

On 19 November 2010, the Irish government began talks on a multibillion-dollar economic assistance package with experts from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the European Union.
Unemployment in Ireland was forecasted to rise almost 17 per cent in 2010, the Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) stated in a report published on 28 April 2009, however, the unemployment rate in 2010 steadied at 14%. In 2010, the unemployment rate was at 14.8 per cent, and in order to escape economic downfall, Ireland requested €67.5 billion ($85.7 billion) from the International Monetary Fund and members of the euro area. Taking the money meant accepting austerity.

The economic contraction in Ireland ended in 2015, when the economy began growing. The economy began outpacing the rest of the European Union after this period. The economy of Ireland continued to grow in 2022 rising by 11%, although projected to slow with the global recession.

==Cultural impact==

The Celtic Tiger had more than just an economic impact, impacting also Ireland&#x27;s social backdrop. 2007 research by the Economic and Social Research Institute, prior to the crash, found that fears over wider social inequality, declining community life, and a more selfish, materialist approach to life were largely unfounded, and that the social impact of the Celtic Tiger had largely been positive. The economic boom led to lower levels of emigration and higher immigration than had historically been the case, while the government of the time acknowledged the continuing strain on some public services and that the &quot;provision of social housing, childcare and the integration of newcomers&quot; remained political priorities.

== See also ==
*Baltic Tiger
*Economy of the Republic of Ireland
*Ghost estate
*Green Jersey Agenda
*Gulf Tiger
*PIGS (economics)
*Post-2008 Irish banking crisis
*Tatra Tiger
*Tiger Cub Economies

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q855736" start="10" end="22" title="Celtic Tiger" label="Celtic Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062" start="59" end="77" title="economy of the Republic of Ireland" label="economy of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q186582" start="231" end="246" title="property bubble" label="property bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q972891" start="638" end="657" title="Post-2008 Irish economic downturn" label="fell into recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q190918" start="812" end="829" title="Four Asian Tigers" label="Four Asian Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="907" end="922" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q217197" start="935" end="955" title="European debt crisis" label="European debt crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="962" end="965" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="1195" end="1205" title="colloquial" label="colloquial"/>
<link wikidata="Q334204" start="1375" end="1389" title="Morgan Stanley" label="Morgan Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q190918" start="1468" end="1485" title="East Asian Tigers" label="East Asian Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="1647" end="1661" title="Irish language" label="Irish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295953" start="1698" end="1714" title="Foras na Gaeilge" label="Foras na Gaeilge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384234" start="1863" end="1883" title="Economic boom" label="&amp;quot;The Boom&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q112154439" start="2243" end="2261" title="social partnership" label="social partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="2294" end="2305" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="2427" end="2452" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q645011" start="2460" end="2475" title="corporation tax" label="corporation tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2535" end="2549" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327750" start="2609" end="2622" title="Single Market" label="Single Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="2649" end="2675" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567091" start="2734" end="2750" title="David McWilliams (economics pundit)" label="David McWilliams"/>
<link wikidata="Q43502" start="3163" end="3167" title="Dodo (bird)" label="dodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221605" start="3218" end="3230" title="soft landing (economics)" label="soft landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814941" start="3314" end="3324" title="Depression (economics)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="3355" end="3370" title="The Irish Times" label="The Irish Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173" start="3505" end="3512" title="RMS Titanic" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8268" start="3870" end="3878" title="eurozone" label="eurozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="4154" end="4157" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="4437" end="4455" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="4465" end="4468" title="GNP" label="GNP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273619" start="4617" end="4629" title="R. F. Foster (historian)" label="R. F. Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="4741" end="4746" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q206620" start="4985" end="5017" title="IDA Ireland" label="Industrial Development Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="5031" end="5045" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347744" start="5255" end="5271" title="Frederic Mishkin" label="Frederic Mishkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814650" start="5339" end="5348" title="austerity" label="austerity"/>
<link wikidata="Q333735" start="5357" end="5372" title="Charles Haughey" label="Charles Haughey"/>
<link wikidata="Q645011" start="5615" end="5628" title="corporate tax" label="corporate tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361297" start="5943" end="5977" title="European Regional Development Fund" label="European Regional Development Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q752343" start="5993" end="6013" title="European Social Fund" label="European Social Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631387" start="6064" end="6080" title="Education in the Republic of Ireland" label="education system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411457" start="6125" end="6141" title="transfer payment" label="transfer payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="6163" end="6177" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046" start="6187" end="6194" title="Economy of Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057" start="6199" end="6205" title="Economy of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="6244" end="6266" title="gross national product" label="gross national product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051256" start="6659" end="6673" title="Cato Institute" label="Cato Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q876787" start="6802" end="6821" title="The Heritage Foundation" label="Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q323138" start="7115" end="7129" title="Economy of the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q193219" start="7193" end="7202" title="subsidies" label="subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q206620" start="7264" end="7275" title="IDA Ireland" label="IDA Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30873" start="7320" end="7324" title="Dell" label="Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="7326" end="7331" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="7337" end="7346" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q230788" start="7475" end="7481" title="Grant (money)" label="grants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153255" start="7646" end="7685" title="International Financial Services Centre, Dublin" label="International Financial Services Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475731" start="7848" end="7874" title="Science Foundation Ireland" label="Science Foundation Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q830170" start="8118" end="8135" title="knowledge economy" label="knowledge economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12143" start="8179" end="8188" title="time zone" label="time zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="8558" end="8579" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634022" start="8963" end="8983" title="demographic dividend" label="demographic dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q986194" start="9272" end="9289" title="Disposable income" label="Disposable income"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164722" start="9339" end="9356" title="consumer spending" label="consumer spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333436" start="9570" end="9608" title="Economic and Social Research Institute" label="Economic and Social Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q846059" start="10371" end="10396" title="National Development Plan" label="National Development Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q612560" start="10482" end="10486" title="Luas" label="Luas"/>
<link wikidata="Q924978" start="10509" end="10527" title="Dublin Port Tunnel" label="Dublin Port Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693608" start="10554" end="10572" title="Cork Suburban Rail" label="Cork Suburban Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134365" start="10646" end="10661" title="Spire of Dublin" label="Spire of Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959488" start="10703" end="10717" title="breakfast roll" label="breakfast roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q718109" start="10833" end="10837" title="IAWS" label="IAWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q205495" start="10879" end="10894" title="filling station" label="filling station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361709" start="10895" end="10912" title="convenience store" label="convenience store"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="11093" end="11109" title="multiculturalism" label="multiculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="11131" end="11137" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="11139" end="11143" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="11145" end="11153" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="11159" end="11165" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q25543948" start="11687" end="11709" title="culture of Ireland" label="country&amp;#x27;s culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112618" start="12079" end="12122" title="Government of the 29th Dáil" label="Fianna Fáil-Progressive Democrat government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019919" start="12140" end="12152" title="William Wall (writer)" label="William Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552936" start="12174" end="12186" title="Gerry Murphy (poet)" label="Gerry Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="12647" end="12663" title="entrepreneurship" label="entrepreneurship"/>
<link wikidata="Q152401" start="13546" end="13568" title="Foot and mouth disease" label="Foot and mouth disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="13577" end="13602" title="11 September 2001 attacks" label="11 September 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q209380" start="13759" end="13790" title="Economy of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q825026" start="13955" end="13958" title="Economic and Monetary Union" label="EMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="14173" end="14188" title="Federal Reserve" label="Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q274490" start="14394" end="14408" title="public finance" label="public finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q832661" start="14466" end="14491" title="Stability and Growth Pact" label="Stability and Growth Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="14537" end="14546" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590816" start="15280" end="15285" title="EU-15" label="EU-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q720060" start="15455" end="15460" title="Economy of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071741" start="15991" end="16018" title="Irish property bubble" label="increase in property values"/>
<link wikidata="Q152401" start="16236" end="16258" title="foot and mouth disease" label="foot and mouth disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="16267" end="16292" title="11 September 2001 attacks" label="11 September 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="16429" end="16432" title="Personal computer" label="PCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="16438" end="16443" title="Apple Computer" label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="16499" end="16507" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="16510" end="16512" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="HP"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="16518" end="16521" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="16618" end="16623" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="16657" end="16663" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="16685" end="16691" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q306764" start="16693" end="16712" title="Abbott Laboratories" label="Abbott Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="16752" end="16761" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475731" start="16829" end="16855" title="Science Foundation Ireland" label="Science Foundation Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146214" start="17077" end="17085" title="Tánaiste" label="Tánaiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q444705" start="17086" end="17099" title="Mary Coughlan (politician)" label="Mary Coughlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="17548" end="17561" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071741" start="17579" end="17610" title="Irish property bubble" label="excessive Irish property values"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="17854" end="17865" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q661973" start="17866" end="17887" title="Progressive Democrats" label="Progressive Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068258" start="17981" end="17984" title="University College Dublin" label="UCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47232" start="18327" end="18391" title="Expansion of the European Union" label="many poorer Eastern European states had joined the EU since 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="18776" end="18783" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642179" start="19001" end="19004" title="Allied Irish Banks" label="AIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324860" start="19011" end="19015" title="Élan" label="Élan"/>
<link wikidata="Q253967" start="19017" end="19028" title="Kerry Group" label="Kerry Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q170614" start="19030" end="19037" title="Ryanair" label="Ryanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536176" start="19043" end="19056" title="Smurfit Kappa" label="Smurfit Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="19598" end="19602" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="19626" end="19639" title="hydroelectric" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752171" start="19669" end="19680" title="Ardnacrusha (village)" label="Ardnacrusha"/>
<link wikidata="Q192820" start="19688" end="19701" title="River Shannon" label="River Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q689880" start="19722" end="19730" title="Oil platform" label="offshore"/>
<link wikidata="Q209916" start="19972" end="19990" title="peak oil" label="security of supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="19995" end="20009" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="20076" end="20086" title="wind power" label="wind power"/>
<link wikidata="Q208554" start="20112" end="20122" title="wave power" label="wave power"/>
<link wikidata="Q194356" start="20137" end="20146" title="wind farm" label="wind farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q673662" start="20203" end="20209" title="Arklow" label="Arklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="20867" end="20881" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q217659" start="21145" end="21153" title="Eurostat" label="Eurostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449637" start="21696" end="21741" title="Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority" label="Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449637" start="22213" end="22232" title="Financial Regulator (Ireland)" label="Financial Regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q541461" start="22302" end="22318" title="Anglo Irish Bank" label="Anglo Irish Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q327646" start="22337" end="22342" title="Enron" label="Enron"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="22914" end="22923" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081788" start="22973" end="22998" title="Central Statistics Office (Ireland)" label="Central Statistics Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308877" start="23544" end="23553" title="Hot Press" label="Hot Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q185272" start="23621" end="23632" title="Brian Cowen" label="Brian Cowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425313" start="24046" end="24063" title="Garret FitzGerald" label="Garret FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q303304" start="24239" end="24255" title="Charlie McCreevy" label="Charlie McCreevy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="24301" end="24311" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q207781" start="24403" end="24409" title="bubble (economics)" label="bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q8901" start="24502" end="24523" title="European Central Bank" label="European Central Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q131112" start="24647" end="24659" title="Paul Krugman" label="Paul Krugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="24895" end="24922" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="25285" end="25288" title="IMF" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="25801" end="25821" title="economic contraction" label="economic contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="25924" end="25938" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q112968291" start="26058" end="26074" title="2022 stock market decline" label="global recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q367761" start="26851" end="26863" title="Baltic Tiger" label="Baltic Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062" start="26865" end="26899" title="Economy of the Republic of Ireland" label="Economy of the Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5557233" start="26901" end="26913" title="Ghost estate" label="Ghost estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q54870244" start="26915" end="26934" title="Put on the green jersey" label="Green Jersey Agenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116381" start="26936" end="26946" title="Gulf Tiger" label="Gulf Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q217130" start="26948" end="26964" title="PIGS (economics)" label="PIGS (economics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613071" start="26966" end="26996" title="Post-2008 Irish banking crisis" label="Post-2008 Irish banking crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688236" start="26998" end="27009" title="Tatra Tiger" label="Tatra Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143093" start="27011" end="27030" title="Tiger Cub Economies" label="Tiger Cub Economies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42678" wikidata="Q1780082" url="?curid=42678" title="1630s BC">
<text>The 1630s BC was a decade lasting from January 1, 1639 BC to December 31, 1630 BC.

==Events and trends==
* 1633 BC—May 2—Lunar Saros 34 begins.
*Before 1630 BC – 1500 BC—Landscape (Spring fresco), wall painting with areas of modern reconstruction from Akrotiri, Thera, Cyclades, is made. It is now at National Archaeological Museum, Athens.

==Significant lifeforms==
* 1637 BC—Death of Abraham according to Jewish calculations (2,123 years after biblical creation)
* 1634 BC—Death of Salah, son of Arpachshad, according to the Hebrew calendar 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1780082" start="4" end="12" title="1630s BC" label="1630s BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780082" start="108" end="115" title="1633 BC" label="1633 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q44235" start="122" end="127" title="Lunar eclipse" label="Lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q220397" start="128" end="133" title="Saros (astronomy)" label="Saros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780082" start="153" end="160" title="1630 BC" label="1630 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851857" start="163" end="170" title="1500 BC" label="1500 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q421232" start="253" end="261" title="Akrotiri (prehistoric city)" label="Akrotiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q129296" start="263" end="268" title="Santorini" label="Thera"/>
<link wikidata="Q171132" start="270" end="278" title="Cyclades" label="Cyclades"/>
<link wikidata="Q637187" start="302" end="340" title="National Archaeological Museum, Athens" label="National Archaeological Museum, Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780082" start="371" end="378" title="1637 BC" label="1637 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="388" end="395" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q137651" start="448" end="465" title="biblical creation" label="biblical creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780082" start="469" end="476" title="1634 BC" label="1634 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827950" start="486" end="491" title="Salah (biblical figure)" label="Salah"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="529" end="544" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew calendar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42679" wikidata="Q2851880" url="?curid=42679" title="1640s BC">
<text>The 1640s BC was a decade lasting from January 1, 1649 BC to December 31, 1640 BC.
==Events and trends==

==Significant people==
*Bazaya, King of Assyria, 
*Ammi-Ditana, King of Babylonia, (Middle chronology)
*Ammi-Saduqa, King of Babylonia, (Middle chronology)
*Tang, Shang dynasty king of China, 
*Tài Dīng, Shang dynasty king of China, 
*Bu Bing, Shang dynasty king of China, 
*Salitis, Fifteenth Dynasty pharaoh of Egypt, 1648–1628 BC
*Djehuti, Sixteenth Dynasty pharaoh of Egypt, 1650–1647 BC
*Sobekhotep VIII, Sixteenth Dynasty pharaoh of Egypt, 1647–1631 BC
*Kuk-Nashur II, King of Elam, 1650–1635 BC
*Hattusili I, King of the Hittites, 1650–1620 BC (middle chronology)
*Kashtiliash II, King of the Kassites, 
*Urzigurumash, King of the Kassites, 
*Ishkibal, King of the Sealand, 
*Shushshi, King of the Sealand, 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2851880" start="4" end="12" title="1640s BC" label="1640s BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q366585" start="130" end="136" title="Bazaya" label="Bazaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416493" start="157" end="168" title="Ammi-Ditana" label="Ammi-Ditana"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="190" end="207" title="Middle chronology" label="Middle chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q441344" start="210" end="221" title="Ammi-Saduqa" label="Ammi-Saduqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="243" end="260" title="Middle chronology" label="Middle chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q471820" start="263" end="267" title="Tang of Shang" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="269" end="282" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q888231" start="300" end="308" title="Da Ding of Shang" label="Tài Dīng"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="310" end="323" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q536732" start="341" end="348" title="Bu Bing" label="Bu Bing"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="350" end="363" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q509679" start="381" end="388" title="Salitis" label="Salitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q728479" start="390" end="407" title="Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt" label="Fifteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q889883" start="440" end="447" title="Djehuti" label="Djehuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q737695" start="449" end="466" title="Sixteenth Dynasty of Egypt" label="Sixteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q888294" start="499" end="514" title="Sobekhotep VIII" label="Sobekhotep VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q737695" start="516" end="533" title="Sixteenth Dynasty of Egypt" label="Sixteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q299472" start="609" end="620" title="Hattusili I" label="Hattusili I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="634" end="642" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="658" end="675" title="middle chronology" label="middle chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q243312" start="706" end="714" title="Kassites" label="Kassites"/>
<link wikidata="Q243312" start="744" end="752" title="Kassites" label="Kassites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="766" end="785" title="List of Kings of Babylon#Sealand Dynasty .28Dynasty II of Babylon.29" label="King of the Sealand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="799" end="818" title="List of Kings of Babylon#Sealand Dynasty .28Dynasty II of Babylon.29" label="King of the Sealand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42680" wikidata="Q2851901" url="?curid=42680" title="1690s BC">
<text>The 1690s BC was a decade lasting from January 1, 1699, BC to December 31, 1690, BC.
==Events and trends==
*The Minoan and Harappan Civilizations continue to exist in Crete and Ancient India respectively.
*1700–1500 BC—Hurrian conquests.
*Second Intermediate Period, in which the Hyksos invades Egypt, continues.
*1698 BC- King Jie of China kills his minister Guan Longfeng according to Chinese legend.
*The Exodus of the Israelites from Egypt, according to Thrasyllus of Mendes, an Egyptian mathematician and astronomer who lived in the reign of Tiberius (c. 1691 BC).
*1691 BC June—Lunar Saros 32 begins.

==Significant people==
*Belu-bani, King of Assyria, r. 1700–1691 BC.
*Libaia, King of Assyria r. 1691–1674 BC.
*Abi-eshuh, King of Babylon, r. 1712–1684 (middle chronology)
*Jie, Legendary King of the supposed Xia dynasty (existence disputed) in China, r. c.1728–1675 BC
*Merneferre Ay, Pharaoh of Egypt, r. c.1714–1691 BC
*Merhotepre Ini, Pharaoh of Egypt, r. c.1691–1689 BC
*Fourteenth dynasty Pharaohs (see List of Pharaohs for details), 1705–1690 BC
* Lila-Ir-Tash king of the Elamite Empire, r. c.1700–c.1698 BC.
* Temti-Agun I king of the Elamite Empire, r. c.1698–c.1690 BC.
* Tan-Uli king of the Elamite Empire, r. c.1690–c.1655 BC.
*Agum I, King of the Kassites, r. 1705–1690 BC
*Kashtiliash I, King of the Kassites, r. 1690–1680 BC
*Itti-Ili-Nibi, King of the Sealand, r. c.1700–1683 BC
*1695 BC—Death of Sarah, wife of Abraham, according to the Hebrew Calendar
*1691 BC—Death of Merneferre Ay, Pharaoh of Egypt

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2851901" start="4" end="12" title="1690s BC" label="1690s BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="112" end="118" title="Minoan Civilization" label="Minoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="123" end="144" title="Harappan Civilization" label="Harappan Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="167" end="172" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="177" end="190" title="Ancient India" label="Ancient India"/>
<link wikidata="Q186728" start="206" end="210" title="1700 BC" label="1700"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851857" start="211" end="218" title="1500 BC" label="1500 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q190394" start="219" end="226" title="Hurrian" label="Hurrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q206715" start="239" end="265" title="Second Intermediate Period of Egypt" label="Second Intermediate Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q192319" start="280" end="286" title="Hyksos" label="Hyksos"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="295" end="300" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q465081" start="328" end="340" title="Jie of Xia" label="Jie of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290338" start="404" end="414" title="The Exodus" label="The Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="438" end="443" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q725225" start="458" end="478" title="Thrasyllus of Mendes" label="Thrasyllus of Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="547" end="555" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851901" start="560" end="567" title="1691 BC" label="1691 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q44235" start="584" end="589" title="Lunar eclipse" label="Lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q220397" start="590" end="595" title="Saros cycle" label="Saros"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881698" start="632" end="641" title="Belu-bani" label="Belu-bani"/>
<link wikidata="Q217762" start="643" end="658" title="Kings of Assyria" label="King of Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851901" start="668" end="675" title="1691 BC" label="1691 BC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="678" end="684" title="Libaia" label="Libaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217762" start="686" end="701" title="Kings of Assyria" label="King of Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851886" start="710" end="717" title="1674 BC" label="1674 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778286" start="720" end="729" title="Abi-eshuh" label="Abi-eshuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="762" end="779" title="middle chronology" label="middle chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q465081" start="782" end="785" title="Jie of Xia" label="Jie"/>
<link wikidata="Q169705" start="818" end="829" title="Xia dynasty" label="Xia dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q411850" start="880" end="893" title="Merneferre Ay" label="Merneferre Ay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="906" end="911" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277728" start="932" end="946" title="Merhotepre Ini" label="Merhotepre Ini"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="959" end="964" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q650945" start="985" end="1012" title="Fourteenth dynasty of Egypt" label="Fourteenth dynasty Pharaohs"/>
<link wikidata="Q189754" start="1018" end="1034" title="List of Pharaohs" label="List of Pharaohs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1064" end="1076" title="Lila-Ir-Tash" label="Lila-Ir-Tash"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="1089" end="1103" title="Elamite Empire" label="Elamite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851901" start="1117" end="1124" title="1698 BC" label="1698 BC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1128" end="1140" title="Temti-Agun I" label="Temti-Agun I"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="1153" end="1167" title="Elamite Empire" label="Elamite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851901" start="1181" end="1188" title="1690 BC" label="1690 BC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1192" end="1199" title="Tan-Uli" label="Tan-Uli"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="1212" end="1226" title="Elamite Empire" label="Elamite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999853" start="1240" end="1247" title="1655 BC" label="1655 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q243312" start="1270" end="1278" title="Kassites" label="Kassites"/>
<link wikidata="Q243312" start="1324" end="1332" title="Kassites" label="Kassites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1366" end="1385" title="List of Kings of Babylon#Sealand Dynasty .28Dynasty II of Babylon.29" label="King of the Sealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q194808" start="1423" end="1428" title="Sarah" label="Sarah"/>
<link wikidata="Q411850" start="1498" end="1511" title="Merneferre Ay" label="Merneferre Ay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1524" end="1529" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42681" wikidata="Q2851896" url="?curid=42681" title="1680s BC">
<text>The 1680s BC was a decade lasting from January 1, 1689 BC to December 31, 1680 BC.
==Events and trends==
* Egypt—Start of the Sixteenth Dynasty.
* Egypt—Development of leavened bread (date approximate).

==Significant people==
* 1686 BC—Death of Hammurabi (short chronology)
* 1684 BC—Death of Érimón, Irish legend

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2851896" start="4" end="12" title="1680s BC" label="1680s BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q766876" start="107" end="112" title="History of ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q206715" start="126" end="143" title="Second Intermediate Period" label="Sixteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="147" end="152" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="177" end="182" title="bread" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851896" start="229" end="236" title="1686 BC" label="1686 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q36359" start="246" end="255" title="Hammurabi" label="Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="257" end="273" title="short chronology" label="short chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851896" start="277" end="284" title="1684 BC" label="1684 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273540" start="294" end="300" title="Érimón" label="Érimón"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="302" end="307" title="Ireland" label="Irish"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42682" wikidata="Q2851886" url="?curid=42682" title="1670s BC">
<text>The 1670s BC was a decade lasting from January 1, 1679 BC to December 31, 1670 BC.
==Events and trends==
* c. 1674 BC—End of Middle Kingdom in Ancient Egypt. Start of the Second intermediate period, the 15th–17th Dynasties.
* Egypt—Start of the Fifteenth Dynasty.
* 1674 BC—Hyksos invade Egypt.

==Significant people==
* 1677 BC—Death of Terah, father of Abraham, according to the Hebrew Calendar
* 1675 BC—Death of Niqmi-Epuh, Great King of Yamhad, according to the Middle chronology

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2851886" start="4" end="12" title="1670s BC" label="1670s BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851886" start="110" end="117" title="1674 BC" label="1674 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q191324" start="125" end="139" title="Middle Kingdom of Egypt" label="Middle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="143" end="156" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q206715" start="171" end="197" title="Second intermediate period" label="Second intermediate period"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="226" end="231" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q728479" start="245" end="262" title="15th Dynasty of Egypt" label="Fifteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q192319" start="274" end="280" title="Hyksos" label="Hyksos"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="288" end="293" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851886" start="321" end="328" title="1677 BC" label="1677 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q586541" start="338" end="343" title="Terah" label="Terah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851886" start="399" end="406" title="1675 BC" label="1675 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q511187" start="416" end="426" title="Niqmi-Epuh" label="Niqmi-Epuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q617218" start="442" end="448" title="Yamhad" label="Yamhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="467" end="484" title="Middle chronology" label="Middle chronology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42683" wikidata="Q2851882" url="?curid=42683" title="1660s BC">
<text>The 1660s BC was a decade lasting from January 1, 1669 BC to December 31, 1660 BC.
==Events and trends==
* 1664 BC: Gravitational interactions with Saturn result in the centaur Chiron being forced into a different orbit.
* 1662 BC—May 22—Lunar Saros 33 begins.

==Significant people==
* 1661 BC: Iptar-Sin became the King of Assyria.
* 1664 BC: Death of Arpachshad, son of Shem, son of Noah, according to the Hebrew calendar.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2851882" start="4" end="12" title="1660s BC" label="1660s BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="148" end="154" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15611" start="177" end="183" title="2060 Chiron" label="Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q44235" start="238" end="243" title="Lunar eclipse" label="Lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q220397" start="244" end="249" title="Saros cycle" label="Saros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851882" start="287" end="294" title="1660 BC" label="1661 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q887833" start="296" end="305" title="Iptar-Sin" label="Iptar-Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217762" start="317" end="332" title="King of Assyria" label="King of Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q457520" start="354" end="364" title="Arpachshad" label="Arpachshad"/>
<link wikidata="Q200902" start="373" end="390" title="Shem" label="Shem, son of Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="409" end="424" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew calendar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42684" wikidata="Q2851872" url="?curid=42684" title="1610s BC">
<text>The 1610s BC was a decade lasting from January 1, 1619 BC to December 31, 1610 BC.
==Events and trends==
* 1610 - A volcanic eruption at Thera island destroyed the ancient city of Akrotiri.
* 1618 - The Chinese records a famine accompanied with frost in July. They also recorded a dim sun and yellow fog during this time.

==Significant people==
* King Tang of Shang dynasty China (1617 BC–1588 BC)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2851872" start="4" end="12" title="1610s BC" label="1610s BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q129296" start="137" end="149" title="Santorini" label="Thera island"/>
<link wikidata="Q421232" start="180" end="188" title="Akrotiri (prehistoric city)" label="Akrotiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q471820" start="348" end="357" title="Tang of Shang" label="King Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="361" end="374" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="375" end="380" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851872" start="382" end="389" title="1617 BC" label="1617 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988958" start="390" end="397" title="1588 BC" label="1588 BC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42685" wikidata="Q2851879" url="?curid=42685" title="1620s BC">
<text>The 1620s BC was a decade lasting from January 1, 1629 BC to December 31, 1620 BC.

==Events and trends==
* 1627 BC—Beginning of a period of cooling of the world climate lasting several years, recorded in tree-rings all over the world. Various volcanic eruptions have been suggested for the cause of this climatic event; the Minoan eruption of Thera, the Avellino eruption of Mount Vesuvius, or the eruption of Mount Aniakchak.
* 1625 BC—Samsu-Ditana becomes King of Babylon (middle chronology).
* 1621 BC—Lullaia becomes the King of Assyria.
* 1620 BC—Mursili I becomes King of the Hittite Empire (middle chronology).

==Significant people==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2851879" start="4" end="12" title="1620s BC" label="1620s BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851879" start="108" end="115" title="1627 BC" label="1627 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q80205" start="205" end="215" title="Growth ring" label="tree-rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144693" start="325" end="340" title="Minoan eruption" label="Minoan eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q129296" start="344" end="349" title="Santorini" label="Thera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828024" start="355" end="372" title="Avellino eruption" label="Avellino eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q524" start="376" end="390" title="Mount Vesuvius" label="Mount Vesuvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q531642" start="411" end="426" title="Mount Aniakchak" label="Mount Aniakchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851879" start="430" end="437" title="1625 BC" label="1625 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q391117" start="438" end="450" title="Samsu-Ditana" label="Samsu-Ditana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="467" end="474" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="476" end="493" title="middle chronology" label="middle chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851879" start="498" end="505" title="1621 BC" label="1621 BC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="506" end="513" title="Lullaia" label="Lullaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217762" start="526" end="541" title="King of Assyria" label="King of Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851879" start="545" end="552" title="1620 BC" label="1620 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q222536" start="553" end="562" title="Mursili I" label="Mursili I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="583" end="597" title="Hittite Empire" label="Hittite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q600281" start="599" end="616" title="middle chronology" label="middle chronology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42686" wikidata="Q2851869" url="?curid=42686" title="1600s BC (decade)">
<text>The 1600s BC was a decade lasting from January 1, 1609 BC to December 31, 1600 BC.
==Events and trends==
* Egypt—End of Fourteenth Dynasty.
* The creation of one of the oldest surviving astronomical documents, a copy of which was found in the Babylonian library of Ashurbanipal: a 21-year record of the appearances of Venus (which the early Babylonians called Nindaranna).
* The end of the Indus Valley civilization.
* The overthrow of the ruling Amorite dynasty in Aleppo, Syria.
* The date of the earliest discovered rubber balls.
* Egypt conquered by Asian tribes known as the Hyksos—see History of ancient Israel and Judah.
* 1600 BC—Shang dynasty instituted in China.
* 1600 BC—Tumulus culture started.
* —Nebra skydisk created in what is now Germany.
* —The foundations of the Olmec civilization in southern Mexico.
* —Cycladic civilization ends.
* –1550 BC—&quot;Mask of Agamemnon&quot; Funerary mask, from the royal tombs at Mycenae, Greece, is made. Grave Circle A. It is now at National Archaeological Museum of Athens.
* –1200 BC—Hittite (Anatolia) iron tools and weapons.
* – 1200 BC—Tiryns, Ancient Greece, is inhabited.
* —Kings and princes on the mainland Greece have begun building large aboveground burial places commonly referred to as beehive tombs because of their rounded, conical shape.
* —Hittites establish capital at Hattusa (near modern Boğazkale, Turkey).

==Significant people==
* 1602 BC—Death of Shem, son of Noah, according to the Hebrew Calendar

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2851869" start="4" end="12" title="1600s BC (decade)" label="1600s BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="107" end="112" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q650945" start="120" end="138" title="Fourteenth Dynasty of Egypt" label="Fourteenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="243" end="253" title="Akkadian language" label="Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q171191" start="265" end="277" title="Ashurbanipal" label="Ashurbanipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="318" end="323" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="390" end="415" title="Indus Valley civilization" label="Indus Valley civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q203507" start="447" end="454" title="Amorite" label="Amorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="466" end="472" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="474" end="479" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="519" end="525" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="535" end="540" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="554" end="558" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192319" start="580" end="586" title="Hyksos" label="Hyksos"/>
<link wikidata="Q193748" start="591" end="626" title="History of ancient Israel and Judah" label="History of ancient Israel and Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851869" start="630" end="637" title="1600 BC" label="1600 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="638" end="651" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="666" end="671" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851869" start="675" end="682" title="1600 BC" label="1600 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q603383" start="683" end="698" title="Tumulus culture" label="Tumulus culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q157094" start="711" end="724" title="Nebra skydisk" label="Nebra skydisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q135364" start="783" end="788" title="Olmec" label="Olmec"/>
<link wikidata="Q318144" start="825" end="846" title="Cycladic civilization" label="Cycladic civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q533909" start="856" end="863" title="1550 BC" label="1550 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126741" start="870" end="887" title="Mask of Agamemnon" label="Mask of Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40555" start="894" end="907" title="Funerary mask" label="Funerary mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="933" end="940" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="942" end="948" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597783" start="959" end="973" title="Grave Circle A, Mycenae" label="Grave Circle A"/>
<link wikidata="Q637187" start="988" end="1028" title="National Archaeological Museum of Athens" label="National Archaeological Museum of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994008" start="1033" end="1040" title="1200 BC" label="1200 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="1041" end="1048" title="Hittites" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1050" end="1058" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217379" start="1096" end="1102" title="Tiryns" label="Tiryns"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1104" end="1118" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1171" end="1177" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="1312" end="1320" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q181007" start="1342" end="1349" title="Hattusa" label="Hattusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q848800" start="1363" end="1372" title="Boğazkale" label="Boğazkale"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="1374" end="1380" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851869" start="1409" end="1416" title="1602 BC" label="1602 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q200902" start="1426" end="1430" title="Shem" label="Shem"/>
<link wikidata="Q81422" start="1439" end="1443" title="Noah" label="Noah"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42687" wikidata="Q1999853" url="?curid=42687" title="1650s BC">
<text>The 1650s BC was a decade lasting from January 1, 1659 BC to December 31, 1650 BC.
==Events and trends==
* c. 1655 BC—Tan-Uli, the ruler of the Elamite Empire, dies.
* c. 1650 BC—Greeks start to live in Mycenae. 
* c. 1650 BC—Middle Kingdom ends in Ancient Egypt (other date is 1674 BC).
* c. 1650 BC—Second Intermediate Period starts in Ancient Egypt (other date is 1674 BC).
* c. 1650 BC — &quot;Flotilla&quot; fresco, from Room 5 of West House, Akrotiri (prehistoric city), Thera, is made. Second Palace period. It is now kept in National Archaeological Museum, Athens.
* Egypt—Start of Seventeenth Dynasty.
* c. 1650 BC—Between Rapperswil and Hurden, on the so-called Seedamm, a first wooden bridge was constructed on Lake Zürich in Switzerland
* c. 1650 BC—The last Woolly mammoths die on Wrangel Island, rendering the species extinct.
* c. 1650 BC—The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus is produced.

== Significant lifeforms ==

* c.1653 BC —Alerce Milenario is estimated to have germinated this year.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1999853" start="4" end="12" title="1650s BC" label="1650s BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999853" start="110" end="117" title="1655 BC" label="1655 BC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="118" end="125" title="Tan-Uli" label="Tan-Uli"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="144" end="158" title="Elamite Empire" label="Elamite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999853" start="171" end="178" title="1650 BC" label="1650 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="179" end="185" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="203" end="210" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q191324" start="226" end="240" title="Middle Kingdom of Egypt" label="Middle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="249" end="262" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q206715" start="301" end="327" title="Second Intermediate Period" label="Second Intermediate Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q421232" start="448" end="475" title="Akrotiri (prehistoric city)" label="Akrotiri (prehistoric city)"/>
<link wikidata="Q129296" start="477" end="482" title="Santorini" label="Thera"/>
<link wikidata="Q637187" start="533" end="563" title="National Archaeological Museum, Athens" label="National Archaeological Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="565" end="571" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="575" end="580" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q642301" start="590" end="609" title="Seventeenth dynasty of Egypt" label="Seventeenth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q688539" start="632" end="642" title="Rapperswil" label="Rapperswil"/>
<link wikidata="Q689914" start="647" end="653" title="Hurden" label="Hurden"/>
<link wikidata="Q690742" start="672" end="679" title="Seedamm" label="Seedamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625439" start="689" end="702" title="Holzbrücke Rapperswil-Hurden" label="wooden bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q14407" start="722" end="733" title="Lake Zürich" label="Lake Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="737" end="748" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699044" start="771" end="785" title="Woolly mammoth" label="Woolly mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q106594" start="794" end="808" title="Wrangel Island" label="Wrangel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q213540" start="854" end="884" title="The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus" label="The Rhind Mathematical Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999853" start="932" end="939" title="1653 BC" label="1653 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q112480861" start="941" end="957" title="Alerce Milenario" label="Alerce Milenario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42691" wikidata="Q151164" url="?curid=42691" title="André Malraux">
<text>Georges André Malraux ( ; ; 3 November 1901 – 23 November 1976) was a French novelist, art theorist, and minister of cultural affairs. Malraux&#x27;s novel &quot;La Condition Humaine&quot; (&quot;Man&#x27;s Fate&quot;) (1933) won the Prix Goncourt. He was appointed by President Charles de Gaulle as information minister (1945–46) and subsequently as France&#x27;s first cultural affairs minister during de Gaulle&#x27;s presidency (1959–1969).

==Early years==
Malraux was born in Paris in 1901, the son of Fernand-Georges Malraux (1875–1930) and Berthe Félicie Lamy (1877–1932). His parents separated in 1905 and eventually divorced. There are suggestions that Malraux&#x27;s paternal grandfather committed suicide in 1909.

Malraux was raised by his mother, his maternal aunt Marie Lamy and his maternal grandmother, Adrienne Lamy (née Romagna), who had a grocery store in the small town of Bondy (Seine-Saint-Denis). His father, a stockbroker, died by suicide in 1930 after the international crash of the stock market and onset of the Great Depression. 

From his childhood, associates noticed that André had marked nervousness and motor and vocal tics. The recent biographer Olivier Todd, who published a book on Malraux in 2005, suggests that he had Tourette syndrome, although that has not been confirmed. The young Malraux left formal education early, but he followed his curiosity through the booksellers and museums in Paris, and explored the city&#x27;s rich libraries as well.


==Career==

===Early years===
Malraux&#x27;s first published work, an article entitled &quot;The Origins of Cubist Poetry&quot;, appeared in Florent Fels&#x27; magazine &quot;Action&quot; in 1920. This was followed in 1921 by three semi-surrealist tales, one of which, &quot;Paper Moons&quot;, was illustrated by Fernand Léger. Malraux also frequented the Parisian artistic and literary milieux of the period, meeting figures such as Demetrios Galanis, Max Jacob, François Mauriac, Guy de Pourtalès, André Salmon, Jean Cocteau, Raymond Radiguet, Florent Fels, Pascal Pia, Marcel Arland, Edmond Jaloux, and Pierre Mac Orlan. In 1922, Malraux married Clara Goldschmidt. Malraux and his first wife separated in 1938 but did not divorce until 1947. His daughter from this marriage, Florence (b. 1933), married the filmmaker Alain Resnais. By the age of twenty, Malraux was reading the work of the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche who was to remain a major influence on him for the rest of his life. Malraux was especially impressed with Nietzsche&#x27;s theory of a world in continuous turmoil and his statement &quot;that the individual himself is still the most recent creation&quot; who was completely responsible for all of his actions. Most of all, Malraux embraced Nietzsche&#x27;s theory of the &quot;Übermensch&quot;, the heroic, exalted man who would create great works of art and whose will would allow him to triumph over anything.

===Indochina===
T. E. Lawrence, aka &quot;Lawrence of Arabia&quot;, has a reputation in France as the man who was supposedly responsible for France&#x27;s troubles in Syria in the 1920s. An exception was Malraux who regarded Lawrence as a role model, the intellectual-cum-man-of-action and the romantic, enigmatic hero. Malraux often admitted to having a &quot;certain fascination&quot; with Lawrence, and it has been suggested that Malraux&#x27;s sudden decision to abandon the Surrealist literary scene in Paris for adventure in the Far East was prompted by a desire to emulate Lawrence who began his career as an archaeologist in the Ottoman Empire excavating the ruins of the ancient city of Carchemish in the &quot;vilayet&quot; of Aleppo in what is now modern Syria. As Lawrence had first made his reputation in the Near East digging up the ruins of an ancient civilization, it was only natural that Malraux should go to the Far East to likewise make his reputation in Asia digging up ancient ruins. Lawrence considered himself a writer first and foremost while also presenting himself as a man of action, the &quot;Nietzschean&quot; hero who triumphs over both the environment and men through the force of his will, a persona that Malraux consciously imitated. Malraux often wrote about Lawrence, whom he described admiringly as a man with a need for &quot;the absolute&quot;, for whom no compromises were possible and for whom going all the way was the only way. Along the same lines, Malraux argued that Lawrence should not be remembered mainly as a guerrilla leader in the Arab Revolt and the British liaison officer with the Emir Faisal, but rather as a romantic, lyrical writer as writing was Lawrence&#x27;s first passion, which also described Malraux very well. Although Malraux courted fame through his novels, poems and essays on art in combination with his adventures and political activism, he was an intensely shy and private man who kept to himself, maintaining a distance between himself and others. Malraux&#x27;s reticence led his first wife Clara to later say she barely knew him during their marriage.

In 1923, aged 22, Malraux and Clara left for the French Protectorate of Cambodia. Angkor Wat is a huge 12th century temple situated in the old capital of the Khmer Empire. Angkor (Yasodharapura) was &quot;the world&#x27;s largest urban settlement&quot; in the 11th and 12th centuries supported by an elaborate network of canals and roads across mainland Southeast Asia before decaying and falling into the jungle. The discovery of the ruins of Angkor Wat by Westerners (the Khmers had never fully abandoned the temples of Angkor) in the jungle by the French explorer Henri Mouhot in 1861 had given Cambodia a romantic reputation in France, as the home of the vast, mysterious ruins of the Khmer empire. Upon reaching Cambodia, Malraux, Clara and friend Louis Chevasson undertook an expedition into unexplored areas of the former imperial settlements in search of hidden temples, hoping to find artifacts and items that could be sold to art collectors and museums. At about the same time archaeologists, with the approval of the French government, were removing large numbers of items from Angkor - many of which are now housed in the Guimet Museum in Paris. On his return, Malraux was arrested and charged by French colonial authorities for removing a &quot;bas-relief&quot; from the exquisite &quot;Banteay Srei&quot; temple. Although he was guilty, his arrest and imprisonment were deemed inappropriate – for the crime was of no consequence. Clara, his wife, started a campaign for his acquittal and a number of notable arts and literary figures signed a petition defending Malraux: among them were François Mauriac, André Breton and André Gide. Malraux had his sentence reduced to a year, and then suspended.

Malraux&#x27;s experiences in Indochina led him to become highly critical of the French colonial authorities there. In 1925, with Paul Monin, a progressive lawyer, he helped to organize the Young Annam League and founded a newspaper &quot;L&#x27;Indochine&quot; to champion Vietnamese independence. After falling foul of the French authorities, Malraux claimed to have crossed over to China where he was involved with the Kuomintang and their then allies, the Chinese Communists, in their struggle against the warlords in the Great Northern Expedition before they turned on each other in 1927, which marked the beginning of the Chinese Civil War that was to last on and off until 1949. In fact, Malraux did not first visit China until 1931 and he did not see the bloody suppression of the Chinese Communists by the Kuomintang in 1927 first-hand as he often implied that he did, although he did do much reading on the subject.

===Asian novels===
On his return to France, Malraux published &quot;The Temptation of the West&quot; (1926). The work was in the form of an exchange of letters between a Westerner and an Asian, comparing aspects of the two cultures. This was followed by his first novel &quot;The Conquerors&quot; (1928), and then by &quot;The Royal Way&quot; (1930) which reflected some of his Cambodian experiences. The American literary critic Dennis Roak described &quot;Les Conquérants&quot; as influenced by &quot;The Seven Pillars of Wisdom&quot; as it was narrated in the present tense &quot;...with its staccato snatches of dialogue and the images of sound and sight, light and darkness, which create a compellingly haunting atmosphere.&quot; &quot;The Conquerors&quot; was set in the summer of 1925 against the backdrop of the general strike called by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and Kuomintang in Hong Kong and Canton, the novel concerns political intrigue amongst the &quot;anti-imperialist&quot; camp. The novel is narrated by an unnamed Frenchman who travels from Saigon to Hong Kong to Canton to meet an old friend named Garine who is a professional revolutionary working with Mikhail Borodin, who in real life was the Comintern&#x27;s principal agent in China. The novel alternates between depictions of Chinese nationalist militancy and British imperial anxieties. The Kuomintang are depicted rather unflatteringly as conservative Chinese nationalists uninterested in social reform, another faction is led by Hong, a Chinese assassin committed to revolutionary violence for the sake of violence, and only the Communists are portrayed relatively favorably. Much of the dramatic tension between the novel concerns a three-way struggle between the hero, Garine and Borodin who is only interested in using the revolution in China to achieve Soviet foreign policy goals. The fact that the European characters are considerably better drawn than the Asian characters reflected Malraux&#x27;s understanding of China at the time as more of an exotic place where Europeans played out their own dramas rather than a place to be understood in its own right. Initially, Malraux&#x27;s writings on Asia reflected the influence of Orientalism presenting the Far East as strange, exotic, decadent, mysterious, sensuous and violent, but Malraux&#x27;s picture of China grew somewhat more humanized and understanding as Malraux disregarded his Orientalist and Eurocentric viewpoint in favor of one that presented the Chinese as fellow human beings.

The second of Malraux&#x27;s Asian novels was the semi-autobiographical &quot;La Voie Royale&quot; which relates the adventures of a Frenchman Claude Vannec who together with his Danish friend Perken head down the royal road of the title into the jungle of Cambodia with the intention of stealing bas-relief sculptures from the ruins of Hindu temples. After many perilous adventures, Vannec and Perken are captured by hostile tribesmen and find an old friend of Perken&#x27;s, Grabot, who had already been captured for some time. Grabot, a deserter from the French Foreign Legion had been reduced to nothing as his captors blinded him and left him tied to a stake starving, a stark picture of human degradation. The three Europeans escape, but Perken is wounded and dies of an infection. Through ostensibly an adventure novel, &quot;La Voie Royale&quot; is in fact a philosophical novel concerned with existential questions about the meaning of life. The book was a failure at the time as the publishers marketed it as a stirring adventure story set in far-off, exotic, Cambodia which confused many readers who, instead, found a novel pondering deep philosophical questions.

In his Asian novels Malraux used Asia as a stick to beat Europe with as he argued that after World War I the ideal of progress of a Europe getting better and better for the general advancement of humanity was dead. As such, Malraux now argued that European civilization was faced with a &quot;Nietzschean&quot; void, a twilight world, without God or progress, in which the old values had proven worthless and a sense of spirituality that had once existed was gone. An agnostic, but an intensely spiritual man, Malraux maintained that what was needed was an &quot;aesthetic spirituality&quot; in which love of &#x27;Art&#x27; and &#x27;Civilization&#x27; would allow one to appreciate &quot;le sacré&quot; in life, a sensibility that was both tragic and awe-inspiring as one surveyed all of the cultural treasures of the world, a mystical sense of humanity&#x27;s place in a universe that was as astonishingly beautiful as it was mysterious. Malraux argued that as death is inevitable and in a world devoid of meaning, which thus was &quot;absurd&quot;, only art could offer meaning in an &quot;absurd&quot; world. Malraux argued that art transcended time as art allowed one to connect with the past, and the very act of appreciating art was itself an act of art as the love of art was part of a continuation of endless artistic metamorphosis that constantly created something new. Malraux argued that as different types of art went in and out of style, the revival of a style was a metamorphosis as art could never be appreciated in exactly the same way as it was in the past. As art was timeless, it conquered time and death as artworks lived on after the death of the artist. The American literary critic Jean-Pierre Hérubel wrote that Malraux never entirely worked out a coherent philosophy as his mystical &quot;Weltanschauung&quot; (world view) was based more upon emotion than logic. In Malraux&#x27;s viewpoint, of all the professions, the artist was the most important as artists were the explorers and voyagers of the human spirit, as artistic creation was the highest form of human achievement for only art could illustrate humanity&#x27;s relationship with the universe. As Malraux wrote, &quot;there is something far greater than history and it is the persistence of genius&quot;. Hérubel argued that it is fruitless to attempt to criticize Malraux for his lack of methodological consistency as Malraux cultivated a poetical sensibility, a certain lyrical style, that appealed more to the heart than to the brain. Malraux was a proud Frenchman, but he also saw himself as a citizen of the world, a man who loved the cultural achievements of all of the civilizations across the globe. At the same time, Malraux criticized those intellectuals who wanted to retreat into the ivory tower, instead arguing that it was the duty of intellectuals to participate and fight (both metaphorically and literally) in the great political causes of the day, that the only truly great causes were the ones that one was willing to die for.

In 1933 Malraux published &quot;Man&#x27;s Fate&quot; (&quot;La Condition Humaine&quot;), a novel about the 1927 failed Communist rebellion in Shanghai. Despite Malraux&#x27;s attempts to present his Chinese characters as more three dimensional and developed than he did in &quot;Les Conquérants&quot;, his biographer Oliver Todd wrote he could not &quot;quite break clear of a conventional idea of China with coolies, bamboo shoots, opium smokers, destitutes, and prostitutes&quot;, which were the standard French stereotypes of China at the time. The work was awarded the 1933 Prix Goncourt. After the breakdown of his marriage with Clara, Malraux lived with journalist and novelist Josette Clotis, starting in 1933. Malraux and Josette had two sons: Pierre-Gauthier (1940–1961) and Vincent (1943–1961). During 1944, while Malraux was fighting in Alsace, Josette died, aged 34, when she slipped while boarding a train. His two sons died together in 1961 in an automobile accident. The car they were driving had been given them by Vincent&#x27;s girlfriend, the wealthy Clara Saint.

===Searching for lost cities===
On 22 February 1934, Malraux together with Édouard Corniglion-Molinier embarked on a much publicized expedition to find the lost capital of the Queen of Sheba mentioned in the Old Testament. Saudi Arabia and Yemen were both remote, dangerous places that few Westerners visited at the time, and what made the expedition especially dangerous was while Malraux was searching for the lost cities of Sheba, King Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia invaded Yemen, and the ensuing Saudi–Yemeni war greatly complicated Malraux&#x27;s search. After several weeks of flying over the deserts in Saudi Arabia and Yemen, Malraux returned to France to announce that the ruins he found up in the mountains of Yemen were the capital of the Queen of Sheba. Though Malraux&#x27;s claim is not generally accepted by archeologists, the expedition bolstered Malraux&#x27;s fame and provided the material for several of his later essays.

===Spanish Civil War===
During the 1930s, Malraux was active in the anti-fascist Popular Front in France. At the beginning of the Spanish Civil War he joined the Republican forces in Spain, serving in and helping to organize the small Spanish Republican Air Force. Curtis Cate, one of his biographers, writes that Malraux was slightly wounded twice during efforts to stop the Battle of Madrid in 1936 as the Spanish Nationalists attempted to take Madrid, but the historian Hugh Thomas argues otherwise.

The French government sent aircraft to Republican forces in Spain, but they were obsolete by the standards of 1936. They were mainly Potez 540 bombers and Dewoitine D.372 fighters. The slow Potez 540 rarely survived three months of air missions, flying at 160 knots against enemy fighters flying at more than 250 knots. Few of the fighters proved to be airworthy, and they were delivered intentionally without guns or gunsights. The Ministry of Defense of France had feared that modern types of planes would easily be captured by the German Condor Legion fighting with General Francisco Franco, and the lesser models were a way of maintaining official &quot;neutrality&quot;. The planes were surpassed by more modern types introduced by the end of 1936 on both sides.

The Republic circulated photos of Malraux standing next to some Potez 540 bombers suggesting that France was on their side, at a time when France and the United Kingdom had officially declared neutrality. But Malraux&#x27;s commitment to the Republicans was personal, like that of many other foreign volunteers, and there was never any suggestion that he was there at the behest of the French Government. Malraux himself was not a pilot, and never claimed to be one, but his leadership qualities seem to have been recognized because he was made Squadron Leader of the &#x27;España&#x27; squadron. Acutely aware of the Republicans&#x27; inferior armaments, of which outdated aircraft were just one example, he toured the United States to raise funds for the cause. In 1937 he published &quot;L&#x27;Espoir&quot; (Man&#x27;s Hope), a novel influenced by his Spanish war experiences. In July 1937 he attended the Second International Writers&#x27; Congress, the purpose of which was to discuss the attitude of intellectuals to the war, held in Valencia, Barcelona and Madrid and attended by many writers including Ernest Hemingway, Stephen Spender and Pablo Neruda.

Malraux&#x27;s participation in major historical events such as the Spanish Civil War inevitably brought him determined adversaries as well as strong supporters, and the resulting polarization of opinion has colored, and rendered questionable, much that has been written about his life. Fellow combatants praised Malraux&#x27;s leadership and sense of camaraderie While André Marty of the Comintern called him as an &quot;adventurer&quot; for his high profile and demands on the Spanish Republican government. The British historian Antony Beevor also claims that &quot;Malraux stands out, not just because he was a mythomaniac in his claims of martial heroism – in Spain and later in the French Resistance – but because he cynically exploited the opportunity for intellectual heroism in the legend of the Spanish Republic.&quot;

In any case, Malraux&#x27;s participation in events such as the Spanish Civil War has tended to distract attention from his important literary achievement. Malraux saw himself first and foremost as a writer and thinker (and not a &quot;man of action&quot; as biographers so often portray him) but his extremely eventful life – a far cry from the stereotype of the French intellectual confined to his study or a Left Bank café – has tended to obscure this fact. As a result, his literary works, including his important works on the theory of art, have received less attention than one might expect, especially in Anglophone countries.

===World War II===
At the beginning of the Second World War, Malraux joined the French Army. He was captured in 1940 during the Battle of France but escaped and later joined the French Resistance. In 1944, he was captured by the Gestapo. He later commanded the Brigade Alsace-Lorraine in defence of Strasbourg and in the attack on Stuttgart.

André&#x27;s half-brother, Claude, a Special Operations Executive (SOE) agent, was also captured by the Germans, and executed at Gross-Rosen concentration camp in 1944.

Otto Abetz was the German Ambassador, and produced a series of &quot;black lists&quot; of authors forbidden to be read, circulated or sold in Nazi occupied France. These included anything written by a Jew, a communist, an Anglo-Saxon or anyone else who was anti-Germanic or anti-fascist. Louis Aragon and André Malraux were both on these &quot;Otto Lists&quot; of forbidden authors.

After the war, Malraux was awarded the &quot;Médaille de la Résistance&quot; and the . The British awarded him the Distinguished Service Order, for his work with British liaison officers in Corrèze, Dordogne and Lot. After Dordogne was liberated, Malraux led a battalion of former resistance fighters to Alsace-Lorraine, where they fought alongside the First Army.

During the war, he worked on his last novel, &quot;The Struggle with the Angel&quot;, the title drawn from the story of the Biblical Jacob. The manuscript was destroyed by the Gestapo after his capture in 1944. A surviving first section, titled &quot;The Walnut Trees of Altenburg&quot;, was published after the war.

===After the war===
Shortly after the war, General Charles de Gaulle appointed Malraux as his Minister for Information (1945–1946). Soon after, he completed his first book on art, &quot;The Psychology of Art&quot;, published in three volumes (1947–1949). The work was subsequently revised and republished in one volume as &quot;The Voices of Silence&quot; (&quot;Les Voix du Silence&quot;), the first part of which has been published separately as &quot;The Museum without Walls&quot;. Other important works on the theory of art were to follow. These included the three-volume &quot;Metamorphosis of the Gods&quot; and &quot;Precarious Man and Literature&quot;, the latter published posthumously in 1977. In 1948, Malraux married a second time, to Marie-Madeleine Lioux, a concert pianist and the widow of his half-brother, Roland Malraux. They separated in 1966. Subsequently, Malraux lived with Louise de Vilmorin in the Vilmorin family château at Verrières-le-Buisson, Essonne, a suburb southwest of Paris. Vilmorin was best known as a writer of delicate but mordant tales, often set in aristocratic or artistic milieu. Her most famous novel was &quot;Madame de...&quot;, published in 1951, which was adapted into the celebrated film &quot;The Earrings of Madame de...&quot; (1953), directed by Max Ophüls and starring Charles Boyer, Danielle Darrieux and Vittorio de Sica. Vilmorin&#x27;s other works included &quot;Juliette&quot;, &quot;La lettre dans un taxi&quot;, &quot;Les belles amours&quot;, &quot;Saintes-Unefois&quot;, and &quot;Intimités&quot;. Her letters to Jean Cocteau were published after the death of both correspondents. After Louise&#x27;s death, Malraux spent his final years with her relative, Sophie de Vilmorin.

In 1957, Malraux published the first volume of his trilogy on art entitled &quot;The Metamorphosis of the Gods&quot;. The second two volumes (not yet translated into English) were published shortly before he died in 1976. They are entitled &quot;L&#x27;Irréel&quot; and &quot;L&#x27;Intemporel&quot; and discuss artistic developments from the Renaissance to modern times. Malraux also initiated the series &quot;Arts of Mankind&quot;, an ambitious survey of world art that generated more than thirty large, illustrated volumes.

When de Gaulle returned to the French presidency in 1958, Malraux became France&#x27;s first Minister of Cultural Affairs, a post he held from 1958 to 1969. On 7 February 1962, Malraux was the target of an assassination attempt by the &quot;Organisation armée secrète&quot; (OAS), which set off a bomb to his apartment building that failed to kill its intended target, but did leave a four-year-old girl who was living in the adjoining apartment blinded by the shrapnel. Ironically, Malraux was a lukewarm supporter of de Gaulle&#x27;s decision to grant independence to Algeria, but the OAS was not aware of this, and had decided to assassinate Malraux as a high-profile minister.

On 23 May 1961, André Malraux&#x27;s two sons, Gauthier and Vincent, were killed in a car accident.

Among many initiatives, Malraux launched an innovative (and subsequently widely imitated) program to clean the blackened façades of notable French buildings, revealing the natural stone underneath. He also created a number of &quot;maisons de la culture&quot; in provincial cities and worked to preserve France&#x27;s national heritage by promoting industrial archaeology. An intellectual who took the arts very seriously, Malraux saw his mission as Culture Minister to preserve France&#x27;s heritage and to improve the cultural levels of the masses. Malraux&#x27;s efforts to promote French culture mostly concerned renewing old or building new libraries, art galleries, museums, theatres, opera houses, and &quot;maisons de la culture&quot; (centres built in provincial cities that were a mixture of a library, art gallery and theatre). In 1964 he created the Inventaire général du patrimoine culturel to record all goods based on archival sources created by human kind throughout France. Film, television and music took less of Malraux&#x27;s time, and the changing demographics caused by immigration from the Third World stymied his efforts to promote French high culture, as many immigrants from Muslim and African nations did not find French high culture that compelling. A passionate bibliophile, Malraux built up a huge collection of books both as a cultural minister for the nation and as a man for himself.

Malraux was an outspoken supporter of the Bangladesh liberation movement during the 1971 Liberation War of Bangladesh and despite his age seriously considered joining the struggle. When Indira Gandhi came to Paris in November 1971, there was extensive discussion between them about the situation in Bangladesh.
During this post-war period, Malraux published a series of semi-autobiographical works, the first entitled &quot;Antimémoires&quot; (1967). A later volume in the series, &quot;Lazarus&quot;, is a reflection on death occasioned by his experiences during a serious illness. &quot;La Tête d&#x27;obsidienne&quot; (1974) (translated as &quot;Picasso&#x27;s Mask&quot;) concerns Picasso, and visual art more generally. In his last book, published posthumously in 1977, &quot;L&#x27;Homme précaire et la littérature&quot;, Malraux propounded the theory that there was a &quot;bibliothèque imaginaire&quot; where writers created works that influenced subsequent writers much as painters learned their craft by studying the old masters; once they have understood the work of the old masters, writers would sally forth with the knowledge gained to create new works that added to the growing and never-ending &quot;bibliothèque imaginaire&quot;. (See also musée imaginaire). An elitist who appreciated what he saw as the high culture of all the nations of the world, Malraux was especially interested in art history and archaeology, and saw his duty as a writer to share what he knew with ordinary people. An aesthete, Malraux believed that art was spiritually enriching and necessary for humanity.

Malraux was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature on 32 occasions. He was an annual contender for the prize in the 1950s and 1960s, but was never awarded. In 1969 he was the main candidate considered for the prize along with Samuel Beckett. His candidacy was supported by some members of the Nobel committee, but was rejected for political reasons by another member, and the Swedish Academy ultimately decided that Beckett should be awarded.

===Death===

Malraux died in Créteil, near Paris, on 23 November 1976 from a lung embolism. He was a heavy smoker and had cancer. He was cremated and his ashes buried in the Verrières-le-Buisson (Essonne) cemetery. In recognition of his contributions to French culture, his ashes were moved to the Panthéon in Paris during 1996, on the twentieth anniversary of his death.

===Legacy and honours===

*1933, Prix Goncourt
*Médaille de la Résistance
*Croix de Guerre
*Distinguished Service Order (United Kingdom)
* 1959, honorary doctorate, University of São Paulo
*Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding, 1974 (India)

There is a large body of critical commentary on Malraux&#x27;s literary &quot;œuvre&quot;, including his extensive writings on art. However, some of his works, including the last two volumes of &quot;The Metamorphosis of the Gods&quot; (&quot;L&#x27;Irréel&quot; and &quot;L&#x27;Intemporel&quot;), are not yet available in English translation. Malraux&#x27;s works on the theory of art contain a revolutionary approach to art that challenges the Enlightenment tradition that treats art simply as a source of &quot;aesthetic pleasure&quot;. However, as French writer André Brincourt has commented, Malraux&#x27;s books on art have been &quot;skimmed a lot but very little read&quot; (this is especially true in Anglophone countries) and the radical implications of his thinking are often missed. A particularly important aspect of Malraux&#x27;s thinking about art is his explanation of the capacity of art to transcend time. In contrast to the traditional notion that art endures because it is timeless (&quot;eternal&quot;), Malraux argues that art lives on through metamorphosis – a process of resuscitation (where the work had fallen into obscurity) and transformation in meaning. This idea has also been extended into scholarship about the function of image datasets in art history.

*1968, an international Malraux Society was founded in the United States. It produces the journal &quot;Revue André Malraux Review&quot;, Michel Lantelme, editor, at University of Oklahoma.
*Another international Malraux association, the &quot;Amitiés internationales André Malraux&quot;, is based in Paris.
*A French-language website, &quot;Site littéraire André Malraux&quot;, offers research, information, and critical commentary about Malraux&#x27;s works.
*A quote from Malraux&#x27;s &quot;Antimémoires&quot; is included in the original 1997 English translation of &quot;&quot;. The quote, &quot;What is a man? A miserable little pile of secrets&quot; is part of a monologue early in the game between Richter and Dracula.
*One of the primary &quot;feeder&quot; schools of the Lycée Français Charles de Gaulle in London is named in honour of André Malraux.

==Bibliography==
* &quot;Lunes en Papier&quot;, 1923 (&quot;Paper Moons&quot;, 2005)
* &quot;La Tentation de l&#x27;Occident&quot;, 1926 (&quot;The Temptation of the West&quot;, 1926)
* &quot;Royaume-Farfelu&quot;, 1928 (&quot;The Kingdom of Farfelu&quot;, 2005)
* (reprint University of Chicago Press, 1992, )
* &quot;La Voie royale&quot;, 1930 (&quot;The Royal Way&quot; or &quot;The Way of the Kings&quot;, 1930)
* &quot;La Condition humaine&quot;, 1933 (&quot;Man&#x27;s Fate&quot;, 1934)
* &quot;Le Temps du mépris&quot;, 1935 (&quot;Days of Wrath&quot;, 1935)
* &quot;L&#x27;Espoir&quot;, 1937 (&quot;Man&#x27;s Hope&quot;, 1938)
* (reprint University of Chicago Press, 1992, )
* &quot;La Psychologie de l&#x27;Art&quot;, 1947–1949 (&quot;The Psychology of Art&quot;)
* &quot;Le Musée imaginaire de la sculpture mondiale&quot; (1952–54) (&quot;The Imaginary Museum of World Sculpture&quot; (in three volumes))
* &quot;Les Voix du silence&quot;, 1951 (&quot;The Voices of Silence&quot;, 1953)
* &quot;La Métamorphose des dieux&quot; (English translation: &quot;The Metamorphosis of the Gods&quot;, by Stuart Gilbert, London: Secker and Warburg, 1960- .):
**Vol 1. &quot;Le Surnaturel&quot;, 1957
**Vol 2. &quot;L&#x27;Irréel&quot;, 1974
**Vol 3. &quot;L&#x27;Intemporel&quot;, 1976
* &quot;Antimémoires&quot;, 1967 (&quot;Anti-Memoirs&quot;, 1968 – autobiography)
* &quot;Les Chênes qu&#x27;on abat&quot;, 1971 (&quot;Felled Oaks&quot; or &quot;The Fallen Oaks&quot;)
* &quot;Lazare&quot;, 1974 (&quot;Lazarus&quot;, 1977)
* &quot;L&#x27;Homme précaire et la littérature&quot;, 1977
* &quot;Saturne: Le destin, l&#x27;art et Goya&quot;, (Paris: Gallimard, 1978) (Translation of an earlier edition published in 1957: Malraux, André.
* &quot;Saturn: An Essay on Goya&quot;. Translated by C.W. Chilton. London: Phaidon Press, 1957.)
* &quot;Lettres choisies, 1920–1976&quot;. Paris, Gallimard, 2012.

For a more complete bibliography, see site littéraire André Malraux.

== Exhibitions ==
* &quot;André Malraux&quot;, Fondation Maeght, Vence, 1973
* &quot;André Malraux et la modernité - le dernier des romantiques&quot;, Centennial Exhibition of his Birth, Musée de la Vie romantique, Paris, 2001, by Solange Thierry, with contributions by Marc Lambron, Solange Thierry, Daniel Marchesseau, Pierre Cabanne, Antoine Terrasse, Christiane Moatti, Gilles Béguin and Germain Viatte ()

==References==
==Further reading ==
* Art and the Human Adventure: André Malraux&#x27;s Theory of Art (Amsterdam, Rodopi: 2009) Derek Allan
* &quot;André Malraux&quot; (1960) by Geoffrey H. Hartman
* &quot;André Malraux: The Indochina adventure&quot; (1960) by Walter Langlois (New York Praeger).
* &quot;Malraux&quot; (1971) by Pierre Galante ()
* &quot;André Malraux: A Biography&quot; (1997) by Curtis Cate Fromm Publishing ()
* &quot;Malraux ou la Lutte avec l&#x27;ange. Art, histoire et religion&quot; (2001) by Raphaël Aubert ()
* &quot;Malraux : A Life&quot; (2005) by Olivier Todd () Review by Christopher Hitchens
* &quot;Dits et écrits d&#x27;André Malraux : Bibliographie commentée&quot; (2003) by Jacques Chanussot and Claude Travi ()
* &quot;André Malraux&quot; (2003) by Roberta Newnham ()
*
*
* &quot;Andre Malraux: Tragic Humanist&quot; (1963) by Charles D. Blend, Ohio State University Press ()
* &quot;Mona Lisa&#x27;s Escort: André Malraux and the Reinvention of French Culture&quot; (1999) by Herman Lebovics, Cornell University Press. 
* Derek Allan, &quot;Art and Time &quot;, Cambridge Scholars, 2013.
* Leys, Simon (Pierre Ryckmans), &#x27;Malraux&#x27;, in &quot;The Hall of Uselessness: Collected Essays&quot; (Melbourne: Black Inc, 2011), pp. 144–152. 

==External links==
* Amitiés Internationales André Malraux The official site of the French André Malraux Society: Malraux and culture. 
* André Malraux The site of research and information dedicated to André Malraux: literature, art, religion, history and culture. 
* Université McGill: le roman selon les romanciers (French) Inventory and analysis of André Malraux non-novelistic writings 
* Malraux&#x27;s early, surrealist writings 
* &#x27;Malraux, Literature and Art&#x27; – Essays by Derek Allan 
* A multimedia adaptation of Voices of silence 
* &quot;Andre Malraux and the Arts&quot; – Henri Peyre, The Baltimore Museum of Art: Baltimore, Maryland, 1964 – Accessed 26 June 2012 
* Fondation André Malraux 
* Foundation André Malraux 
* Villa André Malraux</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q151164" start="0" end="21" title="André Malraux" label="Georges André Malraux"/>
<link wikidata="Q384602" start="105" end="133" title="Minister of Culture (France)" label="minister of cultural affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618413" start="196" end="211" title="Man&amp;#x27;s Fate" label="Man&amp;#x27;s Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q187300" start="234" end="247" title="Prix Goncourt" label="Prix Goncourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="279" end="296" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q237394" start="894" end="899" title="Bondy" label="Bondy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020018" start="996" end="1021" title="Stock market crash" label="crash of the stock market"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1039" end="1055" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q191779" start="1256" end="1273" title="Tourette syndrome" label="Tourette syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074080" start="1632" end="1644" title="Florent Fels" label="Florent Fels"/>
<link wikidata="Q157183" start="1804" end="1817" title="Fernand Léger" label="Fernand Léger"/>
<link wikidata="Q330976" start="1925" end="1942" title="Demetrios Galanis" label="Demetrios Galanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q156214" start="1944" end="1953" title="Max Jacob" label="Max Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q81685" start="1955" end="1971" title="François Mauriac" label="François Mauriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557629" start="1973" end="1989" title="Guy de Pourtalès" label="Guy de Pourtalès"/>
<link wikidata="Q522679" start="1991" end="2003" title="André Salmon" label="André Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83158" start="2005" end="2017" title="Jean Cocteau" label="Jean Cocteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q333615" start="2019" end="2035" title="Raymond Radiguet" label="Raymond Radiguet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074080" start="2037" end="2049" title="Florent Fels" label="Florent Fels"/>
<link wikidata="Q481146" start="2051" end="2061" title="Pascal Pia" label="Pascal Pia"/>
<link wikidata="Q59076" start="2063" end="2076" title="Marcel Arland" label="Marcel Arland"/>
<link wikidata="Q706785" start="2078" end="2091" title="Edmond Jaloux" label="Edmond Jaloux"/>
<link wikidata="Q546952" start="2097" end="2113" title="Pierre Mac Orlan" label="Pierre Mac Orlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975495" start="2140" end="2157" title="Clara Malraux" label="Clara Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q218022" start="2311" end="2324" title="Alain Resnais" label="Alain Resnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="2403" end="2422" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q43484" start="2801" end="2811" title="Übermensch" label="Übermensch"/>
<link wikidata="Q170596" start="2953" end="2967" title="T. E. Lawrence" label="T. E. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q283680" start="3633" end="3643" title="Carchemish" label="Carchemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173090" start="5114" end="5145" title="French Protectorate of Cambodia" label="French Protectorate of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43473" start="5147" end="5157" title="Angkor Wat" label="Angkor Wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="5223" end="5235" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654910" start="5245" end="5258" title="Yasodharapura" label="Yasodharapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q399978" start="5632" end="5644" title="Henri Mouhot" label="Henri Mouhot"/>
<link wikidata="Q860994" start="6199" end="6212" title="Guimet Museum" label="Guimet Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="6323" end="6333" title="bas-relief" label="bas-relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q790099" start="6365" end="6377" title="Banteay Srei" label="Banteay Srei"/>
<link wikidata="Q81685" start="6666" end="6682" title="François Mauriac" label="François Mauriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q161955" start="6684" end="6696" title="André Breton" label="André Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q47484" start="6701" end="6711" title="André Gide" label="André Gide"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="6808" end="6817" title="French Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6968" end="6986" title="Young Annam League" label="Young Annam League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7017" end="7033" title="L&amp;#x27;Indochine" label="L&amp;#x27;Indochine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="7200" end="7210" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7773" end="7799" title="The Temptation of the West" label="The Temptation of the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q24323" start="8212" end="8235" title="Seven Pillars of Wisdom" label="Seven Pillars of Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q176578" start="8886" end="8901" title="Mikhail Borodin" label="Mikhail Borodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42865" start="9927" end="9938" title="Orientalism" label="Orientalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195143" start="10315" end="10341" title="The Royal Way" label="&amp;quot;La Voie Royale&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="10500" end="10508" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618413" start="14486" end="14501" title="Man&amp;#x27;s Fate" label="Man&amp;#x27;s Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195058" start="14567" end="14605" title="Shanghai massacre of 1927" label="failed Communist rebellion in Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q187300" start="15033" end="15046" title="Prix Goncourt" label="Prix Goncourt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15139" end="15153" title="Josette Clotis" label="Josette Clotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="15303" end="15309" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579788" start="15614" end="15641" title="Édouard Corniglion-Molinier" label="Édouard Corniglion-Molinier"/>
<link wikidata="Q159888" start="15715" end="15729" title="Queen of Sheba" label="Queen of Sheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422284" start="16558" end="16571" title="Popular Front (France)" label="Popular Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="16607" end="16624" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="16639" end="16649" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="16863" end="16869" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q335150" start="16950" end="16961" title="Hugh Thomas, Baron Thomas of Swynnerton" label="Hugh Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q922310" start="17114" end="17123" title="Potez 540" label="Potez 540"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207183" start="17136" end="17151" title="Dewoitine D.372" label="Dewoitine D.372"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134322" start="17399" end="17408" title="sight (device)" label="gunsights"/>
<link wikidata="Q153324" start="17522" end="17535" title="Condor Legion" label="Condor Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="17558" end="17574" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203257" start="18541" end="18554" title="Man&amp;#x27;s Hope" label="L&amp;#x27;Espoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="18791" end="18799" title="Valencia" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="18801" end="18810" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="18815" end="18821" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="18861" end="18877" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q448764" start="18879" end="18894" title="Stephen Spender" label="Stephen Spender"/>
<link wikidata="Q34189" start="18899" end="18911" title="Pablo Neruda" label="Pablo Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q369785" start="19284" end="19295" title="André Marty" label="André Marty"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="19303" end="19312" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q380229" start="19446" end="19459" title="Antony Beevor" label="Antony Beevor"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="20422" end="20438" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="20459" end="20470" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="20507" end="20523" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="20557" end="20574" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="20608" end="20615" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925306" start="20640" end="20663" title="Brigade Alsace-Lorraine" label="Brigade Alsace-Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="20678" end="20688" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="20710" end="20719" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="20759" end="20787" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q160268" start="20851" end="20881" title="Gross-Rosen concentration camp" label="Gross-Rosen concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q213615" start="20892" end="20902" title="Otto Abetz" label="Otto Abetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128" start="21180" end="21192" title="Louis Aragon" label="Louis Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q670473" start="21321" end="21346" title="Médaille de la Résistance" label="Médaille de la Résistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="21391" end="21418" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="Distinguished Service Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326" start="21466" end="21473" title="Corrèze" label="Corrèze"/>
<link wikidata="Q12576" start="21488" end="21491" title="Lot (department)" label="Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q155144" start="21580" end="21595" title="Alsace-Lorraine" label="Alsace-Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q162513" start="21629" end="21639" title="First Army (France)" label="First Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q289957" start="21775" end="21780" title="Jacob" label="Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="22011" end="22028" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q937273" start="22708" end="22729" title="Madeleine Malraux" label="Marie-Madeleine Lioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q297881" start="22857" end="22875" title="Louise de Vilmorin" label="Louise de Vilmorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444707" start="23203" end="23231" title="The Earrings of Madame de..." label="The Earrings of Madame de..."/>
<link wikidata="Q4801535" start="24111" end="24126" title="Arts of Mankind" label="Arts of Mankind"/>
<link wikidata="Q384602" start="24321" end="24349" title="Minister of Culture (France)" label="Minister of Cultural Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q918356" start="24469" end="24495" title="Organisation armée secrète" label="Organisation armée secrète"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471139" start="24782" end="24805" title="Évian Accords" label="independence to Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q259209" start="25360" end="25382" title="industrial archaeology" label="industrial archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153865" start="25874" end="25915" title="Inventaire général du patrimoine culturel" label="Inventaire général du patrimoine culturel"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="26519" end="26547" title="Liberation War of Bangladesh" label="Liberation War of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="26616" end="26629" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224856" start="27687" end="27703" title="musée imaginaire" label="musée imaginaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="28061" end="28086" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="28262" end="28276" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q207360" start="28412" end="28427" title="Swedish Academy" label="Swedish Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46135" start="28509" end="28516" title="Créteil" label="Créteil"/>
<link wikidata="Q220570" start="28557" end="28570" title="lung embolism" label="lung embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q747799" start="28654" end="28674" title="Verrières-le-Buisson" label="Verrières-le-Buisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188856" start="28778" end="28786" title="Panthéon, Paris" label="Panthéon"/>
<link wikidata="Q187300" start="28886" end="28899" title="Prix Goncourt" label="Prix Goncourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q670473" start="28901" end="28926" title="Médaille de la Résistance" label="Médaille de la Résistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q869896" start="28928" end="28943" title="Croix de Guerre" label="Croix de Guerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="28945" end="28972" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="Distinguished Service Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="28998" end="29016" title="honorary doctorate" label="honorary doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q835960" start="29018" end="29041" title="University of São Paulo" label="University of São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847384" start="29680" end="29695" title="André Brincourt" label="André Brincourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="30568" end="30590" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31109" end="31116" title="List of Castlevania characters#Richter Belmont" label="Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304690" start="31121" end="31128" title="Dracula (Castlevania)" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269062" start="31184" end="31216" title="Lycée Français Charles de Gaulle" label="Lycée Français Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="31220" end="31226" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31325" end="31336" title="Paper Moons" label="Paper Moons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31409" end="31435" title="The Temptation of the West" label="The Temptation of the West"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31492" end="31514" title="The Kingdom of Farfelu" label="The Kingdom of Farfelu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195143" start="31618" end="31631" title="The Royal Way" label="The Royal Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618413" start="31729" end="31744" title="Man&amp;#x27;s Fate" label="Man&amp;#x27;s Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203257" start="31872" end="31887" title="Man&amp;#x27;s Hope" label="Man&amp;#x27;s Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q6464641" start="31957" end="31985" title="La Psychologie de l&amp;#x27;Art" label="La Psychologie de l&amp;#x27;Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6464641" start="32189" end="32208" title="La Psychologie de l&amp;#x27;Art" label="Les Voix du silence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32560" end="32572" title="Antimémoires" label="Antimémoires"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32642" end="32668" title="Les Chênes qu&amp;#x27;on abat" label="Les Chênes qu&amp;#x27;on abat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435689" start="33285" end="33301" title="Fondation Maeght" label="Fondation Maeght"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714932" start="33425" end="33451" title="Musée de la Vie romantique" label="Musée de la Vie romantique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824930" start="33827" end="33846" title="Geoffrey H. Hartman" label="Geoffrey H. Hartman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33910" end="33925" title="Walter Langlois" label="Walter Langlois"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33978" end="33992" title="Pierre Galante" label="Pierre Galante"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34047" end="34058" title="Curtis Cate" label="Curtis Cate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258283" start="34167" end="34181" title="Raphaël Aubert" label="Raphaël Aubert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34226" end="34238" title="Olivier Todd" label="Olivier Todd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34359" end="34376" title="Jacques Chanussot" label="Jacques Chanussot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34435" end="34450" title="Roberta Newnham" label="Roberta Newnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q732583" start="34790" end="34805" title="Pierre Ryckmans (writer)" label="Pierre Ryckmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605966" start="35525" end="35536" title="Henri Peyre" label="Henri Peyre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42693" wikidata="Q13222579" url="?curid=42693" title="Upper and lower bounds">
<text>In mathematics, particularly in order theory, an upper bound or majorant of a subset of some preordered set is an element of that is every element of . 
Dually, a lower bound or minorant of is defined to be an element of that is less than or equal to every element of . 
A set with an upper (respectively, lower) bound is said to be bounded from above or majorized (respectively bounded from below or minorized) by that bound. 
The terms bounded above (bounded below) are also used in the mathematical literature for sets that have upper (respectively lower) bounds.

== Examples ==

For example, is a lower bound for the set (as a subset of the integers or of the real numbers, etc.), and so is . On the other hand, is not a lower bound for since it is not smaller than every element in . and other numbers &quot;x&quot; such that would be an upper bound for &quot;S&quot;.

The set has as both an upper bound and a lower bound; all other numbers are either an upper bound or a lower bound for that .

Every subset of the natural numbers has a lower bound since the natural numbers have a least element (0 or 1, depending on convention). An infinite subset of the natural numbers cannot be bounded from above. An infinite subset of the integers may be bounded from below or bounded from above, but not both. An infinite subset of the rational numbers may or may not be bounded from below, and may or may not be bounded from above.

Every finite subset of a non-empty totally ordered set has both upper and lower bounds.

==Bounds of functions==

The definitions can be generalized to functions and even to sets of functions.

Given a function with domain and a preordered set as codomain, an element of is an upper bound of if for each in . The upper bound is called &quot;sharp&quot; if equality holds for at least one value of . It indicates that the constraint is optimal, and thus cannot be further reduced without invalidating the inequality.

Similarly, a function defined on domain and having the same codomain is an upper bound of , if for each in . The function is further said to be an upper bound of a set of functions, if it is an upper bound of &quot;each&quot; function in that set.

The notion of lower bound for (sets of) functions is defined analogously, by replacing ≥ with ≤.

==Tight bounds==

An upper bound is said to be a &quot;tight upper bound&quot;, a &quot;least upper bound&quot;, or a &quot;supremum&quot;, if no smaller value is an upper bound. Similarly, a lower bound is said to be a &quot;tight lower bound&quot;, a &quot;greatest lower bound&quot;, or an &quot;infimum&quot;, if no greater value is a lower bound.

==Exact upper bounds==
An upper bound of a subset of a preordered set is said to be an &quot;exact upper bound&quot; for if every element of that is strictly majorized by is also majorized by some element of . Exact upper bounds of reduced products of linear orders play an important role in PCF theory.

== See also ==

* Greatest element and least element
* Infimum and supremum
* Maximal and minimal elements

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q24175351" start="32" end="44" title="order theory" label="order theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222579" start="49" end="60" title="Upper and lower bounds" label="upper bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222579" start="64" end="72" title="Upper and lower bounds" label="majorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="78" end="84" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425985" start="93" end="107" title="Preorder" label="preordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q554403" start="153" end="159" title="Duality (order theory)" label="Dually"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222579" start="163" end="174" title="Upper and lower bounds" label="lower bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222579" start="178" end="186" title="Upper and lower bounds" label="minorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222579" start="333" end="351" title="Upper and lower bounds" label="bounded from above"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222579" start="355" end="364" title="Upper and lower bounds" label="majorized"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222579" start="379" end="397" title="Upper and lower bounds" label="bounded from below"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222579" start="401" end="410" title="Upper and lower bounds" label="minorized"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222579" start="438" end="451" title="Upper and lower bounds" label="bounded above"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222579" start="453" end="466" title="Upper and lower bounds" label="bounded below"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="646" end="654" title="integers" label="integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="665" end="677" title="real numbers" label="real numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="1023" end="1037" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="1335" end="1350" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="1468" end="1487" title="totally ordered set" label="totally ordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="1585" end="1594" title="Function (mathematics)" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q192439" start="1649" end="1655" title="Domain of a function" label="domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q199006" start="1680" end="1688" title="codomain" label="codomain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1774" end="1779" title="Mathematical jargon#sharp" label="sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="2421" end="2429" title="supremum" label="supremum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="2596" end="2603" title="infimum" label="infimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306336" start="2882" end="2898" title="reduced product" label="reduced products"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="2902" end="2915" title="linear order" label="linear orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q589250" start="2942" end="2952" title="PCF theory" label="PCF theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196892" start="2973" end="3007" title="Greatest element and least element" label="Greatest element and least element"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="3010" end="3030" title="Infimum and supremum" label="Infimum and supremum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475294" start="3033" end="3061" title="Maximal and minimal elements" label="Maximal and minimal elements"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42694" wikidata="Q21449214" url="?curid=42694" title="Nabokov (surname)">
<text>Nabokov () is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:

* Vladimir Vladimirovich Nabokov (1899–1977), Russian-American author, entomologist, and chess problem composer
* Vladimir Dmitrievich Nabokov (1870–1922), Russian criminologist, journalist, and liberal politician, and father of Vladimir Vladimirovich Nabokov
* Konstantin Dmitrievich Nabokov (1872-1927), Russian diplomat and author
* Nicolas Nabokov (1903–1978), Russian-American composer, cousin of Vladimir Vladimirovich Nabokov
* Dmitri Nabokov (1934–2012), singer and author, son of Vladimir Vladimirovich Nabokov 
* Evgeni Nabokov, a retired professional ice hockey goaltender</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36591" start="69" end="99" title="Vladimir Nabokov" label="Vladimir Vladimirovich Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623261" start="181" end="209" title="Vladimir Dmitrievich Nabokov" label="Vladimir Dmitrievich Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4311248" start="329" end="359" title="Konstantin Dmitrievich Nabokov" label="Konstantin Dmitrievich Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q694009" start="403" end="418" title="Nicolas Nabokov" label="Nicolas Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447966" start="502" end="516" title="Dmitri Nabokov" label="Dmitri Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q390913" start="590" end="604" title="Evgeni Nabokov" label="Evgeni Nabokov"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42702" wikidata="Q140318" url="?curid=42702" title="Gloster Meteor">
<text>The Gloster Meteor was the first British jet fighter and the Allies&#x27; only jet aircraft to engage in combat operations during the Second World War. The Meteor&#x27;s development was heavily reliant on its ground-breaking turbojet engines, pioneered by Frank Whittle and his company, Power Jets Ltd. Development of the aircraft began in 1940, although work on the engines had been under way since 1936. 

The Meteor first flew in 1943 and commenced operations on 27 July 1944 with No. 616 Squadron RAF. The Meteor was not a sophisticated aircraft in its aerodynamics, but proved to be a successful combat fighter. Gloster&#x27;s 1946 civil Meteor F.4 demonstrator &quot;G-AIDC&quot; was the first civilian-registered jet aircraft in the world. Several major variants of the Meteor incorporated technological advances during the 1940s and 1950s. Thousands of Meteors were built to fly with the RAF and other air forces and remained in use for several decades.

Slower and less heavily armed than its German counterpart, the jet-powered Messerschmitt Me 262, the Meteor saw limited action in the Second World War. Meteors of the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) fought in the Korean War. Several other operators such as Argentina, Egypt and Israel flew Meteors in later regional conflicts. Specialised variants of the Meteor were developed for use in photographic aerial reconnaissance and as night fighters.

The Meteor was also used in research and development and to break several aviation records. On 20 September 1945, a heavily modified Meteor I, powered by two Rolls-Royce RB.50 Trent turbine engines driving propellers, became the first turboprop aircraft to fly. On 7 November 1945, a Meteor F.3 set the first official airspeed record by a jet aircraft at . In 1946, a Meteor F.4 reached a record speed of . Meteors also broke records in flight time endurance and rate of climb. 

On 10 February 1954, a specially adapted Meteor F.8, the &quot;Meteor Prone Pilot&quot;, which placed the pilot into a prone position to counteract inertial forces, took its first flight.

In the 1950s, the Meteor became increasingly obsolete as more nations developed jet fighters, many of which used a swept wing instead of the Meteor&#x27;s conventional straight wing. The RAF service replaced its Meteors with newer types such as the Hawker Hunter and Gloster Javelin. 

, two Meteors, &quot;G-JSMA&quot; and &quot;G-JWMA&quot;, remained in active service with the Martin-Baker company as ejection seat testbeds. One further aircraft in the USA remained airworthy, as did another in Australia.

==Development==

===Origins===

The development of the turbojet-powered Gloster Meteor was a collaboration between the Gloster Aircraft Company and Frank Whittle&#x27;s firm, Power Jets Ltd. Whittle formed Power Jets Ltd in March 1936 to develop his ideas of jet propulsion, Whittle himself serving as the company&#x27;s chief engineer. For several years, attracting financial backers and aviation firms prepared to take on Whittle&#x27;s radical ideas was difficult. In 1931, Armstrong-Siddeley had evaluated and rejected Whittle&#x27;s proposal, finding it to be technically sound but at the limits of engineering capability. Securing funding was a persistently worrying issue throughout the early development of the engine. The first Whittle prototype jet engine, the Power Jets WU, began running trials in early 1937; shortly afterwards, both Sir Henry Tizard, chairman of the Aeronautical Research Committee, and the Air Ministry gave the project their support.

On 28 April 1939, Whittle made a visit to the premises of the Gloster Aircraft Company, where he met several key figures, such as George Carter, Gloster&#x27;s chief designer. Carter took a keen interest in Whittle&#x27;s project, particularly when he saw the operational Power Jets W.1 engine, and quickly used it as the basis for several rough proposals of various aircraft designs. Independently, Whittle had also been producing proposals for a high-altitude jet-powered bomber, although following the start of the Second World War and the Battle for France, a greater national emphasis arose on fighter aircraft. Power Jets and Gloster quickly formed a mutual understanding around mid-1939.
In spite of ongoing infighting between Power Jets and several of its stakeholders, the Air Ministry contracted Gloster in late 1939 to manufacture a prototype aircraft powered by one of Whittle&#x27;s new turbojet engines. The single-engined proof-of-concept Gloster E28/39, the first British jet-powered aircraft, conducted its maiden flight on 15 May 1941, flown by Gloster&#x27;s chief test pilot, Flight Lieutenant Philip &quot;Gerry&quot; Sayer. The success of the E.28/39 proved the viability of jet propulsion, and Gloster pressed ahead with designs for a production fighter aircraft. Due to the limited thrust available from early jet engines, it was decided that subsequent production aircraft would be powered by a pair of turbojet engines.

In 1940, for a &quot;military load&quot; of , the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE) had advised that work on an aircraft of all-up weight, with a total static thrust of should be started, with an design for the expected, more powerful, W.2 and axial engine designs. George Carter&#x27;s calculations based on the RAE work and his own investigations were that a aircraft with two or four 20 mm cannons and six 0.303 machine guns would have a top speed of at sea level and at . In January 1941 Gloster were told by Lord Beaverbrook that the twin jet fighter was of &quot;unique importance&quot;, and that the company was to stop work on a night-fighter development of their F.9/37 to Specification F.18/40.

===Prototypes===

In August 1940, Carter presented Gloster&#x27;s initial proposals for a twin-engined jet fighter with a tricycle undercarriage. On 7 February 1941, Gloster received an order for twelve prototypes (later reduced to eight) under Specification F9/40. A letter of intent for the production of 300 of the new fighter, initially to be named &quot;Thunderbolt,&quot; was issued on 21 June 1941; to avoid confusion with the USAAF Republic P-47 Thunderbolt which had been issued with the same name to the RAF in 1944, the aircraft&#x27;s name was subsequently changed to &quot;Meteor.&quot; During the aircraft&#x27;s secretive development, employees and officials made use of the codename &quot;Rampage&quot; to refer to the Meteor, as similarly the de Havilland Vampire would initially be referred to as the &quot;Spider Crab&quot;. Test locations and other key project information were also kept secret.

Although taxiing trials were carried out in 1942, it was not until the following year that any flights took place due to production and approval holdups with the Power Jets W.2 engine powering the Meteor. On 26 November 1942 production of the Meteor was ordered to stop due to the delays at subcontractor Rover, which was struggling to manufacture the W.2 engines on schedule; considerable interest was shown in Gloster&#x27;s E.1/44 proposal for a single-engine fighter, unofficially named Ace. Gloster continued development work on the Meteor and the production-stop order was overturned in favour of the construction of six (later increased to eight) F9/40 prototypes alongside three E.1/44 prototypes. Rover&#x27;s responsibilities for development and production of the W.2B engine were also transferred to Rolls-Royce that year.

On 5 March 1943, the fifth prototype, serial &quot;DG206&quot;, powered by two substituted de Havilland Halford H.1 engines owing to problems with the intended W.2 engines, became the first Meteor to become airborne at RAF Cranwell, piloted by Michael Daunt. On the initial flight, an uncontrollable yawing motion was discovered, which led to a redesigned larger rudder; however, no difficulties had been attributed to the groundbreaking turbojet propulsion. Only two prototypes flew with de Havilland engines because of their low flight endurance. Before the first prototype aircraft had even undertaken its first flight, an extended order for 100 production-standard aircraft had been placed by the RAF.

The first Whittle-engined aircraft, &quot;DG205/G&quot;, flew on 12 June 1943 (later crashing during takeoff on 27 April 1944) and was followed by &quot;DG202/G&quot; on 24 July. &quot;DG202/G&quot; was later used for deck handling tests aboard aircraft carrier . &quot;DG203/G&quot; made its first flight on 9 November 1943, later becoming a ground instructional airframe. &quot;DG204/G&quot;, powered by Metrovick F.2 engines, first flew on 13 November 1943; &quot;DG204/G&quot; was lost in an accident on 4 January 1944, the cause believed to have been an engine compressor failure due to overspeed. &quot;DG208/G&quot; made its début on 20 January 1944, by which time the majority of design problems had been overcome and a production design had been approved. &quot;DG209/G&quot; was used as an engine testbed by Rolls-Royce, first flying on 18 April 1944. &quot;DG207/G&quot; was intended to be the basis for the Meteor F.2 with de Havilland engines, but it did not fly until 24 July 1945, at which time the Meteor 3 was in full production and de Havilland&#x27;s attention was being redirected to the upcoming de Havilland Vampire; consequently the F.2 was cancelled.

===Into production===

On 12 January 1944, the first Meteor F.1, serial &quot;EE210/G&quot;, took to the air from Moreton Valence in Gloucestershire. It was essentially identical to the F9/40 prototypes except for the addition of four nose-mounted 20 mm (.79 in) Hispano Mk V cannon and some changes to the canopy to improve all-round visibility. Due to the F.1&#x27;s similarity to the prototypes, they were frequently operated in the test program to progress British understanding of jet propulsion, and it took until July 1944 for the aircraft to enter squadron service. &quot;EE210/G&quot; was later sent to the U.S. for evaluation in exchange for a pre-production Bell YP-59A Airacomet, the Meteor being flown first by John Grierson at Muroc Army Airfield on 15 April 1944.

Originally 300 F.1s were ordered, but the total produced was reduced to 20 aircraft as the follow-on orders had been converted to the more advanced models. Some of the last major refinements to the Meteor&#x27;s early design were trialled using this first production batch, and what was to become the long-term design of the engine nacelles was introduced upon &quot;EE211&quot;. The original nacelles had been discovered by the RAE to suffer from compressibility buffeting at higher speeds, causing increased drag; the re-designed longer nacelles eliminated this and provided an increase in the Meteor&#x27;s maximum speed. The lengthened nacelles were introduced on the final fifteen Meteor IIIs. &quot;EE215&quot; was the first Meteor to be fitted with guns; &quot;EE215&quot; was also used in engine reheat trials, the addition of reheat increasing top speed from 420 mph to 460 mph. and was later converted into the first two-seat Meteor. Due to the radical differences between jet-powered aircraft and those that it replaced, a special &quot;Tactical Flight&quot; or &quot;T-Flight&quot; unit was established to prepare the Meteor for squadron service, led by Group Captain Hugh Joseph Wilson. The Tactical Flight was formed at Farnborough in May 1944, the first Meteors arriving the following month, upon which both tactical applications and limitations were extensively explored.

On 17 July 1944, the Meteor F.1 was cleared for service use. Shortly afterwards, elements of the Tactical Flight and their aircraft were transferred to operational RAF squadrons. The first deliveries to No. 616 Squadron RAF, the first operational squadron to receive the Meteor, began in July 1944. When the F.2 was cancelled, the Meteor F.3 became the immediate successor to the F.1 and alleviated some of the shortcomings of the F.1. In August 1944, the first F.3 prototype flew; early F.3 production aircraft were still fitted with the Welland engine as the Derwent engine&#x27;s production was just starting at this point. A total of 210 F.3 aircraft were produced before they were in turn superseded by production of the Meteor F.4 in 1945.

Several Meteor F.3s were converted into navalised aircraft. The adaptations included a strengthened undercarriage and arrester hook. Operational trials of the type took place aboard . The trials included carrier landings and takeoffs. Performance of these naval prototype Meteors proved to be favourable, including takeoff performance, leading to further trials with a modified Meteor F.4 fitted with folding wings; a &quot;clipped wing&quot; was also adopted. The Meteor later entered service with the Royal Navy, but only as a land-based trainer, the Meteor T.7, to prepare pilots of the Fleet Air Arm for flying other jet aircraft such as the de Havilland Sea Vampire.

While various marks of Meteor had been introduced by 1948, they had remained very similar to the prototypes of the Meteor; consequently, the performance of the Meteor F.4 was beginning to be eclipsed by new jet designs. Gloster therefore embarked on a redesign programme to produce a new version of the Meteor with better performance. Designated &quot;Meteor F.8&quot;, this upgraded variant was a potent fighter aircraft, forming the bulk of RAF Fighter Command between 1950 and 1955. The Meteor continued to be operated in a military capacity by several nations into the 1960s.

===Night fighter===
To replace the increasingly obsolete de Havilland Mosquito as a night fighter, the Meteor was adapted to serve in the role as an interim aircraft. Gloster had initially proposed a night fighter design to meet the Air Ministry specification for the Mosquito replacement, based on the two seater trainer variant of the Meteor, with the pilot in the front seat and the navigator in the rear. Once accepted however, work on the project was swiftly transferred to Armstrong Whitworth to perform both the detailed design process and production of the type; the first prototype flew on 31 May 1950. Although based on the T.7 twin seater, it used the fuselage and tail of the F.8, and the longer wings of the F.3. An extended nose contained the AI Mk 10 (the 1940s Westinghouse SCR-720) Air Intercept radar. As a consequence the 20 mm cannons were moved into the wings, outboard of the engines. A ventral fuel tank and wing mounted drop tanks completed the Armstrong Whitworth Meteor NF.11.

As radar technology developed, a new Meteor night fighter was developed to use the improved US-built APS-21 system. The &quot;NF.12&quot; first flew on 21 April 1953. It was similar to the NF.11 but had a nose section longer; the fin was enlarged to compensate for the greater keel area of the enlarged nose and to counter the airframe reaction to the sideways oscillating motion of the radar scanner which caused difficulty aiming the guns, an anti-tramp motor operating on the rudder was fitted midway up the front leading edge of the fin. The NF.12 also had the new Rolls-Royce Derwent 9 engines and the wings were reinforced to handle the new engine. Deliveries of the NF.12 started in 1953, with the type entering squadron service in early 1954, equipping seven squadrons (Nos 85, 25, 152, 46, 72, 153 and 64); the aircraft was replaced over 1958–1959.

The final Meteor night fighter was the &quot;NF.14&quot;. First flown on 23 October 1953, the NF.14 was based on the NF.12 but had an even longer nose, extended by a further to accommodate new equipment, increasing the total length to and a larger bubble canopy to replace the framed T.7 version. Just 100 NF.14s were built; they first entered service in February 1954 beginning with No. 25 Squadron and were being replaced as early as 1956 by the Gloster Javelin. Overseas, they remained in service a little longer, serving with No. 60 Squadron at Tengah, Singapore until 1961. As the NF.14 was replaced, some 14 were converted to training aircraft as the &quot;NF(T).14&quot; and given to No. 2 Air Navigation School on RAF Thorney Island until transferring to No. 1 Air Navigation School at RAF Stradishall where they served until 1965.

==Design==
===Overview===
The first operational version of the Meteor, designated as the Meteor F.1, apart from the minor airframe refinements, was a straightforward &quot;militarisation&quot; of the earlier F9/40 prototypes. The dimensions of the standard Meteor F.1 were long with a span of , with an empty weight of and a maximum takeoff weight of . Despite the revolutionary turbojet propulsion used, the design of the Meteor was relatively orthodox and did not take advantage of many aerodynamic features used on other, later jet fighters, such as swept wings; the Meteor shared a broadly similar basic configuration to its German equivalent, the Messerschmitt Me 262, which was also aerodynamically conventional.

It was an all-metal aircraft with a tricycle undercarriage and conventional low, straight wings with mid-mounted turbojet engines and a high-mounted tailplane clear of the jet exhaust. The Meteor F.1 exhibited some problematic flying characteristics typical of early jet aircraft; it suffered from stability problems at high transonic speeds, large trim changes, high stick forces and self-sustained yaw instability (snaking) caused by airflow separation over the thick tail surfaces. The longer fuselage of the Meteor T.7, a two-seater trainer, significantly reduced the aerodynamic instability that the early Meteors were known for.

Later Meteor variants would see a large variety of changes from the initial Meteor F.1 introduced to service in 1944. Much attention was given to raising the aircraft&#x27;s top speed, often by improving the airframe&#x27;s aerodynamic qualities, incorporating the latest engine developments, and increasing the strength of the airframe. The Meteor F.8, which emerged in the late 1940s, was considered to have substantially improved performance over prior variants; the F.8 was reportedly the most powerful single-seat aircraft flying in 1947, capable of ascending to within five minutes.

===Construction===
From the outset, each Meteor was constructed from several modular sections or separately produced units, a deliberate design choice to allow for production to be dispersed and for easy disassembly for transport. Each aircraft comprised five main sections: nose, forward fuselage, central section, rear fuselage and tail units; the wings were also built out of lengthwise sections. The forward section contained the pressure cabin, gun compartments, and forward undercarriage. The centre section incorporated much of the structural elements, including the inner wing, engine nacelles, fuel tank, ammunition drums, and main undercarriage. The rear fuselage was of a conventional semi-monocoque structure. Various aluminium alloys were the primary materials used throughout the structure of the Meteor, such as the stressed duralumin skin.

Across the Meteor&#x27;s production life, various different companies were subcontracted to manufacture aircraft sections and major components; due to the wartime workload on producing fighter aircraft such as the Hawker Hurricane and Hawker Typhoon, neither Gloster nor the wider Hawker Siddeley Group were able to internally meet the production demand of 80 aircraft per month. Bristol Tramways produced the forward fuselage of the aircraft, the Standard Motor Company manufactured the central fuselage and inner wing sections, the Pressed Steel Company produced the rear fuselage, and Parnall Aircraft made the tail unit. Other main subcontractors included Boulton Paul Aircraft, Excelsior Motor Radiator Company, Bell Punch, Turner Manufacturing Company, and Charlesworth Bodies; as many of these firms had little or no experience producing aircraft, both quality and interchangeability of components were maintained by contractually enforced adherence to Gloster&#x27;s original drawings.

From the Meteor F.4 onwards, Armstrong Whitworth began completing whole units at their Coventry facility in addition to Gloster&#x27;s own production line. Belgian aviation firm Avions Fairey also produced the Meteor F.8 under licence from Gloster for the Belgian Air Force; a similar licence manufacturing arrangement was made with Dutch company Fokker to meet the Royal Netherlands Air Force&#x27;s order.

===Engines===
The &quot;Meteor F.1&quot; was powered by two Rolls-Royce Welland turbojet engines, Britain&#x27;s first production jet engines, which were built under licence from Whittle&#x27;s designs. The Meteor embodied the advent of practical jet propulsion; in the type&#x27;s service life, both military and civil aviation manufacturers rapidly integrated turbine engines into their designs, favouring its advantages such as smoother running and greater power output. The Meteor&#x27;s engines were considerably more practical than those of the German Me 262 as, unlike the Me 262, the engines were embedded into the wing in nacelles between the front and rear spars rather than underslung, saving some weight due to shorter landing gear legs and less massive spars.

The W.2B/23C engines upon which the Welland was based produced of thrust each, giving the aircraft a maximum speed of at and a range of . It incorporated a hydraulically driven engine starter developed by Rolls-Royce, which was automated following the press of a starter button in the cockpit. The engines also drove hydraulic and vacuum pumps as well as a generator via a Rotol gearbox fixed on the forward wing spar; the cockpit was also heated by bleed air from one of the engines. The acceleration rate of the engines was manually controlled by the pilot; rapid engine acceleration would frequently induce compressor stalls early on; the likelihood of compressor stalls was effectively eliminated upon further design refinements of both the Welland engine and the Meteor itself. At high speeds the Meteor had a tendency to lose directional stability, often during unfavourable weather conditions, leading to a &quot;snaking&quot; motion; this could be easily resolved by throttling back to reduce speed.

Based upon designs produced by Power Jets, Rolls-Royce produced more advanced and powerful turbojet engines. Beyond numerous improvements made to the Welland engine that powered the early Meteors, Rolls-Royce and Power Jets collaborated to develop the more capable Derwent engine, which as the Rover B.26 had undergone a radical re-design from the W.2B/500 while at Rover. The Derwent engine, and the re-designed Derwent V based on the Nene, was installed on many of the later production Meteors; the adoption of this new powerplant led to considerable performance increases. The Meteor often served as the basis for the development of other early turbojet designs; a pair of Meteor F.4s were sent to Rolls-Royce to aid in their experimental engine trials, &quot;RA435&quot; being used for reheat testing, and &quot;RA491&quot; being fitted with the Rolls-Royce Avon, an axial-flow engine. From their involvement in the development of the Meteor&#x27;s engines, Armstrong-Siddeley, Bristol Aircraft, Metropolitan-Vickers and de Havilland also independently developed their own gas turbine engines.

===Performance===

During development, sceptical elements of the Air Ministry had expected mature piston-powered aircraft types to exceed the capabilities of the Meteor in all respects except that of speed; thus, the performance of early Meteors was considered favourable for the interceptor mission, being capable of out-diving the majority of enemy aircraft. The conclusion of in-service trials conducted between the Meteor F.3. and the Hawker Tempest V was that the performance of the Meteor exceeded the Tempest in almost all respects and that, barring some manoeuvrability issues, the Meteor could be considered a capable all-round fighter. Pilots formerly flying piston-engine aircraft often described the Meteor as being exciting to fly. British politician Norman Tebbit stated of his experience flying the Meteor in the RAF: &quot;Get airborne, up with the wheels, hold it low until you were about 380 knots, pull it up and she would go up, well we thought then, like a rocket&quot;.

Early jet engines consumed a lot more fuel than the piston engines they replaced so the Welland engines imposed considerable flight-time limitations on the Meteor F.1, leading to the type being used for local interception duties only. In the post-war environment, there was considerable pressure to increase the range of interceptors to counter the threat of bombers armed with nuclear weapons. The long-term answer to this question was in-flight refuelling; several Meteors were provided to Flight Refuelling Limited for trials of the newly developed probe-and-drogue refuelling techniques. This capability was not incorporated in service Meteors, which had already been supplanted by more modern interceptor aircraft at this point.

A total of 890 Meteors were lost in RAF service (145 of these crashes occurring in 1953 alone), resulting in the deaths of 450 pilots. Contributory factors in the number of crashes were the poor brakes, failure of the landing gear, the high fuel consumption and consequent short flight endurance (less than one hour) causing pilots to run out of fuel, and difficult handling with one engine out due to the widely set engines. The casualty rate was exacerbated by the lack of ejection seats in early series Meteors; the much higher speed that the aircraft was capable of meant that to bail out pilots might have to overcome high g forces and fast-moving airflow past the cockpit; there was also a greater likelihood of the pilot striking the horizontal tailplane. Ejection seats were fitted in the later F.8, FR.9, PR.10 and some experimental Meteors. The difficulty of baling out of the Meteor had been noted by pilots during development, reporting several contributing design factors such as the limited size and relative position of the cockpit to the rest of the aircraft, and difficulty in using the two-lever jettisonable hood mechanism.

==Operational service==

===Second World War===

No. 616 Squadron RAF was the first to receive operational Meteors: a total of 14 aircraft were initially delivered. The squadron was based at RAF Culmhead, Somerset and had been equipped with the Spitfire VII. The conversion to the Meteor was initially a matter of great secrecy. Following a conversion course at Farnborough attended by the squadron&#x27;s six leading pilots, the first aircraft was delivered to Culmhead on 12 July 1944. The squadron and its seven Meteors moved on 21 July 1944 to RAF Manston on the east Kent coast and, within a week, 32 pilots had been converted to the type.

The Meteor was initially used to counter the V-1 flying bomb threat. 616 Squadron Meteors saw action for the first time on 27 July 1944, when three aircraft were active over Kent. These were the first operational jet combat missions for the Meteor and for the RAF. After some problems, especially with jamming guns, the first two V-1 &quot;kills&quot; were made on 4 August. By war&#x27;s end, Meteors had accounted for 14 flying bombs. After the end of the V-1 threat, and the introduction of the ballistic V-2 rocket, the RAF was forbidden to fly the Meteor on combat missions over German-held territory for fear of an aircraft being shot down and salvaged by the Germans.

No. 616 Squadron briefly moved to RAF Debden to allow United States Army Air Forces (USAAF) bomber crews to gain experience and create tactics in facing jet-engined foes before moving to Colerne, Wiltshire. For a week from 10 October 1944 a series of exercises were carried out in which a flight of Meteors made mock attacks on a formation of 100 B-24s and B-17s escorted by 40 Mustangs and Thunderbolts. These suggested that, if the jet fighter attacked the formation from above, it could take advantage of its superior speed in the dive to attack the bombers and then escape by diving through the formation before the escorts could react. The best tactic to counter this was to place a fighter screen above the bombers and attempt to intercept the jets early in the dive. The exercise was also useful from No. 616 Squadron&#x27;s perspective, giving valuable practical experience in Meteor operations.
No. 616 Squadron exchanged its F.1s for the first &quot;Meteor F.3&quot;s on 18 December 1944. These first 15 F.3s differed from the F.1 in having a sliding canopy in place of the sideways hinging canopy, increased fuel capacity and some airframe refinements. They were still powered by Welland I engines. Later F.3s were equipped with the Derwent I engines. This was a substantial improvement over the earlier mark, although the basic design still had not reached its potential. Wind tunnel and flight tests demonstrated that the original short nacelles, which did not extend far fore and aft of the wing, contributed heavily to compressibility buffeting at high speed. New, longer nacelles not only cured some of the compressibility problems but added at altitude, even without upgraded powerplants. The last batch of Meteor F.3s featured the longer nacelles; other F.3s were retrofitted in the field with the new nacelles. The F.3 also had the new Rolls-Royce Derwent engines, increased fuel capacity and a new larger, more strongly raked bubble canopy.

Judging the &quot;Meteor F.3&quot;s were ready for combat over Europe, the RAF finally decided to deploy them on the continent. On 20 January 1945, four Meteors from 616 Squadron were moved to Melsbroek in Belgium and attached to the Second Tactical Air Force, just under three weeks after the Luftwaffe&#x27;s surprise Unternehmen Bodenplatte attack on New Year&#x27;s Day, in which Melsbroek&#x27;s RAF base, designated as Allied Advanced Landing Ground &quot;B.58&quot;, had been struck by piston-engined fighters of JG 27 and JG 54. The 616 Squadron Meteor F.3s&#x27; initial purpose was to provide air defence for the airfield, but their pilots hoped that their presence might provoke the Luftwaffe into sending Me 262 jets against them. At this point the Meteor pilots were still forbidden to fly over German-occupied territory, or to go east of Eindhoven, to prevent a downed aircraft being captured by the Germans or the Soviets.
In March, the entire squadron was moved to Gilze-Rijen Air Base and then in April, to Nijmegen. The Meteors flew armed reconnaissance and ground attack operations without encountering any German jet fighters. By late April, the squadron was based at Faßberg, Germany and suffered its first losses when two aircraft collided in poor visibility. The war ended with the Meteors having destroyed 46 German aircraft through ground attack. Friendly fire through misidentification as Messerschmitt Me 262s by Allied anti-aircraft gunners was more of a threat than the already-diminished forces of the Luftwaffe; to counter this, continental-based Meteors were given an all-white finish as a recognition aid.

===Post-war===
The next-generation &quot;Meteor F.4&quot; prototype first flew on 17 May 1945, and went into production in 1946 when 16 RAF squadrons were already operating Meteors. Equipped with Rolls-Royce Derwent 5 engines, the smaller version of the Nene, the F.4 was faster than the F.1 at sea level (585 against 415), but the reduced wings impaired its rate of climb. The F.4 wingspan was 86.4 cm shorter than the F.3 and with blunter wing tips, derived from the world speed record prototypes. Improvements included a strengthened airframe, fully pressurised cockpit, lighter ailerons to improve manoeuvrability, and rudder trim adjustments to reduce snaking. The F.4 could be fitted with a drop tank under each wing, and experiments were carried out with carriage of underwing stores and also in lengthened fuselage models.

Because of increased demand, F.4 production was divided between Gloster and Armstrong Whitworth. The majority of early F.4s did not go to the RAF: 100 were exported to Argentina, seeing action on both sides in the 1955 revolution; in 1947, only RAF Nos. 74 and 222 squadrons were fully equipped with the F.4. Nine further RAF squadrons converted from 1948 onwards. From 1948, 38 F.4s were exported to the Dutch, equipping four squadrons (322, 323, 326 and 327) split between bases in Soesterberg and Leeuwarden until the mid-1950s. In 1949, only two RAF squadrons were converted to the F.4, Belgium was sold 48 aircraft in the same year (going to 349 and 350 squadrons at Beauvechain) and Denmark received 20 over 1949–1950. In 1950, three more RAF squadrons were upgraded, including No. 616 and, in 1951, six more.
A modified two-seater F.4 for jet-conversion and advanced training was tested in 1949 as the &quot;T.7&quot;. It was accepted by the RAF and the Fleet Air Arm and became a common addition to the various export packages (for example 43 to Belgium between 1948 and 1957, a similar number to the Netherlands over the same period, two to Syria in 1952, six to Israel in 1953, etc.). Despite its limitations – unpressurised cockpit, no armament, limited instructor instrumentation – more than 650 T.7s were manufactured. The T.7 remained in RAF service into the 1970s.

As improved jet fighters emerged, Gloster decided to modernise the F.4 while retaining as much of the manufacturing tooling as possible. The result was the definitive production model, the &quot;Meteor F.8&quot; (G-41-K), serving as a major RAF fighter until the introduction of the Hawker Hunter and the Supermarine Swift. The first prototype F.8 was a modified F.4, followed by a true prototype, &quot;VT150&quot;, that flew on 12 October 1948 at Moreton Valence. Flight testing of the F.8 prototype led to the discovery of an aerodynamic problem: after ammunition was expended, the aircraft became tail-heavy and unstable around the pitch axis due to the weight of fuel in fuselage tanks no longer being balanced by the ammunition. Gloster solved the problem by substituting the tail of the abortive G 42 single-engined jet fighter. The F.8 and other production variants successfully used the new tail design, giving the later Meteors a distinctive appearance, with taller straighter edges compared with the rounded tail of the F.4s and earlier marks.
The F.8 also featured a fuselage stretch of , intended to shift the aircraft&#x27;s centre of gravity and also eliminate the use of ballast formerly necessary in earlier marks due to the subsequent elimination from the design of two of the originally designed six installed cannon. The F.8 incorporated uprated engines, Derwent 8s, with thrust each combined with structural strengthening, a Martin Baker ejection seat and a &quot;blown&quot; teardrop cockpit canopy that provided improved pilot visibility. 

Between 1950 and 1955, the Meteor F.8 was the mainstay of RAF Fighter Command, and served with distinction in combat in Korea with the RAAF as well as operating with many air forces worldwide, although it was clear that the original design was obsolete compared with contemporary swept-wing fighters such as the North American F-86 Sabre and the Soviet MiG-15. The last Meteor F.8 would left RAF frontline squadrons in 1957. Several F.8 were used for target towing or as aggressor until 1970.

Initial deliveries of the F.8 to the RAF were in August 1949, with the first squadron receiving its fighters in late 1950. Like the F.4, there were strong export sales of the F.8. Belgium ordered 240 aircraft, the majority assembled in The Netherlands by Fokker. The Netherlands had 160 F.8s, equipping seven squadrons until 1955. Denmark had 20, ordered in 1951, the last F.8s in front-line service in Europe. The RAAF ordered 94 F.8s, which served in the Korean War. Despite arms embargoes, both Syria and Egypt received F.8s from 1952, as did Israel, each using their Meteors during the Suez Crisis. Brazil ordered 60 new Meteor F.8s and 10 T.7 trainers in October 1952, paying with 15,000 tons of raw cotton.

In the 1950s, Meteors were developed into effective photo-reconnaissance, training and night fighter versions. The fighter reconnaissance (FR) versions were the first to be built, replacing the ageing Spitfires and Mosquitos then in use. Two &quot;FR.5&quot;s were built on the F.4 body; one was used for nose section camera tests, the other broke up in midair while in testing over Moreton Valence. On 23 March 1950, the first &quot;FR.9&quot; flew. Based on the F.8, it was 20 cm longer with a new nose incorporating a remote control camera and window and was also fitted with additional external ventral and wing fuel tanks. Production of the FR.9 began in July. No. 208 Squadron, then based at Fayid, Egypt was the first to be upgraded followed by the 2nd Tactical Air Force in West Germany, No. 2 Squadron RAF at Bückeburg and No. 79 Squadron RAF at RAF Gutersloh flew the FR.9 from 1951 until 1956. In Aden, No. 8 Squadron RAF was given FR.9s in November 1958 and used them until 1961. Ecuador (12), Israel (7) and Syria (2) were foreign customers for the FR.9.

In 1951, 29, 141, 85 and 264 squadrons each received a number of NF.11 aircraft, the first of the Meteor night fighters. It was rolled out across the RAF until the final deliveries in 1954. A &quot;tropicalised&quot; version of the NF.11 for the Middle East was developed; first flying on 23 December 1952 as the &quot;NF.13&quot;. The aircraft equipped No. 219 Squadron RAF at Kabrit and No. 39 Squadron at Fayid, both in Egypt. The aircraft served during the Suez crisis and remained with No. 39 Squadron after they were withdrawn to Malta until 1958. Several problems were encountered: the heavily framed T.7 canopy made landings tricky due to limited visibility, the under-wing external fuel tanks tended to break up when the wing cannons were fired, and gun harmonisation, normally set to about 400 yards, was poor due to the wings flexing in flight. Belgium (24), Denmark (20) and France (41) were foreign customers for the NF.11. Ex-RAF NF.13s were sold to France (two), Syria (six), Egypt (six) and Israel (six).

In addition to the armed, low altitude operation, tactical FR.9 variant, Gloster also developed the &quot;PR.10&quot; for high altitude missions. The first prototype flew on 29 March 1950 and was actually converted into the first production aircraft. Based on the F.4, it had the F.4-style tail and the longer wings of the earlier variant. All the cannons were removed and a single camera placed in the nose with two more in the rear fuselage; the canopy was also changed. The PR.10 was delivered to the RAF in December 1950 and were given to No. 2 and No. 541 squadrons in Germany and No. 13 Squadron RAF in Cyprus. The PR.10 was rapidly phased out from 1956; rapid improvements in surface-to-air missile technology and the introduction of newer aircraft capable of flying at greater altitudes and speeds had rendered the aircraft obsolete.

===Argentina===
Argentina became the first overseas operator of the Meteor, placing an order for 100 F Mk.4s in May 1947. The Meteor&#x27;s procurement led to Argentina becoming the second air force in the Americas to operate jet aircraft.

The Argentine Meteors were first used in combat during the 16 June 1955 rebellion when, in an attempt to kill Juan Perón, rebel-flown aircraft bombed the Casa Rosada. A loyalist Meteor shot down a rebel AT-6, while another strafed rebel-held Ezeiza airport. The rebels seized Morón Airport and Air Base, base of the Meteors, and used several captured aircraft to perform multiple attacks against loyalist forces and the Casa Rosada before the rebellion was defeated by day&#x27;s end.

A second revolt, the &quot;Revolución Libertadora&quot;, broke out on 16 September 1955, with, again, both sides operating the Meteor. The rebels seized three Meteors. Government Meteors flew strafing attacks against the rebel-held destroyers &quot;Rioja&quot; and &quot;Cervantes&quot;, and several landing ships near Rio Santiago on 16 September and attacking Pajas Blancas airport near the city of Córdoba, damaging several Avro Lincoln bombers. The rebel-flown Meteors were used to attack loyalist forces attacking Córdoba, losing one of their number on 19 September to an engine failure caused by use of automobile petrol instead of jet fuel.

The acquisition of F-86 Sabres in 1960 allowed the remaining Meteors to be transferred to the ground attack role. In this role, the aircraft were refitted with bomb pylons and rocket rails; the bare metal colour scheme was also discarded for a camouflage scheme.

Argentine Meteors were used to attack rebels during attempted uprisings in September 1962 and April 1963. The type was ultimately withdrawn from service in 1970.

===Australia===

The Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) acquired 113 Meteors between 1946 and 1952, 94 of which were the F.8 variant. The first RAAF Meteor was an F.3 delivered for evaluation in June 1946.

Australia&#x27;s F.8s saw extensive service during the Korean War with No. 77 Squadron RAAF, part of British Commonwealth Forces Korea. The squadron had personnel from the RAF and other Commonwealth air forces attached to it. It had arrived in Korea equipped with piston-engined Mustangs. To match the threat posed by MiG-15 jet fighters, it was decided to reequip the squadron with Meteors. Jet conversion training was conducted at Iwakuni, Japan, after which the squadron returned to the Korean theatre in April 1951 with about 30 Meteor F.8s and T.7s. The squadron moved to Kimpo Air Base in June, and was declared combat ready the following month. More advanced designs, such as the F-86 Sabre and Hawker P.1081, were considered but would not be available within a realistic time frame; the Meteor proved to be considerably inferior in combat against the MiG-15 in several respects, including speed and manoeuvrability at high altitude.

On 29 July 1951, 77 Squadron began operating their Meteors on combat missions. The squadron had mainly been trained for ground attack and had difficulty when assigned to bomber escort duty at sub-optimum altitudes. On 29 August 1951, eight Meteors were on escort duty in &quot;MiG Alley&quot; when they were engaged by six MiG-15s; one Meteor was lost and two were damaged. On 27 October, the squadron achieved its first probable followed by two probables six days later. On 1 December the Battle of Sunchon took place between 14 Meteors and at least 20 MiG-15s – in North Korean markings but operated secretly by the elite Soviet 176th Guards Fighter Aviation Regiment (176 GIAP). The Australians lost three Meteors, with one pilot killed and two captured, while claiming one MiG destroyed and one damaged. Russian records and accounts, which became public after the end of the Cold War, suggested that no MiGs from 176 GIAP were lost.
At the end of 1951, due to the superiority of the MiGs in air combat – as well as the Meteor&#x27;s favourable low-level performance and sturdy construction, RAAF commanders had 77 Squadron returned to ground-attack. In February 1952, more than a thousand ground-attack sorties were flown and these continued until May 1952, when 77 Squadron switched to fighter sweeps. The last encounter between the Meteor and the MiG-15 was in March 1953, during which a Meteor piloted by Sergeant John Hale recorded a victory. By the end of the conflict, the squadron had flown 4,836 missions, destroying six MiG-15s, over 3,500 structures and some 1,500 vehicles. About 30 Meteors were lost to enemy action in Korea, the vast majority shot down by anti-aircraft fire on ground-attack operations.

The RAAF began introducing the locally-built CAC Sabre powered by the Rolls-Royce Avon, in 1955, which relegated Meteors to training and secondary duties. A number of Meteors would be assigned to the reserve Citizen Air Force, while others were configured as pilotless drone aircraft or for target towing. No. 75 Squadron RAAF was the last Australian squadron to operate the Meteor; notably, it had operated a three-unit aerobatic team, named &quot;The Meteorites&quot;.

===Egypt===
Although Egypt&#x27;s first order for the Meteor was placed in 1948, the rising tension in the region led to the imposition of a series of arms embargoes. Twelve F Mk.4s were eventually delivered between October 1949 and May 1950, along with three T Mk.7s. Twenty-four F Mk.8s were ordered in 1949, but this order was stopped by an embargo. A further order for 12 ex-RAF F.8s was placed in December 1952, of which four were delivered before the order was cancelled, with the final eight being delivered in 1955, along with three more T Mk.7s. and six NF Mk.13s, all ex-RAF aircraft. Britain had allowed the Meteor sales as part of an effort to foster and support good relations; tensions over the Suez Canal led to arms sales being suspended once again.

Egyptian Meteors participated in the fighting during the Suez Crisis of 1956, typically being used in ground attack missions against Israeli forces. In one incident, an Egyptian Meteor NF Mk.13 claimed to have damaged an RAF Vickers Valiant bomber. An aerial bombing campaign of Egyptian airfields by Anglo-French forces resulted in several aircraft being destroyed on the ground; the Egyptian Air Force subsequently withdrew from combat within the Sinai region.

===Syria===
Meteors were the first jet aircraft of the fledgling Syrian Air Force. It acquired 25 of them between 1952 and 1956. Although the British were willing to supply aircraft, they did not supply combat training or radar. As Syria became more aligned with Gamal Abdel Nasser and Egypt, British support for Meteor operations was withdrawn and Syrian pilots began training with their Egyptian counterparts. During the Suez Crisis, the RAF performed high altitude reconnaissance flights over Syria by English Electric Canberra aircraft from bases in Cyprus. Lacking radar to track the aircraft, the Syrian Air Force developed a ground spotter network that reported information by telephone to intercept the flights. On 6 November 1956, a Syrian Meteor shot down a Canberra of No. 13 Squadron RAF, which crashed in Lebanon. In 1957, Syria began to replace its Meteors with new MiG-17s from the Soviet Union.

===France===
The French Air Force was keen to acquire jet aircraft as part of its re-equipment program following the Second World War. In 1953, 25 new-build aircraft were diverted from RAF orders to fulfil a French order; a further 16 ex-RAF NF.11s were purchased in 1954 and delivered between September 1954 and April 1955, these being supplemented by about 14 T Mk.7s. The NF Mk.11s replaced the Mosquito night fighter with the Escadre de Chasse (EC) 30, serving with that Wing until replaced by the Sud Aviation Vautour in 1957. Several Meteors were then transferred to ECN 1/7 in Algeria, which saw combat in the Algerian War, operating from Bône, while others were used for training Vautour night fighter crews. The Vautour was retired from French Air Force service in 1964. Five Meteor NF.11s were transferred to the Centre d’Essais en Vol (Flight Test Centre) in 1958, where they were used as equipment testbeds and chase planes, and were later joined by two NF Mk.13s and two NF Mk.14s. The test aircraft were used in a wide variety of experiments, including radar and missile tests and during the development of Concorde.

===Israel===

Due to tensions between the newly formed nation of Israel and its neighbours, both sides had commenced an arms race which led to jet aircraft being vigorously purchased by various countries in the region. In 1953 Israel ordered four &quot;T Mk.7&quot;s and 11 &quot;F Mk.8&quot;s, with delivery continuing until early 1954. The &quot;F Mk.8&quot;s were modified to carry American HVAR rockets but were otherwise identical to RAF aircraft. A second batch of seven refurbished &quot;FR Mk.9&quot;s and two more &quot;T Mk.7&quot;s was delivered in 1955. In 1956, Israel purchased six NF Mk.13s, with three delivered that year, and the remaining three, delayed by an arms embargo, in 1958. Five more T Mk.7s were later purchased, these were converted from ex-Belgian &quot;F Mk.4&quot;s and were fitted with the Mk.8 tail.

On 1 September 1955, an Israeli Meteor shot down an Egyptian de Havilland Vampire, the first jet aircraft to be shot down in the theatre. The Meteor played a key role during the Suez Crisis; on 28 October 1956, an Israeli NF.13 took part in Operation Tarnegol, in which it successfully located and shot down an Egyptian Ilyushin Il-14 that had been carrying several high-ranking Egyptian military officers on the eve of the crisis. The operation had intended to shoot down the Il-14 that was supposed to be carrying the supreme commander of the Egyptian armed forces, Abdel Hakim Amer, however a different aircraft had been inadvertently attacked and destroyed instead. After deploying paratroopers east of the Suez Canal, the Israeli Air Force continued to support them on the ground predominantly using its jet aircraft, fearing its propeller-driven aircraft would be vulnerable against Egypt&#x27;s jet fighters.

While initially flying combat air patrol missions, the Meteors and other Israeli aircraft could not prevent effective attacks by Egyptian aircraft on the ground forces. Israeli officers came to recognise that the Meteor was outclassed by Egyptian MiG-15s, and subsequently limited the Meteor&#x27;s employment as a fighter against other aerial adversaries. Following the start of the Anglo-French bombing campaign against Egyptian airbases, the Egyptian Air Force mostly withdrew from combat in the Sinai, allowing Israeli aircraft to operate unhindered.

The Mk.8s remained in front line service until 1956, and were then used as training aircraft. The NF Mk.13s remained in operational use until 1962.

===Record setting===

Late in 1945, two F.3 Meteors were modified for an attempt on the world air speed record. On 7 November 1945 at Herne Bay in Kent, UK, Group Captain Hugh &quot;Willie&quot; Wilson set the first official air speed record by a jet aircraft of TAS. In 1946, Group Captain Edward &quot;Teddy&quot; Donaldson broke this record with a speed of TAS, in &quot;EE549&quot;, a Meteor F.4.

On 4–5 April 1950, Sqn Ldr Janusz Żurakowski set an international speed record London-Copenhagen-London in a production standard F.8 (&quot;VZ468&quot;). Suitably impressed, the Danes later purchased the type.

Another &quot;claim to fame&quot; was the Meteor&#x27;s ability to perform the &quot;Zurabatic Cartwheel&quot;, an aerobatics manoeuvre named after Gloster&#x27;s acting Chief Test Pilot, it was first demonstrated by Meteor G-7-1 &quot;G-AMCJ&quot; prototype at the 1951 Farnborough Air Show; the Meteor, due to its widely set engines, could have individual engines throttled back and forward to achieve a seemingly stationary vertical cartwheel. Many Meteor pilots went on to &quot;prove their mettle&quot; by attempting the same feat.

On 7 August 1949, the Meteor III, &quot;EE397&quot;, on loan from the RAF and flown by Flight Refuelling Ltd (FRL) test pilot Patrick Hornidge, took off from Tarrant Rushton and, refuelled 10 times by the Lancaster tanker, remained airborne for 12 hours and 3 minutes, receiving of fuel from the tanker in ten tanker contacts and flying an overall distance of , achieving a new jet endurance record.

Meteor F.8 &quot;WA820&quot; was adapted during 1948 to take two Armstrong Siddeley Sapphire turbojets, and from Moreton Valence, on 31 August 1951, established a time-to-height climb record. The pilot was Flt Lt Tom Prickett, of Armstrong Siddeley. A height of 9,843 ft was reached in 1 min 16 sec, 19,685 ft in 1 min 50 sec, 29,500 ft in 2 min 29 sec, and 39,370 ft in 3 min 7 sec. Air Service Training Ltd were responsible for the conversion.

==Variants==
;Gloster F.9/40
:Prototypes, eight built:

* DG202/G powered by two Rover W2B jet engines, first flown 24 July 1943.
* DG203/G powered by two Power Jets W2/500 engines, first flown 9 November 1943.
* DG204/G powered by two Metrovick F2 axial jet engines, unlike the other F.9/40s the engines were mounted under the wing, first flown 13 November 1943.
* DG205/G powered by two Rover W2B/23 jet engines, first flown 12 June 1943.
* DG206/G powered by two Halford H1 jet engines, the first to fly on 5 March 1943.
* DG207/G powered by two Halford H1 jet engines, first flown 24 July 1945, became the prototype F.2 variant.
* DG208/G powered by two Rover W2B/23 engines, first flown 20 January 1944.
* DG209/G powered by two Rover W2B/27 engines, first flown 18 April 1944.
;Meteor F.1
:First production aircraft built between 1943 and 1944, 20 built.
;Meteor F.1, Trent turboprop

:One-off engine test bed, converted from former No. 616 Squadron RAF operational F.1 serial number &quot;EE227&quot;, for the Rolls-Royce Trent turboprop engine making it the world&#x27;s first turboprop-powered aircraft. The undercarriage was lengthened to give ground clearance for the initial 7 ft 7 inch Rotol airscrews. First flying in September 1945, it was not shown publicly until June 1946. It was found that separate controls for thrust and constant speed units required a lot of skill to manage. It was then flown with higher engine thrust and smaller propellers to enable development of a combined control system. The development programme was complete by 1948.
;Meteor F.2
:Alternative engined version with two Halford H1s – one of the F.9/40s was used as prototype and trials by de Havilland, did not enter production.
;Meteor F.3
:Derwent I powered, with sliding canopy. First flown 11 September 1944, 210 built (first 15 were Welland-powered).

;Meteor F.4
:Derwent 5 powered with strengthened fuselage, 489 built by Gloster and 46 by Armstrong Whitworth for the Royal Air Force. The F.4 was also exported to Argentina (50 aircraft), Belgium (48 aircraft), Denmark (20 aircraft), Egypt (12 aircraft), Netherlands (38 aircraft).
;Meteor FR.5
:One-off fighter reconnaissance version of the F.4. Fitted with vertical cameras in the nose instead of the four cannon and with oblique cameras in the fuselage. Destroyed on maiden flight, 15 June 1949.
;Meteor F.6
:Under development in 1946-1947 and in all respects a forebear of the later F.8 having the short wings of the F.4 and a fuselage similar to that of the F.8 and an E.1/44 tail assembly. Did not progress beyond the drawing board and not built.
;Meteor T.7
:Two-seat trainer variant of the F.4, company prototype first flew 19 March 1948, 640 production aircraft for the Royal Air Force and the Royal Navy (43) and 72 for export (Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Denmark, Egypt, France, Israel, Netherlands). Avions Fairey modified 20 Belgian Air Force F.4s to T.7 standard.
;Meteor F.8

:Greatly improved from the F.4. Longer fuselage, greater fuel capacity, standard ejection seat and modified tail (derived from the E.1/44). A prolific frontline fighter in the RAF during 1950–54, this variant was ordered by the RAAF, with which it saw action in the Korea War.
;Gloster Meteor F8 &quot;prone pilot&quot;
:One-off experimental Meteor F.8 &quot;prone pilot&quot;, &quot;WK935&quot; modified by Armstrong Whitworth.

;Meteor F.8 jet deflection test-bed: One F.8 (RA490) modified with Rolls-Royce Nene engines cantilevered forward of the wings and &quot;deflection boxes&quot; to direct jet exhaust downwards for jet-lift.
;Meteor FR.9
:Fighter armed reconnaissance version of the F.8, first flown 23 March 1950, 126 built by Gloster for the Royal Air Force. Former RAF aircraft were later sold to Ecuador, Israel and Syria.
;Meteor PR.10
:Photo reconnaissance version of the F.8, first flown 29 March 1950, 59 built for the Royal Air Force.
;Meteor NF.11
:Night Fighter variant with airborne interception (AI) radar designed and built by Armstrong Whitworth, three prototypes followed by 311 production aircraft for the Royal Air Force and 20 for the Royal Danish Air Force.
;Meteor NF.12
:Longer-nosed version of the NF.11 with American AN/APS-21 radar, this was balanced by a slightly larger fin, first flown on 21 April 1953, 100 built by Armstrong Whitworth.
;Meteor NF.13
:&quot;Tropicalised&quot; version of the NF.11 to replace the Mosquito NF.36 for service with 39 Squadron in Malta and Cyprus and 219 Squadron based in Egypt. The first of 40 production aircraft built by Armstrong Whitworth was first flown on 21 December 1952. Former Royal Air Force aircraft were later sold to Egypt (6 aircraft), France (2 aircraft), Israel (6 aircraft) and Syria (6 aircraft).
;Meteor NF.14
:NF.11 with new two-piece blown canopy rather than the heavy-framed version. It also had a longer nose giving a length of 51 ft 4 in. Prototype modified from an NF.11 was first flown 23 October 1953 and was followed by 100 production aircraft built by Armstrong Whitworth for the Royal Air Force.
;Meteor U.15
:Target drone conversion of the F.4, 92 modified by Flight Refuelling Ltd.
;Meteor U.16
:Target drone conversion of the F.8, 108 modified by Flight Refuelling.
;Meteor TT.20

:High speed target towing conversion of the NF.11 for the Royal Navy by Armstrong Whitworth, 20 former Royal Air Force NF.11s were modified. Four additional conversions of four NF.11s of Royal Danish Air Force, after conversion these were flown by civil operators on behalf of the Danish military.
;Meteor U.21
:Target drone conversion of the F.8 for the Royal Australian Air Force by Flight Refuelling, some aircraft modified in Australia by Fairey Aviation of Australasia using Flight Refuelling supplied modification kits.
;Ground attack fighter
:Also known as the &quot;Reaper&quot;, it was a F.8 modified by Gloster as a private venture ground attack fighter. The modification allowed the carriage of external rocket-assisted take-off Gear (RATOG), added a 57 mm cannon in the lower fuselage and tip tanks. First flown 4 September 1950, only one was built.
;Gloster CXP-1001
:A single-engine version of the Meteor proposed by Gloster as a pursuit fighter for the Republic of China Air Force. None were built.

==Operators==

===Military operators===

;
* Argentine Air Force ordered 100 F.4s in May 1947, comprising 50 ex-RAF aircraft and 50 newly built. Deliveries started in July that year, the Meteor remaining in service until 1970, when the last examples were replaced by Dassault Mirage IIIs.
* Royal Australian Air Force operated 104 aircraft from 1946 to 1947 (1× F.3) and 1951 to 1963 (94× F.8, 9× T.7, 1× NF.11).
** No. 22 Squadron RAAF
** No. 23 Squadron RAAF
** No. 75 Squadron RAAF
** No. 77 Squadron RAAF
* Belgian Air Force received 40 aircraft of F.4 variant, 43 of T.7 variant, 240 of F.8 variant and 24 aircraft of NF.11 variant.
* Biafran Air Force purchased two Meteor NF 14s through a cover company. One crashed during a ferry flight between Madeira and Cape Verde, while the second was abandoned at Bissau, Portuguese Guinea. An attempt to purchase a further two ex-Danish target tugs via a German intermediary was discovered by the &quot;Bundesnachrichtendienst&quot;, the West German intelligence service, and stopped by grounding the aircraft.
* Brazilian Air Force received 62 aircraft in F.8 and TF.7 variants.
* 2°/1°GAvCa
* 1°/1°GAvCa
* 1°/14°GAv
* Royal Canadian Air Force — from 1945 to 1950, one Meteor III and Meteor T.7 were used for tests and evaluation by the RCAF.
* Royal Danish Air Force — 20 F.4/F.8, 20× NF.11 and 6× T.7 in service from 1949 to 1962, replaced by 30 Hunter Mk 51 since 1956.
* Ecuadorian Air Force
* Royal Egyptian Air Force — used 12× F.4, 6× T.7, 12× F.8 and 6× NF.13 from 1949 to 1958, some of them saw action during Suez Crisis in 1956, replaced by MiG-15bis.
* French Air Force
* Luftwaffe – Meteor TT.20 target towing aircraft.
* Israeli Air Force
** 117 Squadron (First Jet Squadron) — from 1953 to 1962, 4× T.7, 11× F.8, 7× FR.9, and 5× &quot;T.7.5&quot; or &quot;T.8&quot; variants (T.7 with F.8&#x27;s tail, ex Belgian Air Force).
** 119 Squadron (Bat Squadron) — from 1956 to 1963, 5× NF.13 variant. (ordered 6 aircraft, but one has crashed during ferry flight to Israel.)
** 107 Squadron (Knights of the Orange Tail Squadron) — from 1962 to 1964, some F.8 and FR.9 variants, ex 117 sqn.
** 110 Squadron (Knights of The North Squadron) — from 1962 to early 1970s, some T.7 and T.8 variants, ex 117 sqn. and some F.8 and FR.9 variants, ex 107 sqn.
* Royal Netherlands Air Force — 60× F.4 used 1948–1957, along with 160× F.8 1950–1959, replaced by Hawker Hunter.
**322 Squadron RNLAF; 323, 324, 325, 326, 327 and 328 Squadrons
* Dutch Naval Aviation Service
* Royal New Zealand Air Force
** No. 14 Squadron RNZAF in Cyprus, operated two Meteor T.7 aircraft hired from the RAF.
** Various squadrons, one F.3 used for pilot jet conversion training, then trade training airframe.
* South African Air Force – Meteor F.3 aircraft, in service from 1946 to 1949.
* Syrian Air Force — used some T.7, F.8, FR.9 variants, and 6× NF.13 variant, from 1951 to early 1960s.
* Royal Air Force

* Fleet Air Arm
* United States Army Air Forces tested one aircraft and returned it to UK after tests.

===Civilian operators===
* Svensk Flygtjänst AB Three Meteor T.7 and four Meteor TT.20 for target towing between 1955 and 1974.
* DERA, based at Llanbedr used NF.11 variant &quot;WD790&quot; between 1952 and 1982
* Martin-Baker Aircraft Company has used various variants since 1946 to test their ejection seats
* Ferranti Flying Unit, based at RAF Turnhouse used NF.14 variant &quot;WM261&quot; G-ARCX to test airborne radar and gunsights between 1960 and 1969
* Flight Refuelling Ltd (FRL) were lent the RAF Meteor F.3 &quot;EE397&quot; for use in probe-and-drogue trials. This aircraft set a world jet endurance record of 12 hours and 3 minutes on 7 August 1949
* Classic Air Force
* Airwork Fleet Requirements Unit used TT.20 variant between 1958 and 1971

==Surviving aircraft==
Although many Meteors survive in museums, collections and on pylons in public spaces as gate guardians, only four remain airworthy. 
* – Two of the airworthy Meteors are in the United Kingdom:
:*Two Meteor T.7/F.8 Hybrids used by Martin-Baker as ejection seat test aircraft &quot;G-JMWA/WA638&quot; &amp; &quot;WL419&quot;. Both are last recorded as being at Chalgrove.
* – A former RAF F.8 &quot;VH-MBX&quot; (this being a play on the Meteor’s nickname of “Meatbox”) at the Temora Aviation Museum with Royal Australian Air Force markings as &#x27;A77-851&#x27;. Ownership was transferred to the RAAF in July 2019 and it is operated by the Air Force Heritage Squadron (Temora Historic Flight).
* – A former RAF T7 &quot;WA591/G-BWMF&quot; is now in the Planes of Fame Air Museum in Chino, California.

==Specifications (Meteor F.8)==
==Notable appearances in media==


==See also==
==References==

===Notes===
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* Aloni, Shlomo. &quot;Arab-Israeli Air Wars 1947–82&quot;. Osprey Publishing, 2001. .
* Aloni, Shlomo. &quot;The Jet Age: Gloster Meteor in Israeli Service&quot;. &quot;Air Enthusiast&quot;, Fifty, May to June 1993, pp. 38–48. Stamford, UK: Key Publishing. .
* Andrews, C.F. &quot;The Gloster Meteor F.8&quot; &quot;Aircraft in Profile, Volume 1/Part1&quot;. Windsor, Berkshire, UK: Profile Publications Ltd., 4th revised edition 1975 (first published in 1965). .
* Ashley, Glenn. &quot;Meteor in Action&quot;. Carrollton, Texas: Squadron/Signal Publications Inc., 1995. .
* Bowyer, Chaz. &quot;Postwar Military Aircraft 2: Gloster Meteor&quot;. Shepperton, Surrey, UK: Ian Allan Ltd., 1985. .
* Boyne, Walter J. &quot;Air Warfare: an International Encyclopedia: M-Z&quot;. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, 2002. .
* Butler, Phil and Tony Buttler. &quot;Gloster Meteor: Britain&#x27;s Celebrated First-Generation Jet&quot;. Hersham, Surrey, UK: Midland Publishing, 2006. .
* Buttler, Tony. &quot;Secret Projects: British Fighters and Bombers 1935 -1950 (British Secret Projects 3)&quot;. Leicester, UK: Midland Publishing, 2004. .
* Caruana, Richard J. and Richard A. Franks. &quot;The Gloster &amp; AW Meteor&quot;. Kingsway, Bedford, UK: SAM Publications, 2004. .
* Cicalesi, Juan Carlos and Santiago Rivas. &quot;Argentina&#x27;s Meteors: Latin America&#x27;s first jet fighters&quot;. &quot;International Air Power Review&quot;, Volume 7, Winter 2002. pp. 120–128. Norwalk, Connecticut, USA: AIRtime Publishing. . .
* Cicalesi, Juan Carlos, César del Gaizo and Santiago Rivas. &quot;Into the Jet Age: The Gloster Meteor in Argentina&quot;. &quot;Air Enthusiast&quot; No. 104, March/April 2003, pp. 68–73. Stamford, UK: Key Publishing. .
* &quot;The Gloster Meteor.&quot; &quot;Flight&quot;, 25 October 1945, pp. 444–446.
* Geoffery, G. &quot;Progress with Jet Propulsion: Details of the Meteor.&quot; &quot;Flight&quot;, 19 July 1945. pp. 70–73.
* Golly, John and Bill Gunston. &quot;Jet&quot;. Eloy Gutierrez, 2010. .
* Goulding, James. &quot;Interceptor: RAF Single Seat Multi-Gun Fighters&quot;. London: Ian Allan, 1986. .
* Green, William. &quot;Warplanes of the Second World War, Vol. 2.&quot; London: Macdonald &amp; Co Ltd, 1968, First edition 1960.
* Green, William and Gordon Swanborough. &quot;The Great Book of Fighters&quot;. St. Paul, Minnesota: MBI Publishing, 2001. .
* Harrison, W.A. &quot;Forgotten Breed ... The RAF&#x27;s Last &#x27;Shufti&#x27; Meteors&quot;. &quot;Air Enthusiast&quot;, No 93, May/June 2001, pp. 26–33. Stamford, UK: Key Publishing. .
* Jabber, Paul. &quot;Not by War Alone: Security and Arms Control in the Middle East&quot;. University of California Press, 1981. .
* James, Derek N. &quot;Gloster Aircraft since 1917&quot;. London: Putnam, 1971. .
* James, Derek N. &quot;Gloster Aircraft since 1917&quot; (2nd Edition). London: Putnam, 1987. .
* Jefford, C.G. &quot;RAF Squadrons, A Comprehensive Record of the Movement and Equipment of all RAF Squadrons and their Antecedents since 1912&quot;. Shrewsbury, Shropshire, UK: Airlife Publishing, 2001. .
* Jones, Barry. &quot;Gloster Meteor&quot;. Ramsbury, Marlborough, Wiltshire, UK: The Crowood Press Ltd., 1998. .
* King, H. F. &quot;Mars to Javelin, Gloster aircraft of forty years&quot;. &quot;Flight&quot;, Vol. 67, No. 2418, 27 May 1955, pp. 713–731.
* Loftin, L.K. Jr. &quot;Quest for Performance: The Evolution of Modern Aircraft&quot;. NASA SP-468. Retrieved: 22 April 2006.
* Mason, Francis K. &quot;The British Fighter Since 1912&quot;. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press. 1992. .
* Nicolle, David. &quot;Suez: The Other Side: Part Two&quot;. &quot;Air Enthusiast&quot;, No 112, July/August 2004. pp. 48–57. Stamford, UK: Key Publishing. .
* Nicolle, David. &quot;Suez: The Other Side: Part Three&quot;. &quot;Air Enthusiast&quot;, No 113, September/October 2004. pp. 36–44. Stamford, UK: Key Publishing. .
* Nicolle, David. &quot;Suez: The Other Side: Part Four&quot;. &quot;Air Enthusiast&quot;, No 112, November/December 2004. pp. 52–60. Stamford, UK: Key Publishing. .
* Nijboer, Donald. &quot;Meteor I Vs V 1 Flying Bomb, 1944&quot;. Oxford: Osprey Publishing Ltd, 2012..
* Partridge, J.J. &quot;The Gloster Meteor F.IV&quot; &quot;Aircraft in Profile, Volume 4&quot;. Windsor, Berkshire, UK: Profile Publications Ltd., 2nd revised edition 1970 (original in 1966). .
* Pavelec, Sterling Michael. &quot;The Jet Race and the Second World War&quot;. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Publishing, 2007. .
* Schrøder, Hans. &quot;Royal Danish Airforce&quot;. København, Denmark: Tøjhusmuseet, 1991. .
* Shacklady, Edward. &quot;The Gloster Meteor&quot;. London: Macdonald &amp; Co. (Publishers) Ltd., 1962.
* Spick, Mike. &quot;The Illustrated Directory of Fighters&quot;. Minneapolis, Minnesota: Zenith Imprint, 2002. .
* Spring, Ivan. &quot;Springbok Jet Age: The Gloster Meteor III in SAAF service&quot;. &quot;Air Enthusiast&quot;, No. 55, Autumn 1994, pp. 8–12. 
* Sturtivant, Ray. &quot;British Naval Aviation: The Fleet Air Arm, 1917–1990&quot;. Naval Institute Press, 1990. .
* Sturtivant, Ray and Theo Ballance. &quot;The Squadrons of the Fleet Air Arm.&quot; Tonbridge, Kent, UK: Air-Britain (Historians) Ltd, 1994. .
* Williams, Ray. &quot;The Night-Fighting Meteor&quot;. &quot;Air Enthusiast&quot;, Twenty-five, August–November 1984, pp. 44–59. Bromley, Kent, UK: Fine Scroll. .
* Williams, Ray. &quot;Meteor Night Fighters: Part One&quot;. &quot;Aeroplane Monthly&quot;, April 1995, Vol. 23, No 4, Issue No. 264, pp. 6–10.
* Williams, Ray. &quot;Meteor Night Fighters: Part Two&quot;. &quot;Aeroplane Monthly&quot;, May 1995, Vol. 23, No 5, Issue No. 265, pp. 18–22.
* Williams, Ray. &quot;Meteor Night Fighters: Part Three&quot;. &quot;Aeroplane Monthly&quot;, June 1995, Vol. 23, No 6, Issue No. 266, pp. 10–24.
* Williams, Ray. &quot;Meteor Night Fighters: Part Four&quot;. &quot;Aeroplane Monthly&quot;, July 1995, Vol. 24 No 1, Issue No. 267, pp. 42–47.
* Yonay, Ehud. &quot;No Margin for Error: The Making of the Israeli Air Force.&quot; New York: Pantheon Books, 1993. .
* Young, Michael G. &quot;Prone Meteor.&quot; &quot;Aviation News,&quot; Vol. 13, No. 22, 22 March–4 April 1985.
* Zuk, Bill. &quot;Janusz Zurakowski: Legends in the Sky&quot;. St. Catharine&#x27;s, Ontario: Vanwell, 2004. .

==External links==
* Temora Aviation Museum Meteor F.8
* Warbird Alley: Meteor
* Jets 35: Trent engine
* &quot;Meteor&#x27;s Twelve-hour Flight&quot; a 1949 &quot;Flight&quot; article (via Archive.org)
* &quot;Meteor Mk 8&quot; a 1951 &quot;Flight&quot; article (via Archive.org)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q140318" start="4" end="18" title="Gloster Meteor" label="Gloster Meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="41" end="52" title="jet fighter" label="jet fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="61" end="67" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="79" end="91" title="jet aircraft" label="jet aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="134" end="150" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="225" end="233" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q312547" start="256" end="269" title="Frank Whittle" label="Frank Whittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454299" start="287" end="301" title="Power Jets" label="Power Jets Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043686" start="484" end="504" title="No. 616 Squadron RAF" label="No. 616 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q838849" start="700" end="719" title="Aircraft registration" label="civilian-registered"/>
<link wikidata="Q140254" start="1038" end="1058" title="Messerschmitt Me 262" label="Messerschmitt Me 262"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="1130" end="1156" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="1178" end="1188" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306321" start="1366" end="1387" title="aerial reconnaissance" label="aerial reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="1395" end="1408" title="night fighter" label="night fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361343" start="1570" end="1593" title="Rolls-Royce RB.50 Trent" label="Rolls-Royce RB.50 Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q309027" start="1647" end="1656" title="turboprop" label="turboprop"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992965" start="1949" end="1979" title="Gloster Meteor F8 &amp;quot;Prone Pilot&amp;quot;" label="&amp;quot;Meteor Prone Pilot&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064483" start="2011" end="2025" title="prone position" label="prone position"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929294" start="2196" end="2206" title="swept wing" label="swept wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q641943" start="2330" end="2343" title="Hawker Hunter" label="Hawker Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q836770" start="2348" end="2363" title="Gloster Javelin" label="Gloster Javelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903235" start="2461" end="2473" title="Martin-Baker" label="Martin-Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q623544" start="2485" end="2498" title="ejection seat" label="ejection seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="2646" end="2654" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532217" start="2710" end="2734" title="Gloster Aircraft Company" label="Gloster Aircraft Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q689325" start="3068" end="3086" title="Armstrong-Siddeley" label="Armstrong-Siddeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099621" start="3362" end="3375" title="Power Jets WU" label="Power Jets WU"/>
<link wikidata="Q901295" start="3442" end="3454" title="Henry Tizard" label="Henry Tizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986499" start="3472" end="3503" title="Aeronautical Research Committee" label="Aeronautical Research Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="3513" end="3525" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537719" start="3689" end="3702" title="George Carter (engineer)" label="George Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019578" start="3831" end="3845" title="Power Jets W.1" label="Power Jets W.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4077" end="4093" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="4102" end="4119" title="Battle for France" label="Battle for France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658317" start="4323" end="4335" title="Project stakeholder" label="stakeholders"/>
<link wikidata="Q207977" start="4403" end="4412" title="prototype" label="prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201019" start="4496" end="4512" title="proof-of-concept" label="proof-of-concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q430259" start="4513" end="4527" title="Gloster E28/39" label="Gloster E28/39"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381074" start="4673" end="4703" title="Gerry Sayer" label="Philip &amp;quot;Gerry&amp;quot; Sayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419175" start="5056" end="5084" title="Royal Aircraft Establishment" label="Royal Aircraft Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236340" start="5243" end="5246" title="Power Jets W.2" label="W.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855741" start="5251" end="5271" title="Metropolitan-Vickers F.2" label="axial engine designs"/>
<link wikidata="Q332454" start="5520" end="5536" title="Max Aitken, Lord Beaverbrook" label="Lord Beaverbrook"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5644" end="5685" title="Gloster F.9/37#F.18/40 and F.29/40" label="night-fighter development of their F.9/37"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874353" start="5835" end="5857" title="Tricycle landing gear" label="tricycle undercarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q407579" start="5958" end="5977" title="List of Air Ministry Specifications" label="Specification F9/40"/>
<link wikidata="Q207089" start="6153" end="6178" title="Republic P-47 Thunderbolt" label="Republic P-47 Thunderbolt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6201" end="6230" title="Republic P-47 Thunderbolt#P-47 in Allied service" label="with the same name to the RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q179835" start="6473" end="6493" title="de Havilland Vampire" label="de Havilland Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421250" start="6639" end="6646" title="taxiing" label="taxiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q848620" start="6935" end="6940" title="Rover Company" label="Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487854" start="7057" end="7072" title="Gloster E.1/44" label="E.1/44 proposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q679888" start="7441" end="7452" title="Rolls-Royce Limited" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888177" start="7503" end="7509" title="United Kingdom military aircraft serials" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050411" start="7556" end="7580" title="de Havilland Goblin" label="de Havilland Halford H.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347950" start="7684" end="7696" title="RAF Cranwell" label="RAF Cranwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103128" start="7709" end="7722" title="Michael Daunt" label="Michael Daunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288712" start="7765" end="7771" title="Yaw (rotation)" label="yawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="8417" end="8433" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855741" start="8578" end="8591" title="Metrovick F.2" label="Metrovick F.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460518" start="8731" end="8748" title="Jet engine compressors" label="engine compressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q283666" start="9107" end="9119" title="de Havilland" label="de Havilland"/>
<link wikidata="Q19818248" start="9462" end="9477" title="RAF Moreton Valence" label="Moreton Valence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620698" start="9611" end="9623" title="Hispano-Suiza HS.404" label="Hispano Mk V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736751" start="9655" end="9661" title="Aircraft canopy" label="canopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q278162" start="10017" end="10038" title="Bell P-59 Airacomet" label="Bell YP-59A Airacomet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008205" start="10072" end="10085" title="John Grierson (pilot)" label="John Grierson"/>
<link wikidata="Q217563" start="10089" end="10108" title="Edwards Air Force Base" label="Muroc Army Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q8067817" start="10576" end="10591" title="compressibility" label="compressibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q29426" start="10925" end="10938" title="afterburner" label="engine reheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975529" start="11294" end="11307" title="Group Captain" label="Group Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15969940" start="11308" end="11326" title="Hugh Wilson (RAF officer)" label="Hugh Joseph Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231271" start="11362" end="11373" title="Farnborough Airport" label="Farnborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422633" start="12078" end="12085" title="Rolls-Royce Derwent" label="Derwent"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="12767" end="12777" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427735" start="12854" end="12867" title="Fleet Air Arm" label="Fleet Air Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q221344" start="13575" end="13596" title="de Havilland Mosquito" label="de Havilland Mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="13602" end="13615" title="night fighter" label="night fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="14525" end="14530" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14623" end="14629" title="Radar configurations and types#Detection and search radars" label="APS-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043844" start="15304" end="15306" title="No. 85 Squadron RAF" label="85"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043240" start="15308" end="15310" title="No. 25 Squadron RAF" label="25"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042993" start="15312" end="15315" title="No. 152 Squadron RAF" label="152"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043535" start="15317" end="15319" title="No. 46 Squadron RAF" label="46"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043789" start="15321" end="15323" title="No. 72 Squadron RAF" label="72"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042994" start="15325" end="15328" title="No. 153 Squadron RAF" label="153"/>
<link wikidata="Q11792583" start="15333" end="15335" title="No. 64 Squadron RAF" label="64"/>
<link wikidata="Q836770" start="15829" end="15844" title="Gloster Javelin" label="Gloster Javelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699744" start="15930" end="15936" title="Tengah" label="Tengah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275629" start="16103" end="16121" title="RAF Thorney Island" label="RAF Thorney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929294" start="16775" end="16785" title="swept wing" label="swept wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q140254" start="16874" end="16894" title="Messerschmitt Me 262" label="Messerschmitt Me 262"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="16987" end="17000" title="Landing gear" label="undercarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096168" start="17091" end="17100" title="tailplane" label="tailplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579556" start="17267" end="17276" title="transonic" label="transonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178805" start="17310" end="17315" title="Joystick" label="stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q243558" start="19008" end="19017" title="duralumin" label="duralumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="19239" end="19255" title="Hawker Hurricane" label="Hawker Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q662123" start="19260" end="19274" title="Hawker Typhoon" label="Hawker Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q952062" start="19306" end="19327" title="Hawker Siddeley" label="Hawker Siddeley Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969050" start="19405" end="19421" title="Bristol Tramways" label="Bristol Tramways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522049" start="19473" end="19495" title="Standard Motor Company" label="Standard Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q820428" start="19559" end="19580" title="Pressed Steel Company" label="Pressed Steel Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139243" start="19613" end="19629" title="Parnall" label="Parnall Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q823360" start="19685" end="19706" title="Boulton Paul Aircraft" label="Boulton Paul Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19708" end="19740" title="Excelsior Motor Radiator Company" label="Excelsior Motor Radiator Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883237" start="19742" end="19752" title="Bell Punch" label="Bell Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q113040280" start="19754" end="19782" title="Turner Manufacturing Company" label="Turner Manufacturing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084244" start="19788" end="19807" title="Charlesworth Bodies" label="Charlesworth Bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="20107" end="20115" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195182" start="20198" end="20211" title="Avions Fairey" label="Avions Fairey"/>
<link wikidata="Q304134" start="20276" end="20293" title="Belgian Air Force" label="Belgian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q155896" start="20367" end="20373" title="Fokker" label="Fokker"/>
<link wikidata="Q580556" start="20386" end="20413" title="Royal Netherlands Air Force" label="Royal Netherlands Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q914043" start="20489" end="20508" title="Rolls-Royce Welland" label="Rolls-Royce Welland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21207" end="21215" title="Power Jets W.2#Variants" label="W.2B/23C"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303672" start="21576" end="21581" title="Dowty Rotol" label="Rotol"/>
<link wikidata="Q147357" start="21653" end="21662" title="bleed air" label="bleed air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938452" start="21813" end="21829" title="compressor stall" label="compressor stall"/>
<link wikidata="Q639668" start="22648" end="22652" title="Rolls-Royce Nene" label="Nene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164321" start="23062" end="23078" title="Rolls-Royce Avon" label="Rolls-Royce Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q654907" start="23194" end="23210" title="Bristol Aeroplane Company" label="Bristol Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468032" start="23212" end="23232" title="Metropolitan-Vickers" label="Metropolitan-Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q723612" start="23750" end="23766" title="Hawker Tempest" label="Hawker Tempest V"/>
<link wikidata="Q336011" start="24075" end="24088" title="Norman Tebbit" label="Norman Tebbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="24682" end="24696" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q142804" start="24741" end="24761" title="Aerial refueling" label="in-flight refuelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138896" start="24796" end="24821" title="Cobham plc" label="Flight Refuelling Limited"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24856" end="24872" title="Aerial refueling#Probe-and-drogue 2" label="probe-and-drogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q284602" start="25667" end="25674" title="g force" label="g force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043686" start="26232" end="26252" title="No. 616 Squadron RAF" label="No. 616 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275263" start="26374" end="26386" title="RAF Culmhead" label="RAF Culmhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="26388" end="26396" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="26428" end="26440" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Spitfire VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231271" start="26545" end="26556" title="Farnborough Airfield" label="Farnborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415044" start="26731" end="26742" title="RAF Manston" label="RAF Manston"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="26755" end="26759" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q153348" start="26874" end="26889" title="V-1 flying bomb" label="V-1 flying bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="27337" end="27347" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415037" start="27539" end="27549" title="RAF Debden" label="RAF Debden"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="27559" end="27588" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275250" start="27692" end="27699" title="RAF Colerne" label="Colerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23183" start="27701" end="27710" title="Wiltshire" label="Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="28889" end="28900" title="Wind tunnel" label="Wind tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27070220" start="28955" end="28962" title="nacelle" label="nacelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982224" start="29451" end="29464" title="bubble canopy" label="bubble canopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q651419" start="29660" end="29669" title="Melsbroek Air Base" label="Melsbroek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477023" start="29701" end="29726" title="RAF Second Tactical Air Force" label="Second Tactical Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q835881" start="29787" end="29810" title="Unternehmen Bodenplatte" label="Unternehmen Bodenplatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686224" start="29899" end="29922" title="Advanced Landing Ground" label="Advanced Landing Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q667731" start="29987" end="29992" title="JG 27" label="JG 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q683386" start="29997" end="30002" title="JG 54" label="JG 54"/>
<link wikidata="Q140254" start="30184" end="30190" title="Messerschmitt Me 262" label="Me 262"/>
<link wikidata="Q9832" start="30319" end="30328" title="Eindhoven" label="Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446578" start="30448" end="30468" title="Gilze-Rijen Air Base" label="Gilze-Rijen Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q47887" start="30491" end="30499" title="Nijmegen" label="Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="30524" end="30538" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q830708" start="30655" end="30662" title="Faßberg Air Base" label="Faßberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303061" start="30839" end="30852" title="Friendly fire" label="Friendly fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389519" start="31654" end="31679" title="Cabin pressurization" label="fully pressurised cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="31689" end="31696" title="aileron" label="aileron"/>
<link wikidata="Q209760" start="31730" end="31736" title="rudder" label="rudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q581516" start="31737" end="31753" title="Trim tab" label="trim adjustments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148691" start="31764" end="31771" title="Dutch roll" label="snaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q789815" start="31881" end="31897" title="Hardpoint" label="underwing stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="31921" end="31929" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042919" start="32153" end="32168" title="Revolución Libertadora" label="1955 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025080" start="32423" end="32434" title="Soesterberg" label="Soesterberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25390" start="32439" end="32449" title="Leeuwarden" label="Leeuwarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q276266" start="32611" end="32622" title="Beauvechain" label="Beauvechain"/>
<link wikidata="Q641943" start="33603" end="33616" title="Hawker Hunter" label="Hawker Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086822" start="33625" end="33642" title="Supermarine Swift" label="Supermarine Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506785" start="34102" end="34106" title="Empennage" label="tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="34459" end="34476" title="centre of gravity" label="centre of gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851537" start="34507" end="34514" title="ballast" label="ballast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903235" start="34766" end="34778" title="Martin-Baker" label="Martin Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q623544" start="34779" end="34792" title="ejection seat" label="ejection seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q657723" start="34942" end="34961" title="RAF Fighter Command" label="RAF Fighter Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="34994" end="35009" title="Korean War" label="combat in Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q153826" start="35196" end="35221" title="North American F-86 Sabre" label="North American F-86 Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="35230" end="35236" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q187377" start="35237" end="35243" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15" label="MiG-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057079" start="35355" end="35364" title="Aggressor squadron" label="aggressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="35968" end="35979" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41426" start="36166" end="36174" title="Trainer (aircraft)" label="training"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="36874" end="36886" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043346" start="36888" end="36906" title="No. 2 Squadron RAF" label="No. 2 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q157035" start="36910" end="36919" title="Bückeburg" label="Bückeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043810" start="36924" end="36943" title="No. 79 Squadron RAF" label="No. 79 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q278725" start="36947" end="36960" title="RAF Gutersloh" label="RAF Gutersloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865132" start="37000" end="37004" title="Aden Protectorate" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043865" start="37006" end="37024" title="No. 8 Squadron RAF" label="No. 8 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043317" start="37170" end="37172" title="No. 29 Squadron RAF" label="29"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042951" start="37174" end="37177" title="No. 141 Squadron RAF" label="141"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043248" start="37186" end="37199" title="No. 264 Squadron RAF" label="264 squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043161" start="37515" end="37535" title="No. 219 Squadron RAF" label="No. 219 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404068" start="37539" end="37545" title="RAF Kabrit" label="Kabrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042942" start="38769" end="38788" title="No. 13 Squadron RAF" label="No. 13 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="38866" end="38888" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="39377" end="39387" title="Juan Perón" label="Juan Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q891808" start="39389" end="39416" title="Bombing of Plaza de Mayo" label="rebel-flown aircraft bombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q478926" start="39421" end="39432" title="Casa Rosada" label="Casa Rosada"/>
<link wikidata="Q40021" start="39470" end="39474" title="North American T-6 Texan" label="AT-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q384788" start="39509" end="39523" title="Ministro Pistarini International Airport" label="Ezeiza airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843791" start="39543" end="39569" title="Morón Airport and Air Base" label="Morón Airport and Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042919" start="39780" end="39802" title="Revolución Libertadora" label="Revolución Libertadora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39996" end="40013" title="ARA La Rioja (E-4)" label="&amp;quot;Rioja&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40018" end="40039" title="ARA Cervantes" label="&amp;quot;Cervantes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q392113" start="40072" end="40084" title="Río Santiago Shipyard" label="Rio Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q201374" start="40115" end="40128" title="Ingeniero Aeronáutico Ambrosio L.V. Taravella International Airport" label="Pajas Blancas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44210" start="40154" end="40161" title="Córdoba, Argentina" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q575356" start="40180" end="40192" title="Avro Lincoln" label="Avro Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="40362" end="40379" title="Gasoline" label="automobile petrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361665" start="40391" end="40399" title="jet fuel" label="jet fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064293" start="41106" end="41126" title="No. 77 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 77 Squadron RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969832" start="41136" end="41169" title="British Commonwealth Forces Korea" label="British Commonwealth Forces Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q192075" start="41314" end="41322" title="North American P-51 Mustang" label="Mustangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q482493" start="41612" end="41626" title="Gimpo International Airport" label="Kimpo Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q736636" start="41737" end="41750" title="Hawker P.1081" label="Hawker P.1081"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="42097" end="42110" title="Ground attack aircraft" label="ground attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q562692" start="42254" end="42263" title="MiG Alley" label="MiG Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887781" start="42467" end="42484" title="Battle of Sunchon (air)" label="Battle of Sunchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606561" start="43744" end="43753" title="CAC Sabre" label="CAC Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q20990750" start="43907" end="43924" title="Citizen Air Force" label="Citizen Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043795" start="44005" end="44025" title="No. 75 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 75 Squadron RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="44880" end="44890" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q218977" start="45163" end="45178" title="Vickers Valiant" label="Vickers Valiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="45387" end="45392" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416238" start="45467" end="45483" title="Syrian Air Force" label="Syrian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="45665" end="45683" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q520964" start="45907" end="45932" title="English Electric Canberra" label="English Electric Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042942" start="46182" end="46201" title="No. 13 Squadron RAF" label="No. 13 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q152976" start="46282" end="46289" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-17" label="MiG-17s"/>
<link wikidata="Q117464905" start="46331" end="46347" title="French Air Force" label="French Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q773144" start="46816" end="46836" title="Sud Aviation Vautour" label="Sud Aviation Vautour"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="46931" end="46943" title="Algerian War" label="Algerian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q45942" start="46960" end="46964" title="Bône" label="Bône"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505" start="47435" end="47443" title="Concorde" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q179835" start="48342" end="48362" title="de Havilland Vampire" label="de Havilland Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097618" start="48522" end="48540" title="Operation Tarnegol" label="Operation Tarnegol"/>
<link wikidata="Q275031" start="48601" end="48615" title="Ilyushin Il-14" label="Ilyushin Il-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q307226" start="48849" end="48865" title="Abdel Hakim Amer" label="Abdel Hakim Amer"/>
<link wikidata="Q462211" start="49008" end="49025" title="Israeli Air Force" label="Israeli Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164772" start="49221" end="49238" title="combat air patrol" label="combat air patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038621" start="49997" end="50013" title="air speed record" label="air speed record"/>
<link wikidata="Q929286" start="50037" end="50054" title="Herne Bay, Kent" label="Herne Bay in Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784114" start="50166" end="50169" title="True airspeed" label="TAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344531" start="50194" end="50228" title="Edward Mortlock Donaldson" label="Edward &amp;quot;Teddy&amp;quot; Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353550" start="50332" end="50349" title="Janusz Żurakowski" label="Janusz Żurakowski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50601" end="50620" title="Janusz Żurakowski#Postwar" label="Zurabatic Cartwheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887962" start="50740" end="50745" title="United Kingdom aircraft test serials" label="G-7-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138896" start="51141" end="51162" title="Flight Refuelling Ltd" label="Flight Refuelling Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q730242" start="51169" end="51179" title="test pilot" label="test pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275618" start="51212" end="51227" title="RAF Tarrant Rushton" label="Tarrant Rushton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257644" start="51520" end="51547" title="Armstrong Siddeley Sapphire" label="Armstrong Siddeley Sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013228" start="51661" end="51667" title="Flight Lieutenant" label="Flt Lt"/>
<link wikidata="Q689325" start="51685" end="51703" title="Armstrong Siddeley" label="Armstrong Siddeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698182" start="51839" end="51859" title="Air Service Training" label="Air Service Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236340" start="51983" end="51992" title="Power Jets W.2" label="Rover W2B"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236340" start="52057" end="52074" title="Power Jets W.2" label="Power Jets W2/500"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855741" start="52138" end="52150" title="Metropolitan-Vickers F.2" label="Metrovick F2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236340" start="52291" end="52303" title="Power Jets W.2" label="Rover W2B/23"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050411" start="52368" end="52378" title="de Havilland Goblin" label="Halford H1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050411" start="52451" end="52461" title="de Havilland Goblin" label="Halford H1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236340" start="52560" end="52572" title="Power Jets W.2" label="Rover W2B/23"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236340" start="52636" end="52648" title="Power Jets W.2" label="Rover W2B/27"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361343" start="52919" end="52936" title="Rolls-Royce RB.50 Trent" label="Rolls-Royce Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q309027" start="52937" end="52946" title="turboprop" label="turboprop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303672" start="53101" end="53106" title="Dowty Rotol" label="Rotol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050411" start="53517" end="53528" title="de Havilland Goblin" label="Halford H1s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487854" start="54977" end="54983" title="Gloster E.1/44" label="E.1/44"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992965" start="55188" end="55222" title="Gloster Meteor F8 &amp;quot;Prone Pilot&amp;quot;" label="Meteor F.8 &amp;quot;prone pilot&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q639668" start="55343" end="55359" title="Rolls-Royce Nene" label="Rolls-Royce Nene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56097" end="56106" title="AN/APS-21" label="AN/APS-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043448" start="56330" end="56341" title="No. 39 Squadron RAF" label="39 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043161" start="56366" end="56378" title="No. 219 Squadron RAF" label="219 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q198952" start="56958" end="56970" title="Target drone" label="Target drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138896" start="57009" end="57030" title="Cobham plc" label="Flight Refuelling Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676551" start="57878" end="57883" title="JATO" label="RATOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q702659" start="58100" end="58127" title="Republic of China Air Force" label="Republic of China Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q57770" start="58192" end="58211" title="Argentine Air Force" label="Argentine Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q234371" start="58414" end="58433" title="Dassault Mirage III" label="Dassault Mirage III"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="58438" end="58464" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043190" start="58563" end="58583" title="No. 22 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 22 Squadron RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043207" start="58587" end="58607" title="No. 23 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 23 Squadron RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043795" start="58611" end="58631" title="No. 75 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 75 Squadron RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064293" start="58635" end="58655" title="No. 77 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 77 Squadron RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q304134" start="58658" end="58675" title="Belgian Air Force" label="Belgian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58787" end="58804" title="Biafran armed forces#Air wing" label="Biafran Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="58900" end="58907" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="58912" end="58922" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739" start="58958" end="58964" title="Bissau" label="Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002279" start="58966" end="58983" title="Portuguese Guinea" label="Portuguese Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q272969" start="59098" end="59121" title="Bundesnachrichtendienst" label="Bundesnachrichtendienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q634542" start="59208" end="59227" title="Brazilian Air Force" label="Brazilian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="59315" end="59339" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q431059" start="59441" end="59463" title="Royal Danish Air Force" label="Royal Danish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q956632" start="59571" end="59591" title="Ecuadorian Air Force" label="Ecuadorian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351405" start="59594" end="59618" title="Royal Egyptian Air Force" label="Royal Egyptian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q187377" start="59747" end="59753" title="MiG-15" label="MiG-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q117464905" start="59760" end="59776" title="French Air Force" label="French Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q56013" start="59779" end="59788" title="German Air Force" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q462211" start="59830" end="59847" title="Israeli Air Force" label="Israeli Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897679" start="59851" end="59863" title="117 Squadron (Israel)" label="117 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908420" start="60038" end="60050" title="119 Squadron (Israel)" label="119 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907184" start="60181" end="60193" title="107 Squadron (Israel)" label="107 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907198" start="60296" end="60308" title="110 Squadron (Israel)" label="110 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q580556" start="60454" end="60481" title="Royal Netherlands Air Force" label="Royal Netherlands Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q641943" start="60551" end="60564" title="Hawker Hunter" label="Hawker Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043379" start="60568" end="60586" title="322 Squadron RNLAF" label="322 Squadron RNLAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069982" start="60632" end="60660" title="Dutch Naval Aviation Service" label="Dutch Naval Aviation Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q542164" start="60663" end="60690" title="Royal New Zealand Air Force" label="Royal New Zealand Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042985" start="60694" end="60715" title="No. 14 Squadron RNZAF" label="No. 14 Squadron RNZAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519024" start="60882" end="60905" title="South African Air Force" label="South African Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416238" start="60961" end="60977" title="Syrian Air Force" label="Syrian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="61065" end="61080" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427735" start="61084" end="61097" title="Fleet Air Arm" label="Fleet Air Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="61100" end="61129" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654235" start="61213" end="61233" title="Svensk Flygtjänst AB" label="Svensk Flygtjänst AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834769" start="61316" end="61320" title="Defence Evaluation and Research Agency" label="DERA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61331" end="61339" title="Llanbedr Airport#History" label="Llanbedr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903235" start="61401" end="61413" title="Martin-Baker" label="Martin-Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407586" start="61499" end="61507" title="Ferranti" label="Ferranti"/>
<link wikidata="Q91937554" start="61530" end="61543" title="RAF Turnhouse" label="RAF Turnhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138896" start="61649" end="61670" title="Cobham plc" label="Flight Refuelling Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q142804" start="61735" end="61751" title="Aerial refueling" label="probe-and-drogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697742" start="61852" end="61869" title="Classic Air Force" label="Classic Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61872" end="61903" title="Airwork Services#Fleet Requirements Unit" label="Airwork Fleet Requirements Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758835" start="62057" end="62070" title="gate guardian" label="gate guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698212" start="62444" end="62466" title="Temora Aviation Museum" label="Temora Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064201" start="62609" end="62661" title="No. 100 Squadron RAAF" label="Air Force Heritage Squadron (Temora Historic Flight)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391415" start="62722" end="62747" title="Planes of Fame Air Museum" label="Planes of Fame Air Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q506395" start="62751" end="62768" title="Chino, California" label="Chino, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697856" start="63084" end="63098" title="Air Enthusiast" label="Air Enthusiast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697856" start="65409" end="65423" title="Air Enthusiast" label="Air Enthusiast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428742" start="66211" end="66217" title="Flight International" label="Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697856" start="68221" end="68235" title="Air Enthusiast" label="Air Enthusiast"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42704" wikidata="Q361047" url="?curid=42704" title="Transatlantic communications cable">
<text>A transatlantic telecommunications cable is a submarine communications cable connecting one side of the Atlantic Ocean to the other. In the 19th and early 20th centuries, each cable was a single wire. After mid-century, coaxial cable came into use, with amplifiers. Late in the 20th century, all cables installed use optical fiber as well as optical amplifiers, because distances range thousands of kilometers.

==History==
When the first transatlantic telegraph cable was laid in 1858 by Cyrus West Field, it operated for only three weeks; a subsequent attempt in 1866 was more successful. On July 13, 1866 the cable laying ship &quot;Great Eastern&quot; sailed out of Valentia Island, Ireland and on July 27 landed at Heart&#x27;s Content in Newfoundland, completing the first lasting connection across the Atlantic. It was active until 1965. 

Although a telephone cable was discussed starting in the 1920s, to be practical it needed a number of technological advances which did not arrive until the 1940s. Starting in 1927, transatlantic telephone service was radio-based.

TAT-1 (Transatlantic No. 1) was the first transatlantic telephone cable system. It was laid between Gallanach Bay, near Oban, and Clarenville, Newfoundland between 1955 and 1956 by the cable ship &quot;Monarch&quot;. It was inaugurated on September 25, 1956, initially carrying 36 telephone channels. In the first 24 hours of public service, there were 588 London–U.S. calls and 119 from London to Canada. The capacity of the cable was soon increased to 48 channels. Later, an additional three channels were added by use of C Carrier equipment. Time-assignment speech interpolation (TASI) was implemented on the TAT-1 cable in June 1960 and effectively increased the cable&#x27;s capacity from 37 (out of 51 available channels) to 72 speech circuits. TAT-1 was finally retired in 1978. Later coaxial cables, installed through the 1970s, used transistors and had higher bandwidth. The Moscow–Washington hotline was initially connected through this system.

==Current technology==
All cables presently in service use fiber optic technology. Many cables terminate in Newfoundland and Ireland, which lie on the great circle route from London, UK to New York City, US.

There has been a succession of newer transatlantic cable systems. All recent systems have used fiber optic transmission, and a self-healing ring topology. Late in the 20th century, communications satellites lost most of their North Atlantic telephone traffic to these low-cost, high-capacity, low-latency cables. This advantage only increases over time, as tighter cables provide higher bandwidth – the 2012 generation of cables drop the transatlantic latency to under 60 milliseconds, according to Hibernia Atlantic, deploying such a cable that year.

Some new cables are being announced on the South Atlantic: SACS (South Atlantic Cable System) and SAex (South Atlantic Express).

==TAT cable routes==
The TAT series of cables constitute a large percentage of all North Atlantic cables. All TAT cables are joint ventures between a number of telecommunications companies, e.g. British Telecom. CANTAT cables terminate in Canada rather than in the US.

==Private cable routes==
There are a number of private non-TAT cables.

==South Atlantic cable routes==

==See also==
*Cable layer
*List of international submarine communications cables

== References ==
== External links ==
*Aronsson&#x27;s Telecom History Timeline
*Timeline of Submarine Communications Cables, 1850–2024
*Submarine Cable Landings Worldwide</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q361047" start="2" end="40" title="Transatlantic communications cable" label="transatlantic telecommunications cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="46" end="76" title="submarine communications cable" label="submarine communications cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="104" end="118" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q183389" start="220" end="233" title="coaxial cable" label="coaxial cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="317" end="330" title="optical fiber" label="optical fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359305" start="342" end="359" title="optical amplifier" label="optical amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395922" start="439" end="468" title="transatlantic telegraph cable" label="transatlantic telegraph cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148998" start="489" end="505" title="Cyrus West Field" label="Cyrus West Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q348741" start="612" end="629" title="cable layer" label="cable laying ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q733293" start="636" end="649" title="SS Great Eastern" label="Great Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146838" start="670" end="685" title="Valentia Island" label="Valentia Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="687" end="694" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15068797" start="720" end="740" title="Heart&amp;#x27;s Content, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Heart&amp;#x27;s Content"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="744" end="756" title="Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955931" start="1078" end="1083" title="TAT-1" label="TAT-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q935702" start="1198" end="1202" title="Oban" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087641" start="1208" end="1219" title="Clarenville" label="Clarenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="1221" end="1233" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q348741" start="1263" end="1273" title="cable ship" label="cable ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117915" start="1280" end="1287" title="CS Monarch (1945)" label="Monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603561" start="1623" end="1659" title="Time-assignment speech interpolation" label="Time-assignment speech interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="1920" end="1930" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q735219" start="1962" end="1987" title="Moscow–Washington hotline" label="Moscow–Washington hotline"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="2093" end="2104" title="fiber optic" label="fiber optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197597" start="2185" end="2203" title="great circle route" label="great circle route"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2209" end="2215" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2223" end="2236" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="2338" end="2349" title="fiber optic" label="fiber optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448107" start="2370" end="2387" title="self-healing ring" label="self-healing ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="2424" end="2448" title="communications satellite" label="communications satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096504" start="2540" end="2547" title="Latency (audio)" label="latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135155" start="2742" end="2759" title="Hibernia Atlantic" label="Hibernia Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388477" start="2855" end="2859" title="SACS (cable system)" label="SACS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388898" start="2894" end="2898" title="SAex" label="SAex"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="3086" end="3104" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="3121" end="3136" title="British Telecom" label="British Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q348741" start="3315" end="3326" title="Cable layer" label="Cable layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248959" start="3328" end="3381" title="List of international submarine communications cables" label="List of international submarine communications cables"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42706" wikidata="Q3715260" url="?curid=42706" title="Dreams (TV series)">
<text>Dreams is an American sitcom that aired on CBS from October 3 to October 31, 1984. It follows the story of a fictional rock band in Philadelphia that tries to get a recording contract, starring John Stamos in the lead as Gino Manelli, a 22-year-old welder who plays guitar for rock band Dreams outside his regular job. Jami Gertz co-stars as lead singer Martha Spino.

Inspired by the growing popularity of music videos in the early 1980s, the show incorporated music video aesthetics in each episode, with executive producer Jon Peters previously having produced &quot;Flashdance&quot;. However, the show was negatively reviewed by critics and was canceled after five episodes. Stamos and Gertz would go on to success in later work, and one song performed in the show, &quot;Alone&quot;, would become a number-one hit in 1987 for rock group Heart.

==Premise==
Gino Manelli, a 22-year-old welder in Philadelphia, performs as a guitarist with rock band Dreams when not at his regular job. The show &quot;combin[ed] situation comedy with the flourishing popularity of music videos.&quot; Additionally, &quot;Dreams&quot; was the first U.S. network television show to broadcast in stereo sound.

Executive producer Jon Peters previously produced &quot;Flashdance&quot;, a 1983 film that incorporated music video editing with the story.

==Broadcast==
CBS scheduled &quot;Dreams&quot; on Wednesdays at 8:30 p.m. beginning October 3, 1984. However, due to poor ratings, CBS removed &quot;Dreams&quot; after the October 31 episode.

==Cast==
* John Stamos as Gino Minnelli (guitar)
* Jami Gertz as Martha Spino (vocals)
* Cain Devore as Phil Taylor (bass)
* Albert Macklin as Morris Weiner (drums)
* Valerie Stevenson as Lisa Copley (vocals/piano)
* Sandy Freeman as Louise Franconi
* Ron Karabatsos as Frank Franconi

==Episodes==
== Soundtrack ==
==Reception==
&quot;Dreams&quot; encountered negative critical reception. In the summer of 1984, ad agency Dancer Fitzgerald Sample ranked the show among the least likely to succeed in the upcoming television season, believing the show to be childish (&quot;exclusively kidvid&quot;).

For &quot;The New York Times&quot;, John J. O&#x27;Connor found similarities between &quot;Dreams&quot; and &quot;Happy Days&quot;, regarding Stamos&#x27;s character of Gino as a &quot;straightforward resurrection&quot; of Henry Winkler&#x27;s Fonzie &quot;in the &quot;Flashdance&quot; mode&quot;. However, O&#x27;Connor was critical of Gino&#x27;s character development: &quot;...without a nice-guy Richie for a foil, Gino comes across less irresistible than obnoxious.&quot; O&#x27;Connor also called the show &quot;a kind of extended music-video punctuated with dopey dialogue.&quot;

Tom Shales of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; called &quot;Dreams&quot; a &quot;weak and creaky sitcom&quot;.

However, David Bianculli of &quot;The Philadelphia Inquirer&quot; had a more mixed review: &quot;The pilot works, barely, but later episodes will tell if this is a cult item or a commercial cop-out.&quot; Later in the show&#x27;s run, Bianculli pointed out the sanitized nature of &quot;Dreams&quot; on CBS in contrast to the group&#x27;s music videos on MTV: &quot;The paradox here is that rock music, by definition, is supposed to be uninhibited and loose, while network television has censors on its payroll. If &quot;Dreams&quot; were afforded a little more freedom, the show would be a lot more fun to watch.&quot;

==Legacy==
In 2016, Bob Leszczak called &quot;Dreams&quot; &quot;an expensive and ambitious flop&quot;.

The two lead cast members would find success in other ventures after the short run of &quot;Dreams&quot;. Stamos played Jesse Katsopolis on sitcom &quot;Full House&quot; from 1988 to 1995. on ABC. &quot;Full House&quot; was a popular show on ABC&#x27;s &quot;TGIF&quot; lineup, reaching the top ten of Nielsen ratings in 1991–92.

From 2002 to 2006, Gertz portrayed Judy Miller on the CBS sitcom &quot;Still Standing&quot;. In 2015, Gertz and husband Tony Ressler became majority owners of the Atlanta Hawks basketball team.

In 1987, rock group Heart recorded a cover version of &quot;Alone&quot;, previously performed by Stamos and Stevenson for &quot;Dreams&quot;. Heart&#x27;s version became a number-one hit in 1987 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart and was ranked no. 2 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Year-End Hot 100 of 1987.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="22" end="28" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="43" end="46" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q356129" start="194" end="205" title="John Stamos" label="John Stamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q236738" start="319" end="329" title="Jami Gertz" label="Jami Gertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563751" start="526" end="536" title="Jon Peters" label="Jon Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q611043" start="570" end="580" title="Flashdance" label="Flashdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097859" start="776" end="781" title="Alone (i-Ten song)" label="Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503342" start="804" end="826" title="List of Billboard Hot 100 number ones of 1987" label="number-one hit in 1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q941662" start="842" end="847" title="Heart (band)" label="Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="1179" end="1191" title="stereo sound" label="stereo sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563751" start="1213" end="1223" title="Jon Peters" label="Jon Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q611043" start="1250" end="1260" title="Flashdance" label="Flashdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q356129" start="1539" end="1550" title="John Stamos" label="John Stamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q236738" start="1579" end="1589" title="Jami Gertz" label="Jami Gertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017578" start="1617" end="1628" title="Cain Devore" label="Cain Devore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710775" start="1653" end="1667" title="Albert Macklin" label="Albert Macklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731713" start="1780" end="1794" title="Ron Karabatsos" label="Ron Karabatsos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215397" start="1951" end="1975" title="Dancer Fitzgerald Sample" label="Dancer Fitzgerald Sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241224" start="2166" end="2187" title="John J. O&amp;#x27;Connor (journalist)" label="John J. O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q518589" start="2244" end="2254" title="Happy Days" label="Happy Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q343983" start="2353" end="2366" title="Henry Winkler" label="Henry Winkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435927" start="2374" end="2380" title="Fonzie" label="Fonzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q611043" start="2400" end="2410" title="Flashdance" label="Flashdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934789" start="2531" end="2537" title="Richie Cunningham" label="Richie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817908" start="2719" end="2729" title="Tom Shales" label="Tom Shales"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199262" start="2839" end="2854" title="David Bianculli" label="David Bianculli"/>
<link wikidata="Q465472" start="3709" end="3719" title="Full House" label="Full House"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="3748" end="3751" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819011" start="3815" end="3819" title="TGIF (TV programming block)" label="TGIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864655" start="3877" end="3884" title="Top-rated United States television programs of 1991–92" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260081" start="3958" end="3972" title="Still Standing (American TV series)" label="Still Standing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193321" start="4007" end="4019" title="Tony Ressler" label="Tony Ressler"/>
<link wikidata="Q159893" start="4050" end="4063" title="Atlanta Hawks" label="Atlanta Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q941662" start="4102" end="4107" title="Heart (band)" label="Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097859" start="4142" end="4147" title="Alone (i-Ten song)" label="Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503342" start="4254" end="4276" title="List of Billboard Hot 100 number ones of 1987" label="number-one hit in 1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="4284" end="4313" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270368" start="4348" end="4394" title="Billboard Year-End Hot 100 singles of 1987" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Year-End Hot 100 of 1987"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42707" wikidata="Q312547" url="?curid=42707" title="Frank Whittle">
<text>Air Commodore Sir Frank Whittle, (1 June 1907 – 8 August 1996) was an English engineer, inventor and Royal Air Force (RAF) air officer. He is credited with co-creating the turbojet engine. A patent was submitted by Maxime Guillaume in 1921 for a similar invention which was technically unfeasible at the time. Whittle&#x27;s jet engines were developed some years earlier than those of Germany&#x27;s Hans von Ohain, who designed the first-to-fly turbojet engine as well as Austria’s Anselm Franz.
Whittle demonstrated an aptitude for engineering and an interest in flying from an early age. At first he was turned down by the RAF but, determined to join the force, he overcame his physical limitations and was accepted and sent to No. 2 School of Technical Training to join No 1 Squadron of Cranwell Aircraft Apprentices. He was taught the theory of aircraft engines and gained practical experience in the engineering workshops. His academic and practical abilities as an Aircraft Apprentice earned him a place on the officer training course at Cranwell. He excelled in his studies and became an accomplished pilot. While writing his thesis he formulated the fundamental concepts that led to the creation of the turbojet engine, taking out a patent on his design in 1930. His performance on an officers&#x27; engineering course earned him a place on a further course at Peterhouse, Cambridge, where he graduated with a First.

Without Air Ministry support, he and two retired RAF servicemen formed Power Jets Ltd to build his engine with assistance from the firm of British Thomson-Houston. Despite limited funding, a prototype was created, which first ran in 1937. Official interest was forthcoming following this success, with contracts being placed to develop further engines, but the continuing stress seriously affected Whittle&#x27;s health, eventually resulting in a nervous breakdown in 1940. In 1944 when Power Jets was nationalised he again suffered a nervous breakdown, and resigned from the board in 1946.

In 1948, Whittle retired from the RAF and received a knighthood. He joined BOAC as a technical advisor before working as an engineering specialist with Shell, followed by a position with Bristol Aero Engines. After emigrating to the U.S. in 1976 he accepted the position of NAVAIR Research Professor at the United States Naval Academy from 1977 to 1979. In August 1996, Whittle died of lung cancer at his home in Columbia, Maryland. In 2002, Whittle was ranked number 42 in the BBC poll of the 100 Greatest Britons.

==Early life==
Whittle was born in a terraced house in Newcombe Road, Earlsdon, Coventry, England, on 1 June 1907, the eldest son of Moses Whittle and Sara Alice Garlick. When he was nine years old, the family moved to the nearby town of Royal Leamington Spa where his father, a highly inventive practical engineer and mechanic, purchased the Leamington Valve and Piston Ring Company, which comprised a few lathes and other tools and a single-cylinder gas engine, on which Whittle became an expert. Whittle developed a rebellious and adventurous streak, together with an early interest in aviation.

After two years attending Milverton School, Whittle won a scholarship to a secondary school which in due course became Leamington College for Boys, but when his father&#x27;s business faltered there was not enough money to keep him there. He quickly developed practical engineering skills while helping in his father&#x27;s workshop, and being an enthusiastic reader spent much of his spare time in the Leamington reference library, reading about astronomy, engineering, turbines, and the theory of flight. At the age of 15, determined to be a pilot, Whittle applied to join the RAF.

==Entering the RAF==
In January 1923, having passed the RAF entrance examination with a high mark, Whittle reported to RAF Halton in Buckinghamshire as an Aircraft Apprentice. He lasted only two days: just five feet tall and with a small chest measurement, he failed the medical. He then put himself through a vigorous training programme and special diet devised by a physical training instructor at Halton to build up his physique, only to fail again six months later, when he was told that he could not be given a second chance, despite having added three inches to his height and chest. Undeterred, he applied again under an assumed name and presented himself as a candidate at the No 2 School of Technical Training RAF Cranwell. This time he passed the physical and, in September that year, 364365 Boy Whittle, F, started his three-year training as an aircraft mechanic in No. 1 Squadron of No. 4 Apprentices Wing, RAF Cranwell, because RAF Halton No. 1 School of Technical Training was unable to accommodate all the aircraft apprentices at that time.

Whittle hated the strict discipline imposed on apprentices and, convinced there was no hope of ever becoming a pilot, he at one time seriously considered deserting. However, throughout his early days as an aircraft apprentice (and at the Royal Air Force College Cranwell), he maintained his interest in model aircraft and joined the Model Aircraft Society, where he built working replicas. The quality of these attracted the eye of the Apprentice Wing commanding officer, who noted that Whittle was also a mathematical genius. He was so impressed that in 1926 he recommended Whittle for officer training at RAF College Cranwell.

For Whittle, this was the chance of a lifetime, not only to enter the commissioned ranks but also because the training included flying lessons on the Avro 504. While at Cranwell he lodged in a bungalow at Dorrington. Being an ex-apprentice amongst a majority of ex-public schoolboys, life as an officer cadet was not easy for him, but he nevertheless excelled in the courses and went solo in 1927 after only 13.5 hours’ instruction, quickly progressing to the Bristol Fighter and gaining a reputation for daredevil low flying and aerobatics.

A requirement of the course was that each student had to produce a thesis for graduation: Whittle decided to write his on potential aircraft design developments, notably flight at high altitudes and speeds over 500 mph (800 km/h). In &quot;Future Developments in Aircraft Design&quot; he showed that incremental improvements in existing propeller engines were unlikely to make such flight routine. Instead he described what is today referred to as a motorjet; an air compressor using a conventional piston engine to provide compressed air to a combustion chamber whose exhaust was used directly for thrust – essentially an afterburner attached to a piston engine driven air compressor. The idea was not new and had been talked about for some time in the industry, but Whittle&#x27;s aim was to demonstrate that at increased altitudes the lower outside air density would increase the design&#x27;s efficiency. For long-range flight, using an Atlantic-crossing mailplane as his example, the engine would spend most of its time at high altitude and thus could outperform a conventional powerplant. According to Whittle, &quot;...I came to the general conclusion that if very high speeds were to be combined with long range, it would be necessary to fly at very great height, where the low air density would greatly reduce resistance in proportion to speed.&quot;

Of the few apprentices accepted into the Royal Air Force College, Whittle graduated in 1928 at the age of 21 and was commissioned as a pilot officer in July. He ranked second in his class in academics, won the Andy Fellowes Memorial Prize for Aeronautical Sciences for his thesis, and was described as an &quot;exceptional to above average&quot; pilot. However, his flight logbook also showed numerous red ink warnings about showboating and overconfidence, and because of dangerous flying in an Armstrong Whitworth Siskin he was disqualified from the end-of-term flying contest.

==Development of the turbojet engine==
Whittle continued working on the motorjet principle after his thesis work but eventually abandoned it when further calculations showed it would weigh as much as a conventional engine of the same thrust. Pondering the problem he thought: &quot;Why not substitute a turbine for the piston engine?&quot; Instead of using a piston engine driven compressor to provide the compressed air for the burner, a turbine could be used to extract some power from the exhaust and drive a compressor, similar as in a turbocharger. The remaining exhaust thrust would power the aircraft.

On 27 August 1928, Pilot Officer Whittle joined No. 111 Squadron, Hornchurch, flying Siskin IIIs. His continuing reputation for low flying and aerobatics provoked a public complaint that almost led to his being court-martialled. Within a year he was posted to the Central Flying School, then at RAF Wittering, for a flying instructor&#x27;s course. He became a popular and gifted instructor, and was selected as one of the entrants in a competition to select a team to perform the &quot;crazy flying&quot; routine in the 1930 Royal Air Force Air Display at RAF Hendon. He destroyed two aircraft in accidents during rehearsals but remained unscathed on both occasions. After the second incident an enraged Flight Lieutenant Harold W. Raeburn said furiously, &quot;Why don&#x27;t you take all my bloody aeroplanes, make a heap of them in the middle of the aerodrome and set fire to them – it&#x27;s quicker!&quot;

Whittle showed his engine concept around the base, where it attracted the attention of Flying Officer Pat Johnson, formerly a patent examiner. Johnson, in turn, took the concept to the commanding officer of the base. This set in motion a chain of events that almost led to the engines being produced much sooner than actually occurred.

Earlier, in July 1926, A. A. Griffith had published a paper on compressors and turbines, which he had been studying at the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE). He showed that such designs up to this point had been flying &quot;stalled&quot;, and that by giving the compressor blades an aerofoil-shaped cross-section their efficiency could be dramatically improved. The paper went on to describe how the increased efficiency of these sorts of compressors and turbines would allow a jet engine to be produced, although he felt the idea was impractical, and instead suggested using the power as a turboprop. At the time most superchargers used a centrifugal compressor, so there was limited interest in the paper.

Encouraged by his commanding officer, in late 1929 Whittle sent his concept to the Air Ministry to see if it would be of any interest to them. Whittle was invited to the Ministry and met an officer of the Ministry&#x27;s Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) and Griffith (at the time a member of the Aeronautical Research Committee). Afterwards, Whittle received a letter from Griffith, who was of the opinion that Whittle&#x27;s &quot;simple&quot; design could not achieve the sort of efficiencies needed for a practical engine. After pointing out an error in one of Whittle&#x27;s calculations, Griffith went on to comment that the centrifugal design would be too large for aircraft use and that using the jet directly for power would be rather inefficient. Griffith called the design &quot;impracticable,&quot; as current materials could not achieve the high temperatures. Griffith did say &quot;the internal combustion turbine will almost certainly be developed into a successful engine, but before this can be done the performance of both compressors and turbines will have to be greatly improved. However it has been of real interest to investigate your scheme and I can assure you that any suggestion submitted by people in the Service is always welcome.&quot;

Whittle received a report noting the limitations his concept. The report said &quot;the internal combustion turbine will not be rendered practical by the revolutionary design of some lucky inventor. The steam turbine engineer and the metallurgist ... are the people with whom the future development of the turbine rests&quot; Whittle recorded that he found the response depressing.

Pat Johnson remained convinced of the validity of the idea, and had Whittle patent the idea in January 1930. Since the RAF was not interested in the concept they did not declare it secret, meaning that Whittle was able to retain the rights to the idea, which would have otherwise been their property. Johnson arranged a meeting with British Thomson-Houston (BTH), whose chief turbine engineer seemed to agree with the basic idea. However, BTH did not want to spend the £60,000 it would cost to develop it, and this potential brush with early success went no further.

In January 1930, Whittle was promoted to flying officer. In Coventry, on 24 May 1930, Whittle married his fiancée, Dorothy Mary Lee, with whom he later had two sons, David and Ian. Then, in 1931, he was posted to the Marine Aircraft Experimental Establishment at Felixstowe as an armament officer and test pilot of seaplanes, where he continued to publicise his idea. This posting came as a surprise for he had never previously flown a seaplane, but he nevertheless increased his reputation as a pilot by flying some 20 different types of floatplanes, flying boats, and amphibians.

While at Felixstowe, Whittle met with the firm of Armstrong Siddeley, and their technical advisor W.S. Farren. The firm rejected Whittle&#x27;s proposal, doubting material was available to sustain the required very high temperatures. Whittle&#x27;s turbojet proposal required a compressor with a pressure ratio of 4:1, while the best current supercharger had only half that value. Besides publishing a paper on superchargers, Whittle wrote The Case for the Gas Turbine. According to John Golley, &quot;The paper contained example calculations which showed the big increase in efficiency which could be obtained with the gas turbine at great height due to the beneficial effects of low air temperature. It also contained calculations to demonstrate the degree to which range would depend on height with turbojet aircraft.&quot;

Every officer with a permanent commission was expected to take a specialist course, and as a result Whittle attended the Officers School of Engineering at RAF Henlow in 1932. He obtained an aggregate of 98% in all subjects in his entrance exam, which allowed him to complete a shortened one-year course. Whittle received a Distinction in every subject, except mechanical drawing, where he was described as &quot;a very able student. He works hard and has originality. He is suitable for experimental duties.&quot;

His performance in the course was so exceptional that in 1934 he was permitted, though the scheme for RAF officers had been ended the year before, to take a two-year engineering course as a member of Peterhouse, the oldest college of Cambridge University, graduating in 1936 with a First in the Mechanical Sciences Tripos. The Ministry gave him permission to spend a further year after graduation working with the aerodynamicist Melvill Jones. On 1 February 1934, he was promoted to the rank of flight lieutenant.

===Power Jets Ltd===
Still at Cambridge, Whittle could ill afford the £5 renewal fee for his jet engine patent when it became due in January 1935, and because the Air Ministry refused to pay it the patent was allowed to lapse. Shortly afterwards, in May, he received mail from Rolf Dudley-Williams, who had been with him at Cranwell in the 1920s and Felixstowe in 1930. Williams arranged a meeting with Whittle, himself, and another by-then-retired RAF serviceman, James Collingwood Tinling. The two proposed a partnership that allowed them to act on Whittle&#x27;s behalf to gather public financing so that development could go ahead. Whittle thought improvements to his original idea could be patented, noting, &quot;Its virtue lies entirely in its extremely low weight, and that it will work at heights where atmospheric density is very low.&quot; This led to three provisional specifications being filed, as the group sought to develop a jet-propelled aeroplane. The arrangement was that Williams and Tinling would have a quarter share each of the commercial rights but they would not approach any existing company in the aircraft industry.

The agreement soon bore fruit, and in 1935, through Tinling&#x27;s father, Whittle was introduced to Mogens L. Bramson, a well-known independent consulting aeronautical engineer and patent engineer. Bramson was initially sceptical but after studying Whittle&#x27;s ideas became an enthusiastic supporter. Bramson introduced Whittle and his two associates to the investment bank O.T. Falk &amp; Partners, where discussions took place with Lancelot Law Whyte and occasionally Sir Maurice Bonham-Carter. The firm had an interest in developing speculative projects that conventional banks would not touch. Whyte was impressed by the 28-year-old Whittle and his design when they met on 11 September 1935:
However O.T. Falk &amp; Partners specified they would only invest in Whittle&#x27;s engine if they had independent verification that it was feasible. They financed an independent engineering review from Bramson (the historic &quot;Bramson Report&quot;), which was issued in November 1935. It was favourable and together with a letter of support for Whittle and the engine from Henry Tizard (chair of the Engine sub-committee of the Aeronautical Research Committee) in response to Whyte Falk then agreed to finance Whittle. With that the jet engine was finally on its way to becoming a reality.

On 27 January 1936, the principals signed the &quot;Four Party Agreement&quot;, creating &quot;Power Jets Ltd&quot; which was incorporated in March 1936. The parties were O.T. Falk &amp; Partners, the Air Ministry, Whittle and, together, Williams and Tinling. Falk was represented on the board of Power Jets by Whyte as chairman and Bonham-Carter as a director (with Bramson acting as alternate). Whittle, Williams and Tinling retained a 49% share of the company in exchange for Falk and Partners putting in £2,000 with the option of a further £18,000 within 18 months. As Whittle was still a full-time RAF officer and currently at Cambridge, he was given the title &quot;Honorary Chief Engineer and Technical Consultant&quot;. Needing special permission to work outside the RAF, he was placed on the Special Duty List and allowed to work on the design as long as it was for no more than six hours a week. However he was allowed to continue at Cambridge for a year doing post-graduate work which gave him time to work on the turbojet.

The Air Ministry still saw little immediate value in the effort (they regarded it as long-range research and set up work on an axial flow turbine at the RAE with Hayne Constant in 1937), and having no production facilities of its own, Power Jets entered into an agreement with steam turbine specialists British Thomson-Houston (BTH) to build an experimental engine facility at a BTH factory in Rugby, Warwickshire. Work progressed quickly, and by the end of the year 1936 the prototype detail design was finalised and parts for it were well on their way to being completed, all within the original £2,000 budget. However, by 1936, Germany had also started working on jet engines (Herbert A. Wagner at Junkers and Hans von Ohain at Heinkel) and, although they too had difficulty overcoming conservatism, the German Ministry of Aviation (Reichsluftfahrtministerium) was more supportive than their British counterpart. Von Ohain applied for a patent for a turbojet engine in 1935 but having earlier reviewed and critiqued Whittle&#x27;s patents, had to narrow the scope of his own filing. In Spain, air-force pilot and engineer Virgilio Leret Ruiz had been granted a patent for a jet engine in March 1935, and Republican president Manuel Azaña arranged for initial construction at the Hispano-Suiza aircraft factory in Madrid in 1936, but Leret was executed months later by Francoist Moroccan troops after commanding the defence of his seaplane base near Melilla at the onset of the Spanish Civil War. His plans were hidden from the Francoists and secretly handed to the British embassy in Madrid a few years later when his wife, Carlota O&#x27;Neill, was released from prison.

Despite lengthy delays in their own programme, the Luftwaffe beat the British efforts into the air by nine months. A lack of cobalt for high-temperature steel alloys meant the German designs were always at risk of overheating and damaging their turbines. The low-grade alloy production versions of the Junkers Jumo 004, designed by Dr. Anselm Franz and which powered the Messerschmitt Me 262 would typically last only 10–25 hours (longer with an experienced pilot) before burning out; if it was accelerated too quickly, the compressor would stall and power was immediately lost, and sometimes it exploded on their first startup. Over 200 German pilots were killed during training. Nevertheless, the Me 262 could fly far faster than allied planes and had very effective firepower. Although Me 262s were introduced late in the war they shot down 542 or more allied planes and in one allied bombing raid downed 32 of the 36 Boeing B-17 Flying Fortresses.

===Financial difficulty===
Earlier, in January, when the company formed, Henry Tizard, the rector of Imperial College London and chairman of the Aeronautical Research Committee (ARC), had prompted the Air Ministry&#x27;s Director of Scientific Research to ask for a write-up of the design. The report was once again passed on to Griffith for comment, but was not received back until March 1937 by which point Whittle&#x27;s design was well along. Griffith had already started construction of his own turbine engine design and, perhaps to avoid tainting his own efforts, he returned a somewhat more positive review. However, he remained highly critical of some features, notably the use of jet thrust. The Engine Sub-Committee of ARC studied Griffith&#x27;s report, and decided to fund Griffith&#x27;s effort instead. Given this astonishing display of official indifference, Falk and Partners gave notice that they could not provide funding beyond £5,000.

Nevertheless, the team pressed ahead, and the Power Jets WU (Whittle Unit, or W.U.) engine began test runs on 12 April 1937. Initially, the W.U. showed an alarming tendency to race out of control, due to issues with the fuel injection, before stable speeds were reached. However, by August, Whittle acknowledged a major reconstruction effort was needed to solve the combustion problem and compressor efficiency.

On 9 July, Falk &amp; Partners gave the company an emergency loan of £250. On 27 July, Falk&#x27;s option expired, but they agreed to continue financing Power Jets by loan. Also in July, Whittle&#x27;s post-graduate stay at Cambridge was over, but then he was placed on the Special Duty List so he could work full-time on the engine. On 1 November, Williams, Tinling and Whittle took control of Power Jets. Whittle was promoted to squadron leader in December. Tizard pronounced it &quot;streaks ahead&quot; of any other advanced engine he had seen, and managed to interest the Air Ministry enough to fund development with a contract for £5,000 to develop a flyable version. However, it was not until March 1938 that a contract was signed, when Power Jets became subject to the Official Secrets Act, limiting the ability to raise additional funds. In January 1938, BTH invested £2,500.

In December 1937, Victor Crompton became Power Jets’ first employee, as an assistant to Whittle. Because of the hazardous nature of the work being carried out, development was moved largely from Rugby to BTH&#x27;s lightly used Ladywood foundry at nearby Lutterworth in Leicestershire in 1938. Tests with a reconstructed W.U. engine commenced on 16 April 1938, and proceeded until a catastrophic failure of the turbine on 6 May. Yet, the engine ran for 1 hour and 45 minutes, and generated a thrust of at 13,000 rpm. Another W.U. engine reconstruction was started on 30 May 1938, but using ten combustion chambers to match the ten compressor discharge ducts. Avoiding a single large combustion chamber made the engine lighter and more compact. Tests commenced with this third W.U. on 26 October 1938.
These delays and the lack of funding slowed the project. In Germany, Hans von Ohain had filed for a patent in 1935, which in 1939, led to the world&#x27;s first flyable jet aircraft, the Heinkel He 178, powered by the Heinkel HeS 3. There is little doubt that Whittle&#x27;s efforts would have been at the same level or even more advanced had the Air Ministry taken a greater interest in the design. When war broke out in September 1939, Power Jets had a payroll of only 10 and Griffith&#x27;s operations at the RAE and Metropolitan-Vickers were similarly small.

Whittle&#x27;s smoking increased to three packs a day and he suffered from various stress-related ailments such as frequent severe headaches, indigestion, insomnia, anxiety, eczema and heart palpitations, while his weight dropped to nine stone (126 lb / 57 kg). To keep to his 16-hour workdays, he sniffed benzedrine during the day and then took tranquillisers and sleeping pills at night to offset the effects and allow him to sleep. He admitted later he had become addicted to benzedrine. Over this period he became irritable and developed an &quot;explosive&quot; temper.

===Changing fortunes===
On 30 June 1939, Power Jets could barely afford to keep the lights on when yet another visit was made by Air Ministry personnel. This time Whittle was able to run the third reconstructed W.U. at 16,000 rpm for 20 minutes without any difficulty. One of the members of the team was the Director of Scientific Research, David Randall Pye, who walked out of the demonstration utterly convinced of the importance of the project. The Ministry agreed to buy the W.U. and then lend it back to them, injecting cash, and placed an order for a flyable version of the engine, referred to as the Power Jets W.1 and Power Jets W.2. By then, the Ministry had a tentative contract with the Gloster Aircraft Company for a simple aircraft specifically to flight-test the W.1, the single-engine Gloster E.28/39.

Whittle had already studied the problem of turning the massive W.U. into a flyable design, with what he described as very optimistic targets, to power a little aeroplane weighing 2,000 lb with a static thrust of 1,389 lb. The designed maximum thrust for the W.1 was , while that for the W.2, was The W.2 was to be flown in the twin-engine Gloster Meteor fighter, at the time known by its Air Ministry specification as the F.9/40, but the engine was replaced with the W.2B, having a designed static thrust of . An experimental version of the W.1, designated W.1X, was used as a mock-up for the E.28 installation. A second E.28 was powered by the W.1A, that incorporated W.2 features such as air cooling of the turbine and a different compressor intake. On 26 March 1940, the jet engine was listed as a potential war winner by Air Marshal Tedder, and given the associated priority.

Power Jets also spent some time in May 1940 drawing up the W.2Y, a similar design with a &quot;straight-through&quot; airflow that resulted in a longer engine and, more critically, a longer driveshaft but having a somewhat simpler layout. To reduce the weight of the driveshaft as much as possible, the W.2Y used a large diameter, thin-walled, shaft almost as large as the turbine disc, &quot;necked down&quot; at either end where it connected to the turbine and compressor.

In April, the Air Ministry issued contracts for W.2 production lines with a capacity of up to 3,000 engines a month in 1942, asking BTH, Vauxhall and the Rover Company to join. However, the contract was eventually taken up by Rover only. In June, Whittle received a promotion to wing commander.

On 19 July 1940, Power Jets abandoned effort to vaporize fuel, and adopted the controlled atomising burner for the combustion chamber, developed by Isaac Lubbock of Asiatic Petroleum Company (a joint venture of Shell and Royal Dutch) In the words of Whittle, &quot;the introduction of the Shell system may be said to mark the point where combustion ceased to be an obstacle to development.&quot; The size of Power Jets also increased with the war effort, increasing from 25 employees in January 1940 to 70 in September 1940.

===Rover===
Meanwhile, work continued with the W.U., which eventually went through nine rebuilds in an attempt to solve the combustion problems that had dominated the testing. On 9 October the W.U. ran once again, this time equipped with Lubbock or &quot;Shell&quot; atomising-burner combustion chambers. Combustion problems ceased to be an obstacle to development of the engine although intensive development was started on all features of the new combustion chambers.

By this point it was clear that Gloster&#x27;s first airframe would be ready long before Rover could deliver an engine. Unwilling to wait, Whittle cobbled together an engine from spare parts, creating the W.1X (&quot;X&quot; standing for &quot;experimental&quot;) which ran for the first time on 14 December 1940. Shortly afterwards an application for a US patent was made by Power Jets for an &quot;Aircraft propulsion system and power unit&quot;

The W.1X engine powered the E.28/39 for taxi testing on 7 April 1941 at Brockworth near the factory in Gloucester, where it took to the air for two or three short hops of several hundred yards at about six feet from the ground.

The definitive W.1 of 850 lbf (3.8 kN) thrust ran on 12 April 1941, and on 15 May the W.1-powered E.28/39 took off from Cranwell at 7:40 pm, flying for 17 minutes and reaching a maximum speed of around 340 mph (545 km/h). At the end of the flight, Pat Johnson, who had encouraged Whittle for so long said to him, &quot;Frank, it flies.&quot; Whittle replied, &quot;Well, that&#x27;s what it was bloody well designed to do, wasn&#x27;t it?&quot;

Within days the aircraft was reaching 370 mph (600 km/h) at 25,000 feet (7,600 m), exceeding the performance of the contemporary Supermarine Spitfire fighters. Success of the design was now evident, and in 1941, Rolls-Royce, Hawker Siddeley, the Bristol Aeroplane Company, and de Havilland became interested in gas turbine aircraft propulsion. Under Harold Roxbee Cox, the Gas Turbine Collaboration Committee was created to give a forum for all the companies for exchange of information.

The stress on Whittle was expressed in a 27 May 1941 letter to Henry Tizard:

In mid-1941, relations between Power Jets and Rover had continued to deteriorate. Rover had established a version of Power Jet&#x27;s set-up at Waterloo Mill, associated with their Barnoldswick factory, near Clitheroe. Rover was working on an alternative to Whittle&#x27;s &quot;reverse-flow&quot; combustion chambers, by developing a &quot;straight-through&quot; combustion chamber and turbine wheel. Rover referred to the engine as the B.26, sanctioned by the Directorate of Engine Development, but kept secret until April 1942, from Power Jets, the Controller of Research and Development, and the Director of Scientific Research.

===Rolls-Royce===
Earlier, in January 1940, Whittle had met Dr Stanley Hooker of Rolls-Royce, who in turn introduced Whittle to Rolls-Royce board member and manager of their Derby factory, Ernest Hives (later Lord Hives). Hooker was in charge of the supercharger division at Rolls-Royce Derby and was a specialist in fluid dynamics. He had already increased the power of the Merlin piston engine by improving its supercharger. Such a speciality was naturally suited to the aero-thermodynamics of jet engines in which the optimisation of airflow in compressor, combustion chambers, turbine and jet pipe, is fundamental. Hives agreed to supply key parts to help the project. Also, Rolls-Royce built a compressor test rig which helped Whittle solve the surging problems (unstable airflow in the compressor) on the W.2 engine.

On 10 December 1941 Whittle suffered a nervous breakdown, and left work for a month. However, by the end of January 1942, Power Jets had three W.2B engines, two built by Rover. In February 1942, flight trials of the W.1A engine began in the E.28, which reached 430 mph (690 km/h) at 15,000 feet (4,600 m). On 13 March 1942, Whittle started work on a redesign of the W.2B, referred to as the W.2/500. 
On 13 September 1942, W.2/500 performance tests matched predictions, showing a thrust of at full speed. In October 1941, the Ministry approved a new factory to be built outside Whetstone, Leicestershire.

From 3 June until 14 August 1942 Whittle visited the United States. At the General Electric&#x27;s Lynn Factory, Whittle reviewed the Type I Supercharger, GE&#x27;s code name for their jet engine, based on Power Jets&#x27; W.1X. An improved version of the W.2B would also be built, called the I-16, incorporating features of the W.2/500. Whittle also toured the Bell Aircraft, and the three Bell XP-59A Airacomets, a twin-engine fighter powered by the General Electric I-A jet engines. This fighter took flight in October 1942, one year and one day after GE received Power Jets&#x27; W.1X.

On 11 December 1942 Whittle had a meeting with the chief executive of the Ministry of Aircraft Production Air Chief Marshal Wilfrid Freeman and Air Marshal Francis Linnell, Controller of Research and Development at MAP, According to Whittle, &quot;He made it clear that he had definitely decided to transfer Barnoldswick and Clitheroe to Rolls-Royce management.&quot; Spencer Wilks of Rover met with Hives and Hooker at the &quot;Swan and Royal&quot; pub, in Clitheroe, near the Barnoldswick factory. By arrangement with the Ministry of Aircraft Production they traded the jet factory at Barnoldswick for Rolls-Royce&#x27;s tank engine factory in Nottingham.Testing and production ramp-up was immediately accelerated. Adrian Lombard Rover&#x27;s supervising engineer on the Whittle engines transferred to Rolls Royce to continue the role. By January 1943, Rolls-Royce had achieved 400 hours of run time, ten times Rover&#x27;s number of the previous month, and in May 1943, the W.2B passed its first 100-hour development test at of thrust.

When Rolls-Royce became involved, Ray Dorey, the manager of the company&#x27;s Flight Centre at Hucknall Airfield on the north side of Nottingham, had a Whittle W.2B engine installed in the rear of a Vickers Wellington bomber. The installation was done by Vickers at Weybridge.

From the end of 1937, when a Squadron Leader, he lived at &#x27;Broomfield&#x27; on Bilton Road, in Rugby. Both sons were at school in the town. He later briefly lived at &#x27;Laurelcroft&#x27;, 1 North Street, Kilsby until 1949. His two sons went to Rossall School in Blackpool. Ian later joined the RAF.

===Continued impact===
Whittle wanted to improve the efficiency of the jet engine at lower speeds. According to Whittle, &quot;I wanted to &#x27;gear down the jet&#x27;, ie to convert a low-mass high-velocity jet into a high-mass low-velocity jet. The obvious way to do this was to use an additional turbine to extract energy from the jet and use this energy to drive a low-pressure compressor or fan capable of &#x27;breathing&#x27; far more air than the jet engine itself and forcing this additional air rearwards as a &#x27;cold jet&#x27;. The complete system is known as a &#x27;turbofan&#x27;.&quot; The first embodiment was referred to as a No 1 Thrust Augmentor, which consisted of an &quot;aft fan&quot;, or additional turbine, in the exhaust of the main engine. In 1942, No 2 Augmentor, a conventional two-stage system with the fan blades external to the turbine blades, was used by GE in the Convair 990 Coronado. A No 3 Augmentor, known as the &quot;tip turbine&quot;, had the turbine blades outside the fan. A No 4 Augmentor, in combination with the W2/700, included an afterburner and was the design powerplant for the Miles M.52 project. According to Whittle, &quot;The first attempt at the turbofan proper, ie having the fan ahead of and supercharging the core engine, was the LR1 intended as the power plant of a four-engined bomber for operations in the Pacific. The mass flow through the fan of the LR1 was to have been 3–4 times that through the core engine, ie the &#x27;bypass ratio&#x27; was 2–3.&quot; Filed in March 1936, Whittle&#x27;s main turbofan patent 471368, expired in 1962.

Whittle&#x27;s work had caused a minor revolution within the British engine manufacturing industry and, even before the E.28/39 flew, most companies had set up their own research efforts. In 1939, Metropolitan-Vickers set up a project to develop an axial-flow design as a turboprop but later re-engineered the design as a pure jet known as the Metrovick F.2. Rolls-Royce had already copied the W.1 to produce the low-rated WR.1 but later stopped work on this project after taking over Rover&#x27;s efforts. In 1941, de Havilland started a jet fighter project, the Spider Crab – later called Vampire – along with their own engine to power it, Frank Halford&#x27;s Goblin (Halford H.1). Armstrong Siddeley also developed a more complex axial-flow design with an engineer called Heppner, the ASX but reversed Vickers&#x27; thinking and later modified it into a turboprop instead, the Python. The Bristol Aeroplane Company proposed to combine jet and piston engines but dropped the idea and concentrated on propeller turbines instead.

===Nationalisation===
During a demonstration of the E.28/39 to Winston Churchill in April 1943, Whittle proposed to Stafford Cripps, Minister of Aircraft Production, that all jet development be nationalised. He pointed out that the company had been funded by private investors who helped develop the engine successfully, only to see production contracts go to other companies. Nationalisation was the only way to repay those debts and ensure a fair deal for everyone, and he was willing to surrender his shares in Power Jets to make this happen. In October, Cripps told Whittle that he decided a better solution would be to nationalise Power Jets only.
Whittle believed that he had triggered this decision, but Cripps had already been considering how best to maintain a successful jet programme and act responsibly regarding the state&#x27;s substantial financial investment, while at the same time wanting to establish a research centre that could use Power Jets&#x27; talents, and had come to the conclusion that national interests demanded the setting up of a Government-owned establishment. Within the MAP there was a feeling that Power Jets was effectively a research unit funded by the Treasury and that management within the company was non-existent, the latter was also expressed by workers at Power Jets. On 1 December Cripps advised Power Jets&#x27; directors that the Treasury would not pay more than £100,000 for the company.

In January 1944 Whittle was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the New Year Honours. By this time he was a group captain, having been promoted from wing commander in July 1943. Later that month after further negotiations the Ministry made another offer of £135,500 for Power Jets, which was reluctantly accepted after the Ministry refused arbitration on the matter. Since Whittle had already offered to surrender his shares he would receive nothing at all, while Williams and Tinling each received almost £46,800 for their stock, and investors of cash or services had a threefold return on their original investment. Whittle met with Cripps to object personally to the nationalisation efforts and how they were being handled, but to no avail. The final terms were agreed on 28 March, and Power Jets officially became Power Jets (Research and Development) Ltd, with Roxbee Cox as chairman, Constant of RAE Head of Engineering Division, and Whittle as Chief Technical Advisor. On 5 April 1944, the Ministry sent Whittle an award of only £10,000 for his shares.

Whittle and other Power Jets staff still held the view that they would be the sole designers of jet engines; they would build prototypes and industry would actually produce them. This view was in conflict with that of the engine companies, which in engine design had already achieved competence similar or superior to that of Power Jets. The engine companies stated they would not work with Power Jets if Power Jets were the sole designers. The government scientists from RAE who had been moved to Power Jets were against it also and within MAP there was a feeling that Power Jets was publicly financed but not under public administration. From the end of March, Whittle spent six months in hospital recovering from nervous exhaustion; he resigned from Power Jets (R and D) Ltd in January 1946. In July the company was merged with the gas turbine division of the RAE to form the National Gas Turbine Establishment (NGTE) at Farnborough. Sixteen Power Jets engineers, following Whittle&#x27;s
example, also resigned. Whittle&#x27;s Rolls-Royce_Nene would be licensed and made in two different countries: in the United States as the Pratt &amp; Whitney J42 jet engine, later incorporated into the Grumman F9F Panther and in the USSR Soviet as the Klimov VK-1 jet engine, later incorporated into the MiG-15; the Panther vs the MiG-15 would meet in air battles during the Korean war.

==After the war==
In 1946, Whittle accepted a post as Technical Advisor on Engine Design and Production to Controller of Supplies (Air); was made a Commander of the US Legion of Merit; and was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in 1947. During May 1948 Whittle received an ex-gratia award of £100,000 from the Royal Commission on Awards to Inventors in recognition of his work on the jet engine, and two months later he was made a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire.

During a lecture tour in the US, Whittle again broke down and retired from the RAF on medical grounds on 26 August 1948, leaving with the rank of air commodore. He joined BOAC as a technical advisor on aircraft gas turbines and travelled extensively over the next few years, viewing jet engine developments in the United States, Canada, Africa, Asia and the Middle East. He left BOAC in 1952 and spent the next year working on a biography, &quot;Jet: The Story of a Pioneer&quot;. He was awarded the Royal Society of Arts&#x27; Albert Medal that year.

Returning to work in 1953, he accepted a position as a Mechanical Engineering Specialist with Shell, where he developed a new type of self-powered drill driven by a turbine running on the lubricating mud that is pumped into the borehole during drilling. Normally, a well is drilled by attaching rigid sections of pipe together and powering the cutting head by spinning the pipe from the surface, but Whittle&#x27;s design removed the need for a strong mechanical connection between the drill and the head frame, allowing for much lighter piping to be used. He gave the Royal Institution Christmas Lectures in 1954 on &quot;The Story of Petroleum&quot;.

Turbine drilling is best used for drilling hard rocks at high-bit RPM with diamond-impregnated bits and can be used with an angled drive shaft for directional drilling and horizontal drilling. It competes, though, with Moyno motors and increasingly with rotary steerable systems and is again out of favour.

Whittle left Shell in 1957 to work for Bristol Aero Engines, who picked up the project in 1961, setting up &quot;Bristol Siddeley Whittle Tools&quot; to further develop the concept. In 1966 Rolls-Royce purchased Bristol Siddeley, but the financial pressures and eventual bankruptcy because of cost overruns of the RB211 project led to the slow wind-down and eventual disappearance of Whittle&#x27;s &quot;turbo-drill&quot;. The concept eventually re-appeared in the West in the late 1980s, imported from Russian designs. (Russia needed the technology because it lacked high strength drill pipe.)

As part of his socialist ideals, he proposed that Power Jets be nationalised, in part because he saw that private companies would profit from the technology freely given during the war. By 1964, he had deserted his previously socialist beliefs, going so far as to launch a fierce attack on the Labour candidate in Smethwick.

In 1960, he was awarded an honorary degree, doctor techn. honoris causa, at the Norwegian Institute of Technology, later part of Norwegian University of Science and Technology.

In 1967, he was awarded an Honorary Degree (Doctor of Science) by the University of Bath. That year, he was inducted into the International Air &amp; Space Hall of Fame.

In 1987, he was awarded an Honorary Degree (Doctor of Technology) by Loughborough University.

In 2017, he was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame in Dayton, Ohio.

==Later life==
Whittle received the &quot;Tony Jannus Award&quot; in 1969 for his distinguished contributions to commercial aviation.

In 1976, his marriage to Dorothy was dissolved and he married American Hazel S. Hall. He emigrated to the US and the following year accepted the position of NAVAIR Research Professor at the United States Naval Academy (Annapolis, Maryland). His research concentrated on the boundary layer before his professorship became part-time from 1978 to 1979. The part-time post enabled him to write a textbook entitled &quot;Gas turbine aero-thermodynamics: with special reference to aircraft propulsion&quot;, published in 1981.

Having first met Hans von Ohain in 1966, Whittle again met him at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in 1978 while von Ohain was working there as the Aero Propulsion Laboratory&#x27;s Chief Scientist. Initially upset because he had believed von Ohain&#x27;s engine had been developed after seeing Whittle&#x27;s patent, he eventually became convinced that von Ohain&#x27;s work was, in fact, independent. The two became good friends and often toured the US giving talks together.

In a conversation with Whittle after the war, von Ohain stated: &quot;If you had been given the money you would have been six years ahead of us. If Hitler or Goering had heard that there is a man in England who flies 500 mph in a small experimental plane and that it is coming into development, it is likely that World War II would not have come into being.&quot;

In 1986, Whittle was appointed a member of the Order of Merit (Commonwealth). He was made a Fellow of the Royal Society, and of the Royal Aeronautical Society, and in 1991 he and von Ohain were awarded the Charles Stark Draper Prize for their work on turbojet engines.

Whittle became an atheist by degrees.

Whittle died of lung cancer on 9 August 1996, at his home in Columbia, Maryland. He was cremated in America and his ashes were flown to England where they were placed in a memorial in a church in Cranwell. Hazel Whittle died on 30 July 2007 aged 91.

==Styles and promotions==
*1907–1923: Frank Whittle
*1923–1926: Apprentice Frank Whittle
*1926–1928: Officer Cadet Frank Whittle
*1928–1930: Pilot Officer Frank Whittle
*1930–1934: Flying Officer Frank Whittle
*1934–1938: Flight Lieutenant Frank Whittle
*1938–1940: Squadron Leader Frank Whittle
*1940–1941: Squadron Leader (Temp. Wing Commander) Frank Whittle
*1941–1943: Wing Commander Frank Whittle
*1943–1944: Wing Commander (Temp. Group Captain) Frank Whittle
*1944–1946: Group Captain (Actg. Air Commodore) Frank Whittle, CBE
*1946–1947: Group Captain (Temp. Air Commodore) Frank Whittle, CBE
*1947–1948: Group Captain (Temp. Air Commodore) Frank Whittle, CB, CBE
*1948–1986: Air Commodore Sir Frank Whittle, KBE, CB
*1986–1996: Air Commodore Sir Frank Whittle, OM, KBE, CB, FRS, FRAeS

==Memorials==

===Coventry, England===
*The &quot;Whittle Arch&quot; is a large double wing-like structure situated outside the Coventry Transport Museum, Millennium Place, Coventry City Centre.
*A statue of Whittle by Faith Winter is situated under the Whittle Arch. It was unveiled on 1 June 2007 by his son, Ian Whittle, during a televised event. It shows Whittle at RAF Cranwell looking towards the sky observing the first test flight of a Whittle-powered Gloster E.28/39 on 15 May 1941.
*A school is named after Whittle in the Walsgrave suburb of Coventry. It was first called &quot;Frank Whittle Primary&quot;, then renamed in 1997 as &quot;Sir Frank Whittle Primary School&quot;. A jet engine replica sits in the reception area of the school, donated by Whittle himself during his life.
*A commemorative plaque marks the house in Newcombe Road, Earlsdon, Coventry, in which he was born and lived until age nine.
*On Hearsall Common, near Whittle&#x27;s Coventry birthplace, a plaque commemorates where Whittle gained inspiration when he saw an aircraft land. It says &quot;on this common Frank Whittle, jet pioneer, first felt the power of flight.&quot;
*Coventry University named a building after him.
*The main hangar at the Midland Air Museum is called &quot;The Sir Frank Whittle Jet Heritage Centre&quot;.
*Whittle house was one of the four &quot;houses&quot; at Finham Park School until they were renamed in 2008.
===Lutterworth, England===
* The Sir Frank Whittle Studio School is a studio school that opened in 2015. It is situated alongside Lutterworth College, both of which make up The Lutterworth Academies Trust.
* Lutterworth Museum hold a very large unrivalled collection of original papers including the 1936 Patent, Power Jets Autograph book from 1945 and the Champagne bottle signed by everyone at a party at RAF Cranwell on the night of the first flight plus many more artefacts and displays. Also Lutterworth Museum gives talks and put on displays all over the country.
* A memorial has been erected in the middle of a roundabout outside Lutterworth and a bust of Frank Whittle has been erected in Lutterworth, where much of Whittle&#x27;s development on the jet engine was carried out.
* There is a bust of Sir Frank Whittle near the war memorial on the corner of Church and George street.
* The Sir Frank Whittle Public House was opened in 2010 and situated on the Greenacres estate in Lutterworth. It was replaced with a Co-operative convenience store much to the dismay of the residents.
* Whittle Road in Lutterworth was named after Sir Frank Whittle.

===Rugby, England===

* In Rugby where Whittle produced his first prototype engines, a bronze sculpture named &quot;Frank Whittle – Father of the Jet Engine&quot; was installed at Chestnut Field near Rugby Town Hall in 2005. It was made by the sculptor Stephen Broadbent, and represents a propeller transformed into an internal turbine of a jet engine.

===Elsewhere===

* In 2015, Whittle&#x27;s college at the University of Cambridge, Peterhouse, opened the Whittle Building on its grounds.
* The Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, has a Whittle Laboratory.
* A full-scale model of the Gloster E28/39 Whittle has been erected just outside the northern boundary of Farnborough Airfield in Hampshire, UK.
* The Sir Frank Whittle Medal is awarded annually by the Royal Academy of Engineering to an engineer, normally resident in the UK, for outstanding and sustained achievement which has contributed to the well-being of the nation.
* Two roads in Derby are named Sir Frank Whittle Road and Sir Frank Whittle Way, as a tribute to his work at Rolls-Royce.
* The main office complex at the Rolls-Royce Bristol site has been named Whittle House.
* Whittle Parkway in Burnham is named after him.
* One of the main buildings at the Royal Air Force College Cranwell is called Whittle Hall. It houses the Officer &amp; Aircrew Cadet Training Unit and the Air Power Studies Division of King&#x27;s College London.
* A road in Cranford, on the site of the former Heston Aerodrome, is named Whittle Road.
* A road in Shaw, Oldham, is named Whittle Drive.
* A road in Rugby is named Whittle Close.
* Whittle Close in Clitheroe is named after him.
* Sir Frank Whittle Way, a new road in Blackpool Business park, Blackpool..
* The Whittle Gas field in the Southern North Sea operated by BP.
* &quot;The Whittle Inn&quot; near the Gloster Aircraft Company&#x27;s former test runway in Hucclecote, Gloucestershire is named after Whittle; the nearby Tesco has a picture of a Gloster Meteor incorporated in part of its glass frontage.
* The bar/restaurant in Royal Mail&#x27;s management college at Coton House, near Rugby, was named the &quot;Whittle Bar&quot;.
* A memorial stone was placed in the Royal Air Force Chapel in Westminster Abbey in his memory. The inscription on the stone reads: &quot;Frank Whittle. Inventor &amp; Pioneer of the Jet Engine. 1907–1996&quot;. The stone was carved by John Shaw.
* Sir Frank Whittle&#x27;s national and international honours, medals, and awards (including the Order of Merit), are displayed in the Royal Academy of Engineering, London.
* The Frank Whittle house, with its own building existed at the now closed Fairham Comprehensive School Clifton, Nottingham.
*A building at Aero Engine Controls in Birmingham, UK has been named &#x27;The Whittle Building&#x27; (1994).
* Whittle Hangar is one of the main Grade II listed legacy aircraft hangars at . It contains elements of Leadership Training utilised by both the Marine Engineering Training Group and Royal Naval Air Engineering and Survival School. It was originally part of RAF Gosport, sited on the establishment&#x27;s footprint from 1914 to 1945. For many years, Whittle Hangar was the site of establishment parade ceremonies for trainees during inclement weather. 
* A plaque has been placed at the Port of Felixstowe to honour his link with the town (August 2010).
* A plaque commemorating Whittle has been placed inside the hall of Binswood Sixth Form College in Leamington Spa, formerly Leamington College for Boys.
* A plaque commemorating Whittle has been placed on Walland Hill, near Chagford in Devon, the house where he lived from 1962 to 1976
* One of the houses of Southam College is named after Whittle.
* One of the houses of Milverton County Primary School is named after Whittle.
* in 2023, King Charles III broke ground on the New Whittle Laboratory at the University of Cambridge.

==Bibliography==
*

==See also==
* Hans von Ohain
* Nathan C. Price
* Timeline of jet power

==References==
===Notes===
===Sources===
*Campbell-Smith, Duncan (2020). &quot;Jet Man: The Making and Breaking of Frank Whittle, Genius of the Jet Revolution&quot;. Head of Zeus. 
*
*
*

==External links==

* A documentary about Sir Frank Whittle with interviews of him and Hans Von Ohain
* Whittle grave marker in Westminster Abbey
* Whittle Archive 
* News report – Memorial for University of Cambridge Student who Invented the Jet Engine
* More about Frank Whittle
* More about Frank Whittle and the jet age at the Royal Air Force History website
* &quot;Flight&quot;, October 1945 – &quot;Early History of the Whittle Jet Propulsion Gas Turbine&quot; by Air Commodore Frank Whittle &quot;abstract&quot;
*Early History of the Whittle Jet Propulsion Gas Turbine by Frank Whittle &quot;Full text of the first James Claydon lecture&quot;
*Air of Authority – Sir Frank Whittle
*&quot;Jet Liners for Short Range&quot; a 1949 &quot;Flight&quot; report of a Frank Whittle lecture to the Aero Club de France
*&quot;The Secret Years&quot; a 1951 &quot;Flight&quot; article
*Whittle Power Jet Papers – Correspondence from the archives of Peterhouse College in Cambridge Digital Library
*The Papers of Sir Frank Whittle held at Churchill Archives Centre
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q407033" start="0" end="13" title="Air Commodore" label="Air Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q312547" start="14" end="31" title="Frank Whittle" label="Sir Frank Whittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="101" end="116" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698344" start="123" end="134" title="air officer" label="air officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="172" end="180" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302591" start="215" end="231" title="Maxime Guillaume" label="Maxime Guillaume"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="325" end="335" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q76541" start="400" end="414" title="Hans von Ohain" label="Hans von Ohain"/>
<link wikidata="Q84757" start="483" end="495" title="Anselm Franz" label="Anselm Franz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347950" start="1045" end="1053" title="RAF Cranwell" label="Cranwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q650068" start="1370" end="1380" title="Peterhouse, Cambridge" label="Peterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="1382" end="1391" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="1435" end="1447" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454299" start="1498" end="1508" title="Power Jets" label="Power Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q920249" start="1566" end="1589" title="British Thomson-Houston" label="British Thomson-Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q768855" start="2072" end="2082" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of the United Kingdom" label="knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q846885" start="2094" end="2098" title="British Overseas Airways Corporation" label="BOAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="2171" end="2176" title="Royal Dutch Shell" label="Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q654907" start="2206" end="2226" title="Bristol Aeroplane Company" label="Bristol Aero Engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="2326" end="2353" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165177" start="2513" end="2533" title="100 Greatest Britons" label="100 Greatest Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q875016" start="2573" end="2587" title="terraced house" label="terraced house"/>
<link wikidata="Q12056834" start="2606" end="2614" title="Earlsdon, Coventry" label="Earlsdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q546635" start="2774" end="2794" title="Leamington Spa" label="Royal Leamington Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q114704" start="2988" end="2998" title="gas engine" label="gas engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055928" start="3255" end="3282" title="Leamington College for Boys" label="Leamington College for Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="3715" end="3718" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275360" start="3840" end="3850" title="RAF Halton" label="RAF Halton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="3854" end="3869" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698494" start="3876" end="3895" title="Aircraft Apprentice" label="Aircraft Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347950" start="4440" end="4452" title="RAF Cranwell" label="RAF Cranwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043110" start="4673" end="4707" title="No. 1 School of Technical Training RAF" label="No. 1 School of Technical Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373601" start="5016" end="5048" title="Royal Air Force College Cranwell" label="Royal Air Force College Cranwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q383695" start="5536" end="5550" title="Flight training" label="flying lessons"/>
<link wikidata="Q730283" start="5558" end="5566" title="Avro 504" label="Avro 504"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463186" start="5613" end="5623" title="Dorrington, Lincolnshire" label="Dorrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972829" start="5673" end="5686" title="Public school (United Kingdom)" label="public school"/>
<link wikidata="Q629425" start="5868" end="5883" title="Bristol F.2 Fighter" label="Bristol Fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545302" start="6401" end="6409" title="motorjet" label="motorjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q630010" start="6450" end="6463" title="piston engine" label="piston engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29426" start="6574" end="6585" title="afterburner" label="afterburner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511415" start="6803" end="6814" title="density of air" label="air density"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="7270" end="7280" title="drag (physics)" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194476" start="7447" end="7460" title="pilot officer" label="pilot officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q689437" start="7807" end="7833" title="Armstrong Whitworth Siskin" label="Armstrong Whitworth Siskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185525" start="8432" end="8444" title="turbocharger" label="turbocharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042866" start="8550" end="8566" title="No. 111 Squadron RAF" label="No. 111 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q689437" start="8587" end="8598" title="Armstrong Whitworth Siskin" label="Siskin IIIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061098" start="8766" end="8787" title="Central Flying School" label="Central Flying School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754901" start="8797" end="8810" title="RAF Wittering" label="RAF Wittering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5713557" start="9059" end="9069" title="Hendon Aerodrome" label="RAF Hendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q729849" start="9775" end="9789" title="Alan Arnold Griffith" label="A. A. Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419175" start="9875" end="9903" title="Royal Aircraft Establishment" label="Royal Aircraft Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q309027" start="10345" end="10354" title="turboprop" label="turboprop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048872" start="10394" end="10416" title="centrifugal compressor" label="centrifugal compressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="10546" end="10558" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q920249" start="12467" end="12490" title="British Thomson-Houston" label="British Thomson-Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416824" start="12743" end="12757" title="flying officer" label="flying officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764007" start="12919" end="12961" title="Marine Aircraft Experimental Establishment" label="Marine Aircraft Experimental Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000656" start="12965" end="12975" title="Felixstowe" label="Felixstowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q730242" start="13003" end="13013" title="test pilot" label="test pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q689325" start="13335" end="13353" title="Armstrong Siddeley" label="Armstrong Siddeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18954649" start="13383" end="13394" title="William Farren (engineer)" label="W.S. Farren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13627" end="13639" title="Supercharger#Aircraft" label="supercharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q193470" start="13742" end="13753" title="Gas Turbine" label="Gas Turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275373" start="14268" end="14278" title="RAF Henlow" label="RAF Henlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q650068" start="14828" end="14838" title="Peterhouse, Cambridge" label="Peterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="14862" end="14882" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14910" end="14915" title="British undergraduate degree classification#First Class Honours" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374550" start="14943" end="14949" title="Tripos" label="Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070184" start="15057" end="15070" title="Melvill Jones" label="Melvill Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013228" start="15123" end="15140" title="flight lieutenant" label="flight lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360709" start="15420" end="15440" title="Sir Rolf Dudley-Williams, 1st Baronet" label="Rolf Dudley-Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131574" start="15608" end="15633" title="James Collingwood Tinling" label="James Collingwood Tinling"/>
<link wikidata="Q18880153" start="16667" end="16676" title="Oswald Toynbee Falk" label="O.T. Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q620676" start="16727" end="16745" title="Lancelot Law Whyte" label="Lancelot Law Whyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q333617" start="16767" end="16788" title="Maurice Bonham-Carter" label="Maurice Bonham-Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q901295" start="17366" end="17378" title="Henry Tizard" label="Henry Tizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454299" start="17679" end="17689" title="Power Jets" label="Power Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989921" start="18782" end="18796" title="Hayne Constant" label="Hayne Constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q920249" start="18923" end="18946" title="British Thomson-Houston" label="British Thomson-Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q623765" start="19014" end="19033" title="Rugby, Warwickshire" label="Rugby, Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q86097" start="19300" end="19317" title="Herbert A. Wagner" label="Herbert A. Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q161168" start="19321" end="19328" title="Junkers" label="Junkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q76541" start="19333" end="19347" title="Hans von Ohain" label="Hans von Ohain"/>
<link wikidata="Q155296" start="19351" end="19358" title="Heinkel" label="Heinkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q698081" start="19427" end="19454" title="Ministry of Aviation (Nazi Germany)" label="German Ministry of Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5802677" start="19745" end="19764" title="Virgilio Leret Ruiz" label="Virgilio Leret Ruiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="19827" end="19837" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q203708" start="19848" end="19860" title="Manuel Azaña" label="Manuel Azaña"/>
<link wikidata="Q29068" start="19902" end="19915" title="Hispano-Suiza" label="Hispano-Suiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="19991" end="20000" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q457242" start="20001" end="20009" title="Spanish protectorate in Morocco" label="Moroccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5831" start="20072" end="20079" title="Melilla" label="Melilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="20100" end="20117" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752296" start="20247" end="20267" title="Carlota O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Carlota O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="20347" end="20356" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="20421" end="20427" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q695801" start="20598" end="20614" title="Junkers Jumo 004" label="Junkers Jumo 004"/>
<link wikidata="Q84757" start="20632" end="20644" title="Anselm Franz" label="Anselm Franz"/>
<link wikidata="Q140254" start="20667" end="20687" title="Messerschmitt Me 262" label="Messerschmitt Me 262"/>
<link wikidata="Q185000" start="21217" end="21244" title="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress" label="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q901295" start="21322" end="21334" title="Henry Tizard" label="Henry Tizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q189022" start="21350" end="21373" title="Imperial College London" label="Imperial College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986499" start="21394" end="21425" title="Aeronautical Research Committee" label="Aeronautical Research Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099621" start="22251" end="22264" title="Power Jets WU" label="Power Jets WU"/>
<link wikidata="Q11912077" start="23049" end="23064" title="squadron leader" label="squadron leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="23195" end="23207" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q923928" start="23395" end="23415" title="Official Secrets Act" label="Official Secrets Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333774" start="23759" end="23770" title="Lutterworth" label="Lutterworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q533668" start="23996" end="24002" title="thrust" label="thrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q206037" start="24016" end="24019" title="rpm" label="rpm"/>
<link wikidata="Q76541" start="24374" end="24388" title="Hans von Ohain" label="Hans von Ohain"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="24474" end="24486" title="jet aircraft" label="jet aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q161540" start="24492" end="24506" title="Heinkel He 178" label="Heinkel He 178"/>
<link wikidata="Q450482" start="24523" end="24536" title="Heinkel HeS 3" label="Heinkel HeS 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="24710" end="24713" title="World War II" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468032" start="24825" end="24845" title="Metropolitan-Vickers" label="Metropolitan-Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q229256" start="25043" end="25049" title="eczema" label="eczema"/>
<link wikidata="Q179452" start="25175" end="25185" title="benzedrine" label="benzedrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238903" start="25786" end="25803" title="David Randall Pye" label="David Randall Pye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019578" start="26052" end="26066" title="Power Jets W.1" label="Power Jets W.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236340" start="26071" end="26085" title="Power Jets W.2" label="Power Jets W.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532217" start="26143" end="26167" title="Gloster Aircraft Company" label="Gloster Aircraft Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q430259" start="26245" end="26260" title="Gloster E.28/39" label="Gloster E.28/39"/>
<link wikidata="Q140318" start="26602" end="26616" title="Gloster Meteor" label="Gloster Meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q407517" start="27088" end="27099" title="Air marshal" label="Air Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q334980" start="27100" end="27106" title="Arthur Tedder, 1st Baron Tedder" label="Tedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q59187" start="27757" end="27765" title="Vauxhall Motors" label="Vauxhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q848620" start="27774" end="27787" title="Rover Company" label="Rover Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891933" start="27899" end="27913" title="Wing commander (rank)" label="wing commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806838" start="28081" end="28106" title="Asiatic Petroleum Company" label="Asiatic Petroleum Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="28127" end="28132" title="Shell plc" label="Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194225" start="29617" end="29620" title="lbf" label="lbf"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438" start="29626" end="29628" title="kilonewton" label="kN"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="30166" end="30186" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q243278" start="30249" end="30260" title="Rolls-Royce Holdings" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q952062" start="30262" end="30277" title="Hawker Siddeley" label="Hawker Siddeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q654907" start="30283" end="30308" title="Bristol Aeroplane Company" label="Bristol Aeroplane Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q283666" start="30314" end="30326" title="de Havilland" label="de Havilland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372380" start="30387" end="30404" title="Roxbee Cox, Baron Kings Norton" label="Harold Roxbee Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q901295" start="30589" end="30601" title="Henry Tizard" label="Henry Tizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049578" start="30785" end="30797" title="Barnoldswick" label="Barnoldswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008765" start="30812" end="30821" title="Clitheroe" label="Clitheroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599677" start="31301" end="31315" title="Stanley Hooker" label="Stanley Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q679888" start="31319" end="31330" title="Rolls-Royce Limited" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393271" start="31427" end="31439" title="Ernest Walter Hives, 1st Baron Hives" label="Ernest Hives"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="31555" end="31569" title="fluid dynamics" label="fluid dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412885" start="31613" end="31619" title="Rolls-Royce Merlin" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938452" start="31988" end="31995" title="Compressor stall" label="surging"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="32101" end="32118" title="nervous breakdown" label="nervous breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993522" start="32640" end="32665" title="Whetstone, Leicestershire" label="Whetstone, Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="32743" end="32759" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450750" start="32961" end="32965" title="General Electric J31" label="I-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q815695" start="33030" end="33043" title="Bell Aircraft" label="Bell Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q278162" start="33059" end="33080" title="Bell XP-59A Airacomet" label="Bell XP-59A Airacomet"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039786" start="33120" end="33140" title="General Electric I-A" label="General Electric I-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866042" start="33333" end="33364" title="Ministry of Aircraft Production" label="Ministry of Aircraft Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001940" start="33383" end="33398" title="Wilfrid Freeman" label="Wilfrid Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19043602" start="33627" end="33640" title="Spencer Wilks" label="Spencer Wilks"/>
<link wikidata="Q604206" start="33883" end="33894" title="Rolls-Royce Meteor" label="tank engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16005839" start="33977" end="33991" title="Adrian Lombard" label="Adrian Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207377" start="34396" end="34413" title="Hucknall Aerodrome" label="Hucknall Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q850244" start="34500" end="34518" title="Vickers Wellington" label="Vickers Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703030" start="34791" end="34797" title="Kilsby" label="Kilsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493652" start="34831" end="34845" title="Rossall School" label="Rossall School"/>
<link wikidata="Q654051" start="35470" end="35478" title="turbofan" label="turbofan"/>
<link wikidata="Q384469" start="35789" end="35809" title="Convair 990 Coronado" label="Convair 990 Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q29426" start="35969" end="35980" title="afterburner" label="afterburner"/>
<link wikidata="Q505434" start="36019" end="36029" title="Miles M.52" label="Miles M.52"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973494" start="36378" end="36390" title="bypass ratio" label="bypass ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468032" start="36692" end="36712" title="Metropolitan-Vickers" label="Metropolitan-Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q309027" start="36767" end="36776" title="turboprop" label="turboprop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855741" start="36839" end="36852" title="Metrovick F.2" label="Metrovick F.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q179835" start="37086" end="37093" title="de Havilland Vampire" label="Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487068" start="37137" end="37150" title="Frank Halford" label="Frank Halford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050411" start="37158" end="37164" title="de Havilland Goblin" label="Goblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q689325" start="37180" end="37198" title="Armstrong Siddeley" label="Armstrong Siddeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962010" start="37284" end="37287" title="Armstrong Siddeley ASX" label="ASX"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733" start="37376" end="37382" title="Armstrong Siddeley Python" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q654907" start="37388" end="37413" title="Bristol Aeroplane Company" label="Bristol Aeroplane Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="37590" end="37607" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q332405" start="37643" end="37658" title="Stafford Cripps" label="Stafford Cripps"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="39006" end="39050" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187538" start="39058" end="39074" title="1944 New Year Honours" label="New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975529" start="39098" end="39111" title="group captain" label="group captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891933" start="39139" end="39153" title="Wing commander (rank)" label="wing commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372380" start="39856" end="39866" title="Roxbee Cox, Baron Kings Norton" label="Roxbee Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989921" start="39880" end="39888" title="Hayne Constant" label="Constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972859" start="40930" end="40964" title="National Gas Turbine Establishment" label="National Gas Turbine Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q639668" start="41082" end="41098" title="Rolls-Royce_Nene" label="Rolls-Royce_Nene"/>
<link wikidata="Q390816" start="41246" end="41265" title="Grumman F9F Panther" label="Grumman F9F Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q390219" start="41296" end="41307" title="Klimov VK-1" label="Klimov VK-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q187377" start="41348" end="41354" title="MiG-15" label="MiG-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q724443" start="41600" end="41615" title="Legion of Merit" label="Legion of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="41637" end="41671" title="Companion of the Order of the Bath" label="Companion of the Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q144027" start="41717" end="41726" title="Ex gratia" label="ex-gratia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="41875" end="41926" title="Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q407033" start="42075" end="42088" title="air commodore" label="air commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q846885" start="42100" end="42104" title="British Overseas Airways Corporation" label="BOAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="42429" end="42450" title="Royal Society of Arts" label="Royal Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710826" start="42457" end="42469" title="Albert Medal (RSA)" label="Albert Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="42576" end="42581" title="Royal Dutch Shell" label="Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q600467" start="43051" end="43087" title="Royal Institution Christmas Lectures" label="Royal Institution Christmas Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q654907" start="43483" end="43503" title="Bristol Aeroplane Company" label="Bristol Aero Engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636078" start="43758" end="43763" title="Rolls-Royce RB211" label="RB211"/>
<link wikidata="Q4199385" start="44027" end="44037" title="drill pipe" label="drill pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="44056" end="44065" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416348" start="44447" end="44480" title="Norwegian Institute of Technology" label="Norwegian Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q314536" start="44496" end="44542" title="Norwegian University of Science and Technology" label="Norwegian University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422458" start="44615" end="44633" title="University of Bath" label="University of Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614528" start="44671" end="44713" title="International Air &amp;amp; Space Hall of Fame" label="International Air &amp;amp; Space Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434547" start="44785" end="44808" title="Loughborough University" label="Loughborough University"/>
<link wikidata="Q488005" start="44845" end="44875" title="National Aviation Hall of Fame" label="National Aviation Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822643" start="44936" end="44953" title="Tony Jannus Award" label="Tony Jannus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="45219" end="45246" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="45248" end="45267" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q752193" start="45303" end="45317" title="boundary layer" label="boundary layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76541" start="45568" end="45582" title="Hans von Ohain" label="Hans von Ohain"/>
<link wikidata="Q730187" start="45617" end="45648" title="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base" label="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q94056" start="46441" end="46455" title="Order of Merit" label="Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="46486" end="46513" title="Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170942" start="46526" end="46552" title="Royal Aeronautical Society" label="Royal Aeronautical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063447" start="46600" end="46626" title="Charles Stark Draper Prize" label="Charles Stark Draper Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q397905" start="46764" end="46782" title="Columbia, Maryland" label="Columbia, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193794" start="46899" end="46907" title="Cranwell" label="Cranwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497929" start="47055" end="47068" title="Officer Cadet" label="Officer Cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194476" start="47095" end="47108" title="Pilot Officer" label="Pilot Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416824" start="47135" end="47149" title="Flying Officer" label="Flying Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013228" start="47176" end="47193" title="Flight Lieutenant" label="Flight Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11912077" start="47220" end="47235" title="Squadron Leader" label="Squadron Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891933" start="47285" end="47299" title="Wing Commander (rank)" label="Wing Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975529" start="47390" end="47403" title="Group Captain" label="Group Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q407033" start="47452" end="47465" title="Air Commodore" label="Air Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="47482" end="47485" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="CBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="47616" end="47618" title="Companion of the Order of the Bath" label="CB"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="47669" end="47672" title="Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="KBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q94056" start="47722" end="47724" title="Order of Merit" label="OM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="47735" end="47738" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170942" start="47740" end="47745" title="FRAeS" label="FRAeS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79111111" start="47797" end="47809" title="Whittle Arch" label="Whittle Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179119" start="47875" end="47900" title="Coventry Transport Museum" label="Coventry Transport Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="47920" end="47928" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347950" start="48117" end="48129" title="RAF Cranwell" label="RAF Cranwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q430259" start="48207" end="48222" title="Gloster E.28/39" label="Gloster E.28/39"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963805" start="48279" end="48288" title="Walsgrave" label="Walsgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q12056834" start="48599" end="48617" title="Earlsdon, Coventry" label="Earlsdon, Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691693" start="48670" end="48685" title="Hearsall Common" label="Hearsall Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138080" start="48909" end="48928" title="Coventry University" label="Coventry University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842303" start="48981" end="48999" title="Midland Air Museum" label="Midland Air Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915726" start="49106" end="49112" title="House system" label="houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450318" start="49122" end="49140" title="Finham Park School" label="Finham Park School"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908815" start="49207" end="49238" title="Sir Frank Whittle Studio School" label="Sir Frank Whittle Studio School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705965" start="49304" end="49323" title="Lutterworth College" label="Lutterworth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525" start="49793" end="49803" title="roundabout" label="roundabout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333774" start="49812" end="49823" title="Lutterworth" label="Lutterworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277439" start="50198" end="50210" title="The Co-operative Food" label="Co-operative"/>
<link wikidata="Q623765" start="50359" end="50364" title="Rugby, Warwickshire" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q98729215" start="50532" end="50547" title="Rugby Town Hall" label="Rugby Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445260" start="50585" end="50602" title="Stephen Broadbent" label="Stephen Broadbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="50744" end="50767" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025593" start="50831" end="50881" title="Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge" label="Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231271" start="51015" end="51035" title="Farnborough Airfield" label="Farnborough Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526754" start="51060" end="51083" title="Sir Frank Whittle Medal" label="Sir Frank Whittle Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478095" start="51111" end="51139" title="Royal Academy of Engineering" label="Royal Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q43475" start="51297" end="51302" title="Derby" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q679888" start="51391" end="51402" title="Rolls-Royce Limited" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q243278" start="51437" end="51448" title="Rolls-Royce plc" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259685" start="51513" end="51520" title="Burnham, Buckinghamshire" label="Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373601" start="51576" end="51599" title="Royal Air Force College" label="Royal Air Force College"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="51727" end="51753" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182098" start="51767" end="51775" title="Cranford, London" label="Cranford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274670" start="51803" end="51819" title="Heston Aerodrome" label="Heston Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008765" start="51955" end="51964" title="Clitheroe" label="Clitheroe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52067" end="52084" title="Easington Gas Terminal#Juno development" label="Whittle Gas field"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294659" start="52220" end="52230" title="Hucclecote" label="Hucclecote"/>
<link wikidata="Q487494" start="52283" end="52288" title="Tesco" label="Tesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q638098" start="52391" end="52401" title="Royal Mail" label="Royal Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175435" start="52431" end="52442" title="Coton House" label="Coton House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257494" start="52731" end="52740" title="John Shaw (stone carver)" label="John Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q76541" start="54272" end="54286" title="Hans von Ohain" label="Hans von Ohain"/>
<link wikidata="Q28408329" start="54289" end="54304" title="Nathan C. Price" label="Nathan C. Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806087" start="54307" end="54328" title="Timeline of jet power" label="Timeline of jet power"/>
<link wikidata="Q650068" start="55462" end="55480" title="Peterhouse, Cambridge" label="Peterhouse College"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989882" start="55484" end="55509" title="Cambridge Digital Library" label="Cambridge Digital Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118159" start="55551" end="55576" title="Churchill Archives Centre" label="Churchill Archives Centre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="42708" wikidata="Q463364" url="?curid=42708" title="Bion of Smyrna">
<text>Bion (Βίων ) was an ancient Greek bucolic poet from Smyrna, probably active at the end of the second or beginning of the first century BC. He is named in the Suda as one of three canonical bucolic poets alongside Theocritus and Moschus. One long poem about Adonis and seventeen shorter fragments of his poetry survive.

==Life== 

According to the Suda Bion was from Phlossa, which is not otherwise known but may have been one of the villages which made up Smyrna. Ancient sources do not record Bion&#x27;s dates or any details about his life, but he likely was active in the late second or early first century BC. An epitaph to Bion says that he was poisoned and implies that he died young.

==Poetry==

The Suda and the scholiast on the Palatine Anthology name Bion alongside Theocritus and Moschus as a bucolic poet; he also wrote erotic poetry. His surviving work comprises the &quot;Lament to Adonis&quot; and seventeen shorter fragments. All his surviving poetry is composed in dactylic hexameter and in a Doric dialect, which is typical of ancient bucolic poetry. The &quot;Lament to Adonis&quot; is 98 lines long; the other fragments are shorter, ranging from a single line to eighteen lines long, and totalling around another 100 lines. One of these fragments, about a bird hunter&#x27;s attempt to hunt Eros, is probably a complete poem. The remaining fragments seem to come from at least four further poems; no two fragments are certainly from the same poem. The &quot;Lament for Adonis&quot; is influenced traditional Greek lament and specifically references Theocritus&#x27; &quot;Lament for Daphnis&quot;.

Bion&#x27;s work continued to be read until the sixth century AD, and was alluded to by ancient poets including Meleager of Gadara, Ovid, Catullus, and Nonnus. The Greek novelists Achilles Tatius, Longus, and Heliodorus also reference Bion. Pseudo-Moschus&#x27; &quot;Epitaph for Bion&quot; references Bion&#x27;s works, particularly the &quot;Lament for Adonis&quot;.

Bion&#x27;s longest poem, the &quot;Lament to Adonis&quot;, is preserved on two medieval manuscripts. It was transmitted anonymously, with one source attributing it to Theocritus. It was first attributed to Bion by Joachim Camerarius in 1530, and has generally been attributed to Bion since, based on the &quot;Epitaph for Bion&quot;&#x27;s apparent references and metrical similarities with Bion&#x27;s fragments. The first sixteen fragments were preserved by Johannes Stobaeus; the seventeenth fragment was preserved by Orion of Thebes.

Another poem, an epithalamium for Achilles and Deidameia, is also transmitted anonymously in the manuscript tradition but has been attributed to Bion; however there is no strong evidence for this attribution.

==References==

==Works cited==
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q463364" start="0" end="4" title="Bion of Smyrna" label="Bion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379299" start="52" end="58" title="Smyrna" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="158" end="162" title="Suda" label="Suda"/>
<link wikidata="Q219484" start="213" end="223" title="Theocritus" label="Theocritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q957548" start="228" end="235" title="Moschus" label="Moschus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163920" start="257" end="263" title="Adonis" label="Adonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="348" end="352" title="Suda" label="Suda"/>
<link wikidata="Q977693" start="449" end="463" title="synoecism" label="made up Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="709" end="713" title="Suda" label="Suda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247890" start="739" end="757" title="Palatine Anthology" label="Palatine Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q219484" start="778" end="788" title="Theocritus" label="Theocritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q957548" start="793" end="800" title="Moschus" label="Moschus"/>
<link wikidata="Q390001" start="806" end="813" title="bucolic" label="bucolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254470" start="984" end="1002" title="dactylic hexameter" label="dactylic hexameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q285494" start="1012" end="1017" title="Doric Greek" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q121973" start="1313" end="1317" title="Eros" label="Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q441460" start="1733" end="1751" title="Meleager of Gadara" label="Meleager of Gadara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="1753" end="1757" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q163079" start="1759" end="1767" title="Catullus" label="Catullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="1773" end="1779" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q221951" start="1801" end="1816" title="Achilles Tatius" label="Achilles Tatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q314949" start="1818" end="1824" title="Longus" label="Longus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313011" start="1830" end="1840" title="Heliodorus of Emesa" label="Heliodorus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1862" end="1876" title="Moschus#Apocrypha" label="Pseudo-Moschus"/>
<link wikidata="Q64361" start="2206" end="2224" title="Joachim Camerarius" label="Joachim Camerarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q444079" start="2452" end="2469" title="Johannes Stobaeus" label="Johannes Stobaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225578" start="2513" end="2528" title="Orion of Thebes" label="Orion of Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q686027" start="2548" end="2560" title="epithalamium" label="epithalamium"/>
</links>
</doc>
