<doc id="43507" wikidata="Q43056" url="?curid=43507" title="Axis powers">
<text>The Axis powers, originally called the Rome–Berlin Axis and also Rome–Berlin–Tokyo Axis, was the military coalition which initiated World War II and fought against the Allies. Its principal members were Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy and the Empire of Japan. The Axis were united in their far-right positions and general opposition to the Allies, but otherwise lacked comparable coordination and ideological cohesion.

The Axis grew out of successive diplomatic efforts by Germany, Italy, and Japan to secure their own specific expansionist interests in the mid-1930s. The first step was the protocol signed by Germany and Italy in October 1936, after which Italian leader Benito Mussolini declared that all other European countries would thereafter rotate on the Rome–Berlin axis, thus creating the term &quot;Axis&quot;. The following November saw the ratification of the Anti-Comintern Pact, an anti-communist treaty between Germany and Japan; Italy joined the Pact in 1937, followed by Hungary and Spain in 1939. The &quot;Rome–Berlin Axis&quot; became a military alliance in 1939 under the so-called &quot;Pact of Steel&quot;, with the Tripartite Pact of 1940 formally integrating the military aims of Germany, Italy, Japan, and later followed by other nations. The three pacts formed the foundation of the Axis alliance.

At its zenith in 1942, the Axis presided over large parts of Europe, North Africa, and East Asia, either through occupation, annexation, or puppet states. In contrast to the Allies, there were no three-way summit meetings, and cooperation and coordination were minimal; on occasion, the interests of the major Axis powers were even at variance with each other. The Axis ultimately came to an end with its defeat in 1945.

Particularly within Europe, the use of the term &quot;the Axis&quot; sometimes refers solely to the alliance between Italy and Germany, though outside Europe it is normally understood as including Japan.

== Origins and creation ==
The term &quot;axis&quot; was first applied to the Italo-German relationship by the Italian prime minister Benito Mussolini in September 1923, when he wrote in the preface to Roberto Suster&#x27;s &quot;La&quot; &quot;Germania Repubblicana&quot; that &quot;there is no doubt that in this moment the axis of European history passes through Berlin&quot; (&quot;non v&#x27;ha dubbio che in questo momento l&#x27;asse della storia europea passa per Berlino&quot;). At the time, he was seeking an alliance with the Weimar Republic against Yugoslavia and France in the dispute over the Free State of Fiume.

The term was used by Hungary&#x27;s prime minister Gyula Gömbös when advocating an alliance of Hungary with Germany and Italy in the early 1930s. Gömbös&#x27; efforts did affect the Italo-Hungarian Rome Protocols, but his sudden death in 1936 while negotiating with Germany in Munich and the arrival of Kálmán Darányi, his successor, ended Hungary&#x27;s involvement in pursuing a trilateral axis. Contentious negotiations between the Italian foreign minister, Galeazzo Ciano, and the German ambassador, Ulrich von Hassell, resulted in a Nine-Point Protocol, signed by Ciano and his German counterpart, Konstantin von Neurath, in 1936. When Mussolini publicly announced the signing on 1 November, he proclaimed the creation of a Rome–Berlin axis.

===Initial proposals of a German–Italian alliance===
Italy under &quot;Duce&quot; Benito Mussolini had pursued a strategic alliance of Italy with Germany against France since the early 1920s. Prior to becoming head of government in Italy as leader of the Italian Fascist movement, Mussolini had advocated alliance with defeated Germany after the Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920) settled World War I. He believed that Italy could expand its influence in Europe by allying with Germany against France. In early 1923, as a goodwill gesture to Germany, Italy secretly delivered weapons for the &quot;Reichswehr&quot;, which had faced major disarmament under the provisions of the Treaty of Versailles.

Since the 1920s Italy had identified the year 1935 as a crucial date for preparing for a war against France, as 1935 was the year when Germany&#x27;s obligations under the Treaty of Versailles were scheduled to expire. Meetings took place in Berlin in 1924 between Italian General Luigi Capello and prominent figures in the German military, such as von Seeckt and Erich Ludendorff, over military collaboration between Germany and Italy. The discussions concluded that Germans still wanted a war of revenge against France but were short on weapons and hoped that Italy could assist Germany.

However at this time Mussolini stressed one important condition that Italy must pursue in an alliance with Germany: that Italy &quot;must ... tow them, not be towed by them&quot;. Italian foreign minister Dino Grandi in the early 1930s stressed the importance of &quot;decisive weight&quot;, involving Italy&#x27;s relations between France and Germany, in which he recognized that Italy was not yet a major power, but perceived that Italy did have strong enough influence to alter the political situation in Europe by placing the weight of its support onto one side or another, and sought to balance relations between the three.

===Danube alliance, dispute over Austria===

In 1933, Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party came to power in Germany. Hitler had advocated an alliance between Germany and Italy since the 1920s. Shortly after being appointed Chancellor of Germany, Hitler sent a personal message to Mussolini, declaring &quot;admiration and homage&quot; and declaring his anticipation of the prospects of German–Italian friendship and even alliance. Hitler was aware that Italy held concerns over potential German land claims on South Tyrol, and assured Mussolini that Germany was not interested in South Tyrol. Hitler in &quot;Mein Kampf&quot; had declared that South Tyrol was a non-issue considering the advantages that would be gained from a German–Italian alliance. After Hitler&#x27;s rise to power, the Four Power Directorate proposal by Italy had been looked at with interest by Britain, but Hitler was not committed to it, resulting in Mussolini urging Hitler to consider the diplomatic advantages Germany would gain by breaking out of isolation by entering the Directorate and avoiding an immediate armed conflict. The Four Power Directorate proposal stipulated that Germany would no longer be required to have limited arms and would be granted the right to re-armament under foreign supervision in stages. Hitler completely rejected the idea of controlled rearmament under foreign supervision.

Mussolini did not trust Hitler&#x27;s intentions regarding Anschluss nor Hitler&#x27;s promise of no territorial claims on South Tyrol. Mussolini informed Hitler that he was satisfied with the presence of the anti-Marxist government of Engelbert Dollfuss in the First Austrian Republic, and warned Hitler that he was adamantly opposed to Anschluss. Hitler responded in contempt to Mussolini that he intended &quot;to throw Dollfuss into the sea&quot;. With this disagreement over Austria, relations between Hitler and Mussolini steadily became more distant.

Hitler attempted to break the impasse with Italy over Austria by sending Hermann Göring to negotiate with Mussolini in 1933 to convince Mussolini to press Austria to appoint Austrian Nazis to the government. Göring claimed that Nazi domination of Austria was inevitable and that Italy should accept this, as well as repeating to Mussolini of Hitler&#x27;s promise to &quot;regard the question of the South Tyrol frontier as finally liquidated by the peace treaties&quot;. In response to Göring&#x27;s visit with Mussolini, Dollfuss immediately went to Italy to counter any German diplomatic headway. Dollfuss claimed that his government was actively challenging Marxists in Austria and claimed that once the Marxists were defeated in Austria, that support for Austria&#x27;s Nazis would decline.

In June 1934, Hitler and Mussolini met for the first time, in Venice. The meeting did not proceed amicably. Hitler demanded that Mussolini compromise on Austria by pressuring Dollfuss to appoint Austrian Nazis to his cabinet, to which Mussolini flatly refused the demand. In response, Hitler promised that he would accept Austria&#x27;s independence for the time being, saying that due to the internal tensions in Germany (referring to sections of the Nazi Sturmabteilung that Hitler would soon kill in the Night of the Long Knives) that Germany could not afford to provoke Italy. Galeazzo Ciano told the press that the two leaders had made a &quot;gentleman&#x27;s agreement&quot; to avoid interfering in Austria.
Several weeks after the Venice meeting, on 25 July 1934, Austrian Nazis assassinated Dollfuss. Mussolini was outraged as he held Hitler directly responsible for the assassination that violated Hitler&#x27;s promise made only weeks ago to respect Austrian independence. Mussolini rapidly deployed several army divisions and air squadrons to the Brenner Pass, and warned that a German move against Austria would result in war between Germany and Italy. Hitler responded by both denying Nazi responsibility for the assassination and issuing orders to dissolve all ties between the German Nazi Party and its Austrian branch, which Germany claimed was responsible for the political crisis.

Italy effectively abandoned diplomatic relations with Germany while turning to France in order to challenge Germany&#x27;s intransigence by signing a Franco–Italian accord to protect Austrian independence. French and Italian military staff discussed possible military cooperation involving a war with Germany should Hitler dare to attack Austria.

Relations between Germany and Italy recovered due to Hitler&#x27;s support of Italy&#x27;s invasion of Ethiopia in 1935, while other countries condemned the invasion and advocated sanctions against Italy.

===Development of German–Italian–Japanese alliance===

Interest in Germany and Japan in forming an alliance began when Japanese diplomat Hiroshi Ōshima visited Joachim von Ribbentrop in Berlin in 1935. Although at the time Japan was unwilling to make an alliance against the United Kingdom and France, Oshima informed von Ribbentrop of Japan&#x27;s interest in forming a German–Japanese alliance against the Soviet Union. Von Ribbentrop expanded on Oshima&#x27;s proposal by advocating that the alliance be based in a political context of a pact to oppose the Comintern. The proposed pact was met with mixed reviews in Japan, with a faction of ultra-nationalists within the government supporting the pact while the Imperial Japanese Navy and the Japanese Foreign Ministry were staunchly opposed to the pact. There was great concern in the Japanese government that such a pact with Germany could disrupt Japan&#x27;s relations with Britain, endangering years of a beneficial Anglo-Japanese accord, that had allowed Japan to ascend in the international community in the first place. The response to the pact was met with similar division in Germany; while the proposed pact was popular amongst the upper echelons of the Nazi Party, it was opposed by many in the Foreign Ministry, the Army, and the business community who held financial interests in the Republic of China to which Japan was hostile.

On learning of German–Japanese negotiations, Italy also began to take an interest in forming an alliance with Japan. Italy had hoped that due to Japan&#x27;s long-term close relations with Britain, that an Italo-Japanese alliance could pressure Britain into adopting a more accommodating stance towards Italy in the Mediterranean. In the summer of 1936, Italian Foreign Minister Galeazzo Ciano informed Japanese Ambassador to Italy, Sugimura Yotaro, &quot;I have heard that a Japanese–German agreement concerning the Soviet Union has been reached, and I think it would be natural for a similar agreement to be made between Italy and Japan.&quot; Initially Japan&#x27;s attitude towards Italy&#x27;s proposal was generally dismissive, viewing a German–Japanese alliance against the Soviet Union as imperative while regarding an Italo-Japanese alliance as secondary, as Japan anticipated that an Italo-Japanese alliance would antagonize Britain that had condemned Italy&#x27;s invasion of Ethiopia. This attitude by Japan towards Italy altered in 1937 after the League of Nations condemned Japan for aggression in China and faced international isolation, while Italy remained favourable to Japan. As a result of Italy&#x27;s support for Japan against international condemnation, Japan took a more positive attitude towards Italy and offered proposals for a non-aggression or neutrality pact with Italy.

The Tripartite Pact was signed by Germany, Italy, and Japan on 27 September 1940, in Berlin. The pact was subsequently joined by Hungary (20 November 1940), Romania (23 November 1940), Slovakia (24 November 1940), and Bulgaria (1 March 1941).

==Ideology==

The Axis powers&#x27; primary goal was territorial expansion at the expense of their neighbors. In ideological terms, the Axis described their goals as breaking the hegemony of the plutocratic Western powers and defending civilization from communism. The Axis championed a number of variants on fascism, militarism, conservatism and autarky. Creation of territorially contiguous autarkic empires was a common goal of all three major Axis powers.

==Economic resources==
The Axis population in 1938 was 258.9 million, while the Allied population (excluding the Soviet Union and the United States, which later joined the Allies) was 689.7 million. Thus the Allied powers outnumbered the Axis powers by 2.7 to 1. The leading Axis states had the following domestic populations: Germany 75.5 million (including 6.8 million from recently annexed Austria), Japan 71.9 million (excluding its colonies), and Italy 43.4 million (excluding its colonies). The United Kingdom (excluding its colonies) had a population of 47.5 million and France (excluding its colonies) 42 million.

The wartime gross domestic product (GDP) of the Axis was $911 billion at its highest in 1941 in international dollars by 1990 prices. The GDP of the Allied powers was $1,798 billion. The United States stood at $1,094 billion, more than the Axis combined.

The burden of the war upon participating countries has been measured through the percentage of gross national product (GNP) devoted to military expenditures. Nearly one-quarter of Germany&#x27;s GNP was committed to the war effort in 1939, and this rose to three-quarters of GNP in 1944, prior to the collapse of the economy. In 1939, Japan committed 22 percent of its GNP to its war effort in China; this rose to three-quarters of GNP in 1944. Italy did not mobilize its economy; its GNP committed to the war effort remained at prewar levels.

Italy and Japan lacked industrial capacity; their economies were small, dependent on international trade, external sources of fuel and other industrial resources. As a result, Italian and Japanese mobilization remained low, even by 1943.

Among the three major Axis powers, Japan had the lowest per capita income, while Germany and Italy had an income level comparable to the United Kingdom.

Romania&#x27;s oil gave the country a disproportionate importance in the global conflict. In 1940 and 1941, Romania supplied 94% and 75% of Germany&#x27;s oil imports respectively. Italy – which lacked both natural and synthetic output – was even more reliant on Romanian oil than Germany. The loss of Romania&#x27;s oil – following the country&#x27;s defection from the Axis in August 1944 – resulted in Hitler&#x27;s first admission that the war was lost.

==Major Axis powers==

===Germany===



====War justifications====
Hitler in 1941 described the outbreak of World War II as the fault of the intervention of Western powers against Germany during its war with Poland, describing it as the result of &quot;the European and American warmongers&quot;. Hitler had designs for Germany to become the dominant and leading state in the world, such as his intention for Germany&#x27;s capital of Berlin to become the &quot;Welthauptstadt&quot; (&quot;World Capital&quot;), renamed Germania. The German government also justified its actions by claiming that Germany inevitably needed to territorially expand because it was facing an overpopulation crisis that Hitler described: &quot;We are overpopulated and cannot feed ourselves from our own resources&quot;. Thus expansion was justified as an inevitable necessity to provide &quot;lebensraum&quot; (&quot;living space&quot;) for the German nation and end the country&#x27;s overpopulation within existing confined territory, and provide resources necessary to its people&#x27;s well-being. Since the 1920s, the Nazi Party publicly promoted the expansion of Germany into territories held by the Soviet Union.

Germany justified its war against Poland on the issues of German minority within Poland and Polish opposition to the incorporation of the ethnically German-majority Free City of Danzig into Germany. While Hitler and the Nazi party before taking power openly talked about destroying Poland and were hostile to Poles, after gaining power until February 1939 Hitler tried to conceal his true intentions towards Poland, and signed a 10-year Non-Aggression Pact in 1934, revealing his plans to only to his closest associates. Relations between Germany and Poland altered from the early to the late 1930s, as Germany sought rapprochement with Poland to avoid the risk of Poland entering the Soviet sphere of influence, and appealed to anti-Soviet sentiment in Poland. Hitler even tried to convince Poland to join the Anti-Comintern Pact. The Soviet Union in turn at this time competed with Germany for influence in Poland. At the same time Germany was preparing for a war with Poland and was secretly preparing the German minority in Poland for a war.

A diplomatic crisis erupted following Hitler demanding that the Free City of Danzig be annexed to Germany, as it was led by a Nazi government seeking annexation to Germany. Germany used legal precedents to justify its intervention against Poland and annexation of the Free City of Danzig (led by a local Nazi government that sought incorporation into Germany) in 1939. Poland rejected Germany&#x27;s demands and Germany in response prepared a general mobilization on the morning of 30 August 1939.

Germany justified its invasion of the Low Countries of Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands in May 1940 by claiming that it suspected that Britain and France were preparing to use the Low Countries to launch an invasion of the industrial Ruhr region of Germany. When war between Germany versus Britain and France appeared likely in May 1939, Hitler declared that the Netherlands and Belgium would need to be occupied, saying: &quot;Dutch and Belgian air bases must be occupied ... Declarations of neutrality must be ignored&quot;. In a conference with Germany&#x27;s military leaders on 23 November 1939, Hitler declared to the military leaders that &quot;We have an Achilles heel, the Ruhr&quot;, and said that &quot;If England and France push through Belgium and Holland into the Ruhr, we shall be in the greatest danger&quot;, and thus claimed that Belgium and the Netherlands had to be occupied by Germany to protect Germany from a British-French offensive against the Ruhr, irrespective of their claims to neutrality.

Germany&#x27;s invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941 involved issues of &quot;lebensraum&quot;, anti-communism, and Soviet foreign policy. After Germany invaded the Soviet Union in 1941, the Nazi regime&#x27;s stance towards an independent, territorially-reduced Russia was affected by pressure beginning in 1942 from the German Army on Hitler to endorse a &quot;Russian Liberation Army&quot; led by Andrey Vlasov. Initially the proposal to support an anti-communist Russian army was met with outright rejection by Hitler, however by 1944 as Germany faced mounting losses on the Eastern Front, Vlasov&#x27;s forces were recognized by Germany as an ally, particularly by Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler.

After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and the outbreak of war between Japan and the United States, Germany supported Japan by declaring war on the US. During the war Germany denounced the Atlantic Charter and the Lend-Lease Act that the US adopted to support the Allied powers prior to entry into the alliance, as imperialism directed at dominating and exploiting countries outside of the continental Americas. Hitler denounced American President Franklin D. Roosevelt&#x27;s invoking of the term &quot;freedom&quot; to describe US actions in the war, and accused the American meaning of &quot;freedom&quot; to be the freedom for democracy to exploit the world and the freedom for plutocrats within such democracy to exploit the masses.

====History====

At the end of World War I, German citizens felt that their country had been humiliated as a result of the Treaty of Versailles, which included a war guilt clause and forced Germany to pay enormous reparations payments and forfeit territories formerly controlled by the German Empire and all its colonies. The pressure of the reparations on the German economy led to hyperinflation during the early 1920s. In 1923 the French occupied the Ruhr region when Germany defaulted on its reparations payments. Although Germany began to improve economically in the mid-1920s, the Great Depression created more economic hardship and a rise in political forces that advocated radical solutions to Germany&#x27;s woes. The Nazis, under Hitler, promoted the nationalist stab-in-the-back legend stating that Germany had been betrayed by Jews and Communists. The party promised to rebuild Germany as a major power and create a Greater Germany that would include Alsace-Lorraine, Austria, Sudetenland, and other German-populated territories in Europe. The Nazis also aimed to occupy and colonize non-German territories in Poland, the Baltic states, and the Soviet Union, as part of the Nazi policy of seeking &quot;Lebensraum&quot; (&quot;living space&quot;) in Central and Eastern Europe.

Germany renounced the Versailles treaty and remilitarized the Rhineland in March 1936. Germany had already resumed conscription and announced the existence of a German air force, the Luftwaffe, and naval force, the Kriegsmarine in 1935. Germany annexed Austria in 1938, the Sudetenland from Czechoslovakia, and the Memel territory from Lithuania in 1939. Germany then invaded the rest of Czechoslovakia in 1939, creating the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia and the country of Slovakia.

On 23 August 1939, Germany and the Soviet Union signed the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, which contained a secret protocol dividing eastern Europe into spheres of influence. Germany&#x27;s invasion of its part of Poland under the Pact eight days later triggered the beginning of World War II. By the end of 1941, Germany occupied a large part of Europe and its military forces were fighting the Soviet Union, nearly capturing Moscow. However, crushing defeats at the Battle of Stalingrad and the Battle of Kursk devastated the German armed forces. This, combined with Western Allied landings in France and Italy, led to a three-front war that depleted Germany&#x27;s armed forces and resulted in Germany&#x27;s defeat in 1945.

====Occupied territories====
The Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia was created from the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia. Shortly after Germany annexed the Sudetenland region of Czechoslovakia, the Slovak Republic declared its independence from the rump Second Czechoslovak Republic. The new Slovak State allied itself with Germany. The remainder of the country was occupied by German military forces and organized into the Protectorate. Czech civil institutions were preserved but the Protectorate was considered within the sovereign territory of Germany.

The General Government was the name given to the territories of occupied Poland that were not directly annexed into German provinces, but like Bohemia and Moravia was considered within the sovereign territory of Germany by the Nazi authorities.

Reichskommissariats were established in the Netherlands, Belgium, and Norway, designated as places the &quot;Germanic&quot; populations of which were to be incorporated into the planned Greater Germanic Reich. By contrast the Reichskommissariats established in the east (Reichskommissariat Ostland in the Baltics, Reichskommissariat Ukraine in Ukraine) were established as colonies for settlement by Germans.

In Norway, under Reichskommissariat Norwegen, the Quisling regime, headed by Vidkun Quisling, was installed by the Germans as a client regime during the occupation, while king Haakon VII and the legal government were in exile. Quisling encouraged Norwegians to serve as volunteers in the Waffen-SS, collaborated in the deportation of Jews, and was responsible for the executions of members of the Norwegian resistance movement. About 45,000 Norwegian collaborators joined the pro-Nazi party &quot;Nasjonal Samling&quot; (National Union), and some police units helped arrest many Jews. However, Norway was one of the first countries where resistance during World War II was widespread before the turning point of the war in 1943. After the war, Quisling and other collaborators were executed. Quisling&#x27;s name has become an international eponym for traitor.

===Italy===
====War justifications====
&quot;Duce&quot; Benito Mussolini described Italy&#x27;s declaration of war against the Western Allies of Britain and France in June 1940 as the following: &quot;We are going to war against the plutocratic and reactionary democracies of the West who have invariably hindered the progress and often threatened the very existence of the Italian people&quot;. Italy condemned the Western powers for enacting sanctions on Italy in 1935 for its actions in the Second Italo-Ethiopian War that Italy claimed was a response to an act of Ethiopian aggression against tribesmen in Italian Eritrea in the Walwal incident of 1934. Italy, like Germany, also justified its actions by claiming that Italy needed to territorially expand to provide &quot;spazio vitale&quot; (&quot;vital space&quot;) for the Italian nation.

In October 1938 in the aftermath of the Munich Agreement, Italy demanded concessions from France to yield to Italy in Africa. Relations between Italy and France deteriorated with France&#x27;s refusal to accept Italy&#x27;s demands. France responded to Italy&#x27;s demands with threatening naval manoeuvres as a warning to Italy. As tensions between Italy and France grew, Hitler made a major speech on 30 January 1939 in which he promised German military support in the case of an unprovoked war against Italy.

Italy entered World War II on 10 June 1940. Italy justified its intervention against Greece in October 1940 on the allegation that the Kingdom of Greece was being used by Britain against Italy, Mussolini informed this to Hitler, saying: &quot;Greece is one of the main points of English maritime strategy in the Mediterranean&quot;.
Italy justified its intervention against Yugoslavia in April 1941 by appealing to both Italian irredentist claims and the fact of Albanian, Croatian, and Macedonian separatists not wishing to be part of Yugoslavia. Croatian separatism soared after the assassination of Croatian political leaders in the National Assembly of Yugoslavia in 1928 including the death of Stjepan Radić, and Italy endorsed Croatian separatist Ante Pavelić and his fascist Ustaše movement that was based and trained in Italy with the Fascist regime&#x27;s support prior to intervention against Yugoslavia.

====History====
The intention of the Fascist regime was to create a &quot;New Roman Empire&quot; in which Italy would dominate the Mediterranean. In 1935–1936 Italy invaded and annexed Ethiopia and the Fascist government proclaimed the creation of the &quot;Italian Empire&quot;. Protests by the League of Nations, especially the British, who had interests in that area, led to no serious action, although The League did try to enforce economic sanctions upon Italy, but to no avail. The incident highlighted French and British weakness, exemplified by their reluctance to alienate Italy and lose her as their ally. The limited actions taken by the Western powers pushed Mussolini&#x27;s Italy towards alliance with Hitler&#x27;s Germany anyway. In 1937 Italy left the League of Nations and joined the Anti-Comintern Pact, which had been signed by Germany and Japan the preceding year. In March/April 1939 Italian troops invaded and annexed Albania. Germany and Italy signed the Pact of Steel on May 22.
Italy was ill-prepared for war, in spite of the fact that it had continuously been involved in conflict since 1935, first with Ethiopia in 1935–1936 and then in the Spanish Civil War on the side of Francisco Franco&#x27;s Nationalists. 
Mussolini refused to heed warnings from his minister of exchange and currency, Felice Guarneri, who said that Italy&#x27;s actions in Ethiopia and Spain meant that Italy was on the verge of bankruptcy. By 1939 military expenditures by Britain and France far exceeded what Italy could afford. As a result of Italy&#x27;s economic difficulties its soldiers were poorly paid, often being poorly equipped and poorly supplied, and animosity arose between soldiers and class-conscious officers; these contributed to low morale amongst Italian soldiers.

By early 1940, Italy was still a non-belligerent, and Mussolini communicated to Hitler that Italy was not prepared to intervene soon. By March 1940, Mussolini decided that Italy would intervene, but the date was not yet chosen. His senior military leadership unanimously opposed the action because Italy was unprepared. No raw materials had been stockpiled and the reserves it did have would soon be exhausted, Italy&#x27;s industrial base was only one-tenth of Germany&#x27;s, and even with supplies the Italian military was not organized to provide the equipment needed to fight a modern war of a long duration. An ambitious rearmament program was impossible because of Italy&#x27;s limited reserves in gold and foreign currencies and lack of raw materials. Mussolini ignored the negative advice.

By 1941, Italy&#x27;s attempts to run an autonomous campaign from Germany&#x27;s, collapsed as a result of military setbacks in Greece, North Africa, and Eastern Africa; and the country became dependent and effectively subordinate to Germany. After the German-led invasion and occupation of Yugoslavia and Greece, that had both been targets of Italy&#x27;s war aims, Italy was forced to accept German dominance in the two occupied countries. Furthermore, by 1941, German forces in North Africa under Erwin Rommel effectively took charge of the military effort ousting Allied forces from the Italian colony of Libya, and German forces were stationed in Sicily in that year. Germany&#x27;s insolence towards Italy as an ally was demonstrated that year when Italy was pressured to send 350,000 &quot;guest workers&quot; to Germany who were used as forced labour. While Hitler was disappointed with the Italian military&#x27;s performance, he maintained overall favorable relations with Italy because of his personal friendship with Mussolini.

On 25 July 1943, following the Allied invasion of Sicily, King Victor Emmanuel III dismissed Mussolini, placed him under arrest, and began secret negotiations with the Western Allies. An armistice was signed on 8 September 1943, and four days later Mussolini was rescued by the Germans in Operation Oak and placed in charge of a puppet state called the Italian Social Republic (&quot;Repubblica Sociale Italiana&quot;/RSI, or &quot;Repubblica di Salò&quot;) in northern Italy. In order to liberate the country from the Germans and Fascists, Italy became a co-belligerent of the Allies; as result, the country descended in Civil War, with the Italian Co-Belligerent Army and the partisans, supported by the Allies, contended the Social Republic&#x27;s forces and its German allies. Some areas in Northern Italy were liberated from the Germans as late as May, 1945. Mussolini was killed by Communist partisans on 28 April 1945 while trying to escape to Switzerland.

====Colonies and dependencies====
===== In Europe =====

The Dodecanese Islands were an Italian dependency known as the Italian Islands of the Aegean from 1912 to 1943.

Montenegro was an Italian dependency from 1941 to 1943 known as the Governorate of Montenegro that was under the control of an Italian military governor. Initially, the Italians intended that Montenegro would become an &quot;independent&quot; state closely allied with Italy, reinforced through the strong dynastic links between Italy and Montenegro, as Queen Elena of Italy was a daughter of the last Montenegrin king Nicholas I. The Italian-backed Montenegrin nationalist Sekula Drljević and his followers attempted to create a Montenegrin state. On 12 July 1941, they proclaimed the &quot;Kingdom of Montenegro&quot; under the protection of Italy. In less than 24 hours, that triggered a general uprising against the Italians. Within three weeks, the insurgents managed to capture almost all the territory of Montenegro. Over 70,000 Royal Italian Army troops and 20,000 of Albanian and Muslim irregulars were deployed to suppress the rebellion. Drljevic was expelled from Montenegro in October 1941. Montenegro then came under full direct Italian control. With the Italian capitulation of 1943, Montenegro came directly under the control of Germany.

Politically and economically dominated by Italy from its creation in 1913, Albania was occupied by Italian military forces in 1939 as the Albanian king Zog l fled the country with his family. The Albanian parliament voted to offer the Albanian throne to the King of Italy, resulting in a personal union between the two countries.

===== In Africa =====
Italian East Africa was an Italian colony existing from 1936 to 1943. Prior to the invasion and annexation of Ethiopia into this united colony in 1936, Italy had two colonies, Eritrea and Somalia since the 1880s.

Libya was an Italian colony existing from 1912 to 1943. The northern portion of Libya was incorporated directly into Italy in 1939; however the region remained united as a colony under a colonial governor.

===Japan===

====War justifications====

The Japanese government justified its actions by claiming that it was seeking to unite East Asia under Japanese leadership in a Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere that would free East Asians from domination and rule by clients of Western powers. Japan invoked themes of Pan-Asianism and said that the Asian people needed to be free from Western influence.

The United States opposed the Second Sino-Japanese War, and recognized Chiang Kai-Shek&#x27;s Nationalist Government as the legitimate government of China. As a result, the United States sought to bring the Japanese war effort to a halt by imposing an embargo on all trade between the United States and Japan. Japan was dependent on the United States for 80 percent of its petroleum, and as a consequence the embargo resulted in an economic and military crisis for Japan, as Japan could not continue its war effort against China without access to petroleum.

In order to maintain its military campaign in China with the major loss of petroleum trade with the United States, Japan saw the best means to secure an alternative source of petroleum in the petroleum-rich and natural-resources-rich Southeast Asia. This threat of retaliation by Japan to the total trade embargo by the United States was known by the American government, including American Secretary of State Cordell Hull who was negotiating with the Japanese to avoid a war, fearing that the total embargo would pre-empt a Japanese attack on the Dutch East Indies.

Japan identified the United States Pacific Fleet based in Pearl Harbor Naval Base as the principal threat to its designs to invade and capture Southeast Asia. Thus Japan initiated the attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 as a means to inhibit an American response to the invasion of Southeast Asia, and buy time to allow Japan to consolidate itself with these resources to engage in a total war against the United States, and force the United States to accept Japan&#x27;s acquisitions. On 7 December 1941 Japan declared war on the United States and the British Empire.

====History====



The Empire of Japan, a constitutional monarchy with Hirohito as its Emperor, was the principal Axis power in Asia and the Pacific. Under the emperor were a political cabinet and the Imperial General Headquarters, with two chiefs of staff. By 1945 the Emperor of Japan was more than a symbolic leader; he played a major role in devising a strategy to keep himself on the throne.

At its peak, Japan&#x27;s Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere included Manchuria, Inner Mongolia, large parts of China, Malaysia, French Indochina, the Dutch East Indies, the Philippines, Burma, a small part of India, and various Pacific Islands in the central Pacific.

As a result of the internal discord and economic downturn of the 1920s, militaristic elements set Japan on a path of expansionism. As the Japanese home islands lacked natural resources needed for growth, Japan planned to establish hegemony in Asia and become self-sufficient by acquiring territories with abundant natural resources. Japan&#x27;s expansionist policies alienated it from other countries in the League of Nations and by the mid-1930s brought it closer to Germany and Italy, who had both pursued similar expansionist policies. Cooperation between Japan and Germany began with the Anti-Comintern Pact, in which the two countries agreed to ally to challenge any attack by the Soviet Union.

Japan entered into conflict against the Chinese in 1937. The Japanese invasion and occupation of parts of China resulted in numerous atrocities against civilians, such as the Nanjing Massacre and the Three Alls Policy. The Japanese also fought skirmishes with Soviet–Mongolian forces in Manchukuo in 1938 and 1939. Japan sought to avoid war with the Soviet Union by signing a non-aggression pact with it in 1941.


Japan&#x27;s military leaders were divided on diplomatic relationships with Germany and Italy and the attitude towards the United States. The Imperial Japanese Army was in favour of war with the United States, but the Imperial Japanese Navy was generally strongly opposed. When Prime Minister of Japan General Hideki Tojo refused American demands that Japan withdraw its military forces from China, a confrontation became more likely. War with the United States was being discussed within the Japanese government by 1940. Commander of the Combined Fleet Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto was outspoken in his opposition, especially after the signing of the Tripartite Pact, saying on 14 October 1940: &quot;To fight the United States is like fighting the whole world. But it has been decided. So I will fight the best I can. Doubtless I shall die on board [his flagship]. Meanwhile, Tokyo will be burnt to the ground three times. Konoe and others will be torn to pieces by the revengeful people, I [shouldn&#x27;t] wonder. &quot; In October and November 1940, Yamamoto communicated with Navy Minister Oikawa, and stated, &quot;Unlike the pre-Tripartite days, great determination is required to make certain that we avoid the danger of going to war. &quot;

With the European powers focused on the war in Europe, Japan sought to acquire their colonies. In 1940 Japan responded to the German invasion of France by occupying northern French Indochina. The Vichy France regime, a &quot;de facto&quot; ally of Germany, accepted the takeover. The allied forces did not respond with war. However, the United States instituted an embargo against Japan in 1941 because of the continuing war in China. This cut off Japan&#x27;s supply of scrap metal and oil needed for industry, trade, and the war effort.

To isolate the US forces stationed in the Philippines and to reduce US naval power, the Imperial General Headquarters ordered an attack on the US naval base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, on 7 December 1941. They also invaded Malaya and Hong Kong. Initially achieving a series of victories, by 1943 the Japanese forces were driven back towards the home islands. The Pacific War lasted until the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945. The Soviets formally declared war in August 1945 and engaged Japanese forces in Manchuria and northeast China.

====Colonies and dependencies====

Taiwan was a Japanese dependency established in 1895. Korea was a Japanese protectorate and dependency formally established by the Japan–Korea Treaty of 1910.

The South Seas Mandate were territories granted to Japan in 1919 in the peace agreements of World War I, that designated to Japan the German South Pacific islands. Japan received these as a reward by the Allies of World War I, when Japan was then allied against Germany.

Japan occupied the Dutch East Indies during the war. Japan planned to transform these territories into a client state of Indonesia and sought alliance with Indonesian nationalists including future Indonesian President Sukarno, however these efforts did not deliver the creation of an Indonesian state until after Japan&#x27;s surrender.

==Other Tripartite Pact signatories==
In addition to the three major Axis powers, six other countries signed the Tripartite Pact as its member states. Of the additional countries, Hungary, Slovakia, Bulgaria, the Independent State of Croatia, and Romania participated in various Axis military operations with their national armed forces, while the sixth, Yugoslavia, saw its Tripartite signatory government overthrown earlier in a coup merely days after it signed the Pact, and the membership was reversed.

===Hungary===

The Kingdom of Hungary, ruled by Regent Admiral Miklós Horthy, was the first country apart from Germany, Italy, and Japan to adhere to the Tripartite Pact, signing the agreement on 20 November 1940.

Political instability plagued the country until Miklós Horthy, a Hungarian nobleman and Austro-Hungarian naval officer, became regent in 1920. The vast majority of the Hungarians desired to recover former territories of the Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen lost through the Treaty of Trianon. During the government of Gyula Gömbös, Hungary drew closer to Germany and Italy largely because of a shared desire to revise the peace settlements made after World War I. Many people sympathized with the anti-Semitic policy of the Nazi regime. Hungary refused to participate in Nazi Germany&#x27;s planned invasion of Czechoslovakia during the Sudenten Crisis, but after the Munich Agreement carried out a diplomatic rapprochement in order to avoid Germany developing too close of an alliance with Hungary&#x27;s rival Romania. Due to its supportive stance towards Germany and the new efforts in the international policy, Hungary gained favourable territorial settlements by the First Vienna Award, after the breakup of Czechoslovakia occupied and annexed the remainder of Carpathian Ruthenia and in 1940 received Northern Transylvania from Romania via the Second Vienna Award. Hungarians permitted German troops to transit through their territory during the invasion of Yugoslavia, and Hungarian forces joined the military operations after the proclamation of the Independent State of Croatia. Parts of the former Yugoslavia were annexed to Hungary; the United Kingdom immediately broke off diplomatic relations in response.
Although Hungary did not initially participate in the German invasion of the Soviet Union, Hungary and the Soviet Union became belligerents on 27 June 1941. Over 500,000 soldiers served on the Eastern Front. All five of Hungary&#x27;s field armies ultimately participated in the war against the Soviet Union; a significant contribution was made by the Hungarian Second Army.

On 25 November 1941, Hungary was one of thirteen signatories to the renewed Anti-Comintern Pact. Hungarian troops, like their Axis counterparts, were involved in numerous actions against the Soviets. By the end of 1943, the Soviets had gained the upper hand and the Germans were retreating. The Hungarian Second Army was destroyed in fighting on the Voronezh Front, on the banks of the Don River.

Prior to the German occupation within the area of Hungary around 63,000 Jews perished. Afterwards, in late 1944, 437,000 Jews were deported to Auschwitz-Birkenau, most of them to their deaths. Overall, Hungarian Jews suffered close to 560,000 casualties.

Relations between Germany and the regency of Miklós Horthy collapsed in 1944 when Horthy attempted to negotiate a peace agreement with the Soviets and jump out of the war without German approval. Horthy was forced to abdicate after German commandos, led by Colonel Otto Skorzeny, held his son hostage as part of Operation Panzerfaust. Hungary was reorganized following Horthy&#x27;s abdication in December 1944 into a totalitarian regime called the Government of National Unity, led by Ferenc Szálasi. He had been Prime Minister of Hungary since October 1944 and was leader of the Hungarist Arrow Cross Party. Its jurisdiction was effectively limited to an ever-narrowing band of territory in central Hungary, around Budapest since by the time they took power the Red Army was already far inside the country. Nonetheless, the Arrow Cross rule, short-lived as it was, was brutal. In fewer than three months, Arrow Cross death squads killed as many as 38,000 Hungarian Jews. Arrow Cross officers helped Adolf Eichmann re-activate the deportation proceedings from which the Jews of Budapest had thus far been spared, sending some 80,000 Jews out of the city on slave labour details and many more straight to death camps. Most of them died, including many who were murdered outright after the end of the fighting as they were returning home. Days after the Szálasi government took power, the capital of Budapest was surrounded by the Soviet Red Army. German and Hungarian forces tried to hold off the Soviet advance but failed. After fierce fighting, Budapest was taken by the Soviets. A number of pro-German Hungarians retreated to Italy and Germany, where they fought until the end of the war.

In March 1945, Szálasi fled to Germany as the leader of a government in exile, until the surrender of Germany in May 1945.

===Romania===


With the exception of Germany and Italy, Romania was the only country where a Fascist movement came to power without foreign assistance. When war erupted in Europe, the economy of the Kingdom of Romania was already subordinated to the interests of Nazi Germany through a treaty signed in the spring of 1939. Nevertheless, the country had not totally abandoned pro-British sympathies. Romania had also been allied to the Poles for most of the interwar era. Following the invasion of Poland by Germany and the Soviet Union, and the German conquest of France and the Low Countries, Romania found itself increasingly isolated; meanwhile, pro-German and pro-Fascist elements began to grow.

The August 1939 Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact between Germany and the Soviet Union contained a secret protocol ceding Bessarabia, and Northern Bukovina to the Soviet Union. On June 28, 1940, the Soviet Union occupied and annexed Bessarabia, as well as part of northern Romania and the Hertsa region. On 30 August 1940, as a result of the German–Italian arbitrated Second Vienna Award Romania had to cede Northern Transylvania to Hungary. Southern Dobruja was ceded to Bulgaria in September 1940. In an effort to appease the Fascist elements within the country and obtain German protection, King Carol II appointed the General Ion Antonescu as Prime Minister on September 6, 1940.
Two days later, Antonescu forced the king to abdicate and installed the king&#x27;s young son Michael (Mihai) on the throne, then declared himself &quot;Conducător&quot; (&quot;Leader&quot;) with dictatorial powers. The National Legionary State was proclaimed on 14 September, with the Iron Guard ruling together with Antonescu as the sole legal political movement in Romania. Under King Michael I and the military government of Antonescu, Romania signed the Tripartite Pact on November 23, 1940. German troops entered the country on 10 October 1941, officially to train the Romanian Army. Hitler&#x27;s directive to the troops on 10 October had stated that &quot;it is necessary to avoid even the slightest semblance of military occupation of Romania&quot;. The entrance of German troops in Romania determined Italian dictator Benito Mussolini to launch an invasion of Greece, starting the Greco-Italian War. Having secured Hitler&#x27;s approval in January 1941, Antonescu ousted the Iron Guard from power.

Romania was subsequently used as a platform for invasions of Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union. Despite not being involved militarily in the Invasion of Yugoslavia, Romania requested that Hungarian troops not operate in the Banat. Paulus thus modified the Hungarian plan and kept their troops west of the Tisza.

Romania joined the German-led invasion of the Soviet Union on June 22, 1941. Antonescu was the only foreign leader Hitler consulted on military matters and the two would meet no less than ten times throughout the war. Romania re-captured Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina during Operation Munchen before conquering further Soviet territory and establishing the Transnistria Governorate. After the Siege of Odessa, the city became the capital of the Governorate. Romanian troops fought their way into the Crimea alongside German troops and contributed significantly to the Siege of Sevastopol. Later, Romanian mountain troops joined the German campaign in the Caucasus, reaching as far as Nalchik. After suffering devastating losses at Stalingrad, Romanian officials began secretly negotiating peace conditions with the Allies.
Romania&#x27;s military industry was small but versatile, able to copy and produce thousands of French, Soviet, German, British, and Czechoslovak weapons systems, as well as producing capable original products. The Romanian Navy also built sizable warships, such as the minelayer and the submarines and . Hundreds of originally-designed Romanian Air Force aircraft were also produced, such as the fighter IAR-80 and the light bomber IAR-37. The country had built armored fighting vehicles as well, most notably the Mareșal tank destroyer, that likely influenced the design of the German Hetzer. Romania had also been a major power in the oil industry since the 1800s. It was one of the largest producers in Europe and the Ploiești oil refineries provided about 30% of all Axis oil production. British historian Dennis Deletant has asserted that Romania&#x27;s crucial contributions to the Axis war effort, including having the third largest Axis army in Europe and sustaining the German war effort through oil and other materiel, meant that it was &quot;on a par with Italy as a principal ally of Germany and not in the category of a minor Axis satellite&quot;. Another British historian, Mark Axworthy, believes that Romania could even be considered to have had the second most important Axis army of Europe, even more so than that of Italy.

Under Antonescu Romania was a fascist dictatorship and a totalitarian state. Between 45,000 and 60,000 Jews were killed in Bukovina and Bessarabia by Romanian and German troops in 1941. According to Wilhelm Filderman at least 150,000 Jews of Bessarabia and Bukovina, died under the Antonescu regime (both those deported and those who remained). Overall, approximately 250,000 Jews under Romanian jurisdiction died.
By 1943, the tide began to turn. The Soviets pushed further west, retaking Ukraine and eventually launching an unsuccessful invasion of eastern Romania in the spring of 1944. Romanian troops in the Crimea helped repulse initial Soviet landings, but eventually all of the peninsula was re-conquered by Soviet forces and the Romanian Navy evacuated over 100,000 German and Romanian troops, an achievement which earned Romanian Admiral Horia Macellariu the Knight&#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross. During the Jassy-Kishinev Offensive of August 1944, Romania switched sides on August 23, 1944. Romanian troops then fought alongside the Soviet Army until the end of the war, reaching as far as Czechoslovakia and Austria.

====Germany&#x27;s main European ally (September 1943 – August 1944)====
After the September 1943 Armistice of Cassibile with Italy, Romania became the second Axis Power in Europe. The Romanians shared in the spoils of Operation Achse, 5 CB-class midget submarines in the Black Sea being transferred to the Romanian Navy. Romania also captured 496 Italians, mostly naval personnel (2 of them later died). Before the month was out, Germany had agreed to systematically supply the Romanian Army with German military vehicles, via the Olivenbaum I-III and Quittenbaum I programs. Deliveries started in November 1943, and by August 1944, Germany had supplied Romania with 10 times more armored vehicles (Panzer III, Panzer IV and Sturmgeschütz III) than during the entire pre-Cassibile period. Having acquired the license to produce the Messerschmitt Bf 109, Romania planned to assemble 75 from German parts. Deliveries began in May 1944, but only 6 were completed before Romania left the Axis in August 1944. Eleven more were completed by the end of the war with the remaining 58 completed after the war. In 1944, Romania had also gained access to certain &quot;Wunderwaffen&quot;, such as the Werfer-Granate 21. The first Romanian-made Fiesler Storch was completed in October 1943, followed by 9 more by May 1944. From March 1944, Germany also contributed to the design and construction of the M-05 and M-06 prototypes of the Mareșal tank destroyer: Alkett contributed to the Romanian design team and Telefunken radios along with Böhler armor were provided. The 75 mm Reșița gun (production started at the end of 1943) used the projectile chamber of the German Pak 40. Technology transfers between the two countries were not necessarily one-way, however. On 6 January 1944, Antonescu showed Hitler the plans of the M-04 prototype of the Mareșal tank destroyer. In May 1944, Lieutenant-Colonel Ventz from the &quot;Waffenamt&quot; acknowledged that the &quot;Hetzer&quot; had followed the Romanian design. German-led Army Group South Ukraine could not take major operational decisions without securing Ion Antonescu&#x27;s approval, even as late as 22 August 1944 (the day before he was dismissed). An entire German army (the 6th) came under Romanian command in May 1944, when it became part of Romanian general Petre Dumitrescu&#x27;s &quot;Armeegruppe&quot;. For the first time in the war, German commanders came under the actual (rather than nominal) command of their foreign allies. This Romanian-led army group had 24 divisions of which 17 were German.

===Slovakia===

The Slovak Republic under President Josef Tiso signed the Tripartite Pact on 24 November 1940.

Slovakia had been closely aligned with Germany almost immediately from its declaration of independence from Czechoslovakia on 14 March 1939. Slovakia entered into a treaty of protection with Germany on 23 March 1939.

Slovak troops joined the German invasion of Poland, having interest in Spiš and Orava. Those two regions, along with Cieszyn Silesia, had been disputed between Poland and Czechoslovakia since 1918. The Poles fully annexed them following the Munich Agreement. After the invasion of Poland, Slovakia reclaimed control of those territories.
Slovakia invaded Poland alongside German forces, contributing 50,000 men at this stage of the war.

Slovakia declared war on the Soviet Union in 1941 and signed the revived Anti-Comintern Pact in 1941. Slovak troops fought on Germany&#x27;s Eastern Front, furnishing Germany with two divisions totaling 80,000 men. Slovakia declared war on the United Kingdom and the United States in 1942.

Slovakia was spared German military occupation until the Slovak National Uprising, which began on 29 August 1944, and was almost immediately crushed by the Waffen SS and Slovak troops loyal to Josef Tiso.

After the war, Tiso was executed and Slovakia once again became part of Czechoslovakia. The border with Poland was shifted back to the pre-war state.

===Bulgaria===

The Tsardom of Bulgaria was ruled by Тsar Boris III when it signed the Tripartite Pact on 1 March 1941. Bulgaria had been on the losing side in the First World War and sought a return of what the Bulgarian leadership saw as lost ethnically and historically Bulgarian territories, specifically in Macedonia and Thrace (divided between the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, the Kingdom of Greece, and Turkey). During the 1930s, because of traditional right-wing elements, Bulgaria drew closer to Nazi Germany. In 1940 Germany pressured Romania to sign the Treaty of Craiova, returning to Bulgaria the region of Southern Dobrudja, which it had lost in 1913. The Germans also promised Bulgaria – if it joined the Axis – an enlargement of its territory to the borders specified in the Treaty of San Stefano.

Bulgaria participated in the Axis invasion of Yugoslavia and Greece by letting German troops attack from its territory and sent troops to Greece on April 20. As a reward, the Axis powers allowed Bulgaria to occupy parts of both countriessouthern and south-eastern Yugoslavia (Vardar Banovina) and north-eastern Greece (parts of Greek Macedonia and Greek Thrace). The Bulgarian forces in these areas spent the following years fighting various nationalist groups and resistance movements. Despite German pressure, Bulgaria did not take part in the Axis invasion of the Soviet Union and actually never declared war on the Soviet Union. The Bulgarian Navy was nonetheless involved in a number of skirmishes with the Soviet Black Sea Fleet, which attacked Bulgarian shipping.

Following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, the Bulgarian government declared war on the Western Allies. This action remained largely symbolic (at least from the Bulgarian perspective), until August 1943, when Bulgarian air defense and air force attacked Allied bombers, returning (heavily damaged) from a mission over the Romanian oil refineries. This turned into a disaster for the citizens of Sofia and other major Bulgarian cities, which were heavily bombed by the Allies in the winter of 1943–1944.

On 2 September 1944, as the Red Army approached the Bulgarian border, a new Bulgarian government came to power and sought peace with the Allies, expelled the few remaining German troops, and declared neutrality. These measures however did not prevent the Soviet Union from declaring war on Bulgaria on 5 September, and on 8 September the Red Army marched into the country, meeting no resistance. This was followed by the coup d&#x27;état of 9 September 1944, which brought a government of the pro-Soviet Fatherland Front to power. After this, the Bulgarian army (as part of the Red Army&#x27;s 3rd Ukrainian Front) fought the Germans in Yugoslavia and Hungary, sustaining numerous casualties. Despite this, the Paris Peace Treaty treated Bulgaria as one of the defeated countries. Bulgaria was allowed to keep Southern Dobruja, but had to give up all claims to Greek and Yugoslav territory.

=== Independent State of Croatia ===

On 10 April 1941, the so-called Independent State of Croatia (&quot;Nezavisna Država Hrvatska&quot;, or NDH), an installed German–Italian puppet state, co-signed the Tripartite Pact. The NDH remained a member of the Axis until the end of Second World War, its forces fighting for Germany even after its territory had been overrun by Yugoslav Partisans. On 16 April 1941, Ante Pavelić, a Croatian nationalist and one of the founders of the Ustaše (&quot;Croatian Liberation Movement&quot;), was proclaimed &quot;Poglavnik&quot; (leader) of the new regime.

Initially the Ustaše had been heavily influenced by Italy. They were actively supported by Mussolini&#x27;s National Fascist Party regime in Italy, which gave the movement training grounds to prepare for war against Yugoslavia, as well as accepting Pavelić as an exile and allowing him to reside in Rome. In 1941 during the Italian invasion of Greece, Mussolini requested that Germany invade Yugoslavia to save the Italian forces in Greece. Hitler reluctantly agreed; Yugoslavia was invaded and the NDH was created. Pavelić led a delegation to Rome and offered the crown of the NDH to an Italian prince of the House of Savoy, who was crowned Tomislav II. The next day, Pavelić signed the Contracts of Rome with Mussolini, ceding Dalmatia to Italy and fixing the permanent borders between the NDH and Italy. Italian armed forces were allowed to control all of the coastline of the NDH, effectively giving Italy total control of the Adriatic coastline. When the King of Italy ousted Mussolini from power and Italy capitulated, the NDH became completely under German influence.

The platform of the Ustaše movement proclaimed that Croatians had been oppressed by the Serb-dominated Kingdom of Yugoslavia, and that Croatians deserved to have an independent nation after years of domination by foreign empires. The Ustaše perceived Serbs to be racially inferior to Croats and saw them as infiltrators who were occupying Croatian lands. They saw the extermination and expulsion or deportation of Serbs as necessary to racially purify Croatia. While part of Yugoslavia, many Croatian nationalists violently opposed the Serb-dominated Yugoslav monarchy, and assassinated Alexander I of Yugoslavia, together with the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization. Ustashe forces fought against communist Yugoslav Partisan guerrilla throughout the war.

The Ustaše regime lacked general support among Croats and never accrued any significant support among the populace. The Ustaše regime was backed by parts of the Croat population that during the interwar period had felt oppressed in the Serb-led Yugoslavia. Most of the support it had initially gained by creating a Croatian national state was lost because of the brutal practices it used.

Upon coming to power, Pavelić formed the Croatian Home Guard (&quot;Hrvatsko domobranstvo&quot;) as the official military force of the NDH. Originally authorized at 16,000 men, it grew to a peak fighting force of 130,000. The Croatian Home Guard included an air force and navy, although its navy was restricted in size by the Contracts of Rome. In addition to the Croatian Home Guard, Pavelić was also the supreme commander of the Ustaše militia, although all NDH military units were generally under the command of the German or Italian formations in their area of operations.

The Ustaše government declared war on the Soviet Union, signed the Anti-Comintern Pact of 1941, and sent troops to Germany&#x27;s Eastern Front. Ustaše militia were garrisoned in the Balkans, battling the communist partisans.

The Ustaše government applied racial laws on Serbs, Jews, and Romani people, as well as targeting those opposed to the fascist regime, and after June 1941 deported them to the Jasenovac concentration camp or to Nazi concentration camps in Poland. The racial laws were enforced by the Ustaše militia. The exact number of victims of the Ustaše regime is uncertain due to the destruction of documents and varying numbers given by historians. According to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, D.C., between 320,000 and 340,000 Serbs were killed in the NDH.

===Yugoslavia (two-day membership)===
Yugoslavia was largely surrounded by members of the pact and now bordered the German Reich. From late 1940 Hitler sought a non-aggression pact with Yugoslavia. In February 1941, Hitler called for Yugoslavia&#x27;s accession to the Tripartite Pact, but the Yugoslav government delayed. In March, divisions of the German army arrived at the Bulgarian-Yugoslav border and permission was sought for them to pass through to attack Greece. On 25 March 1941, fearing that Yugoslavia would be invaded otherwise, the Yugoslav government signed the Tripartite Pact with significant reservations. Unlike other Axis powers, Yugoslavia was not obliged to provide military assistance, nor to provide its territory for Axis to move military forces during the war. Less than two days later, after demonstrations in the streets of Belgrade, Prince Paul and the government were removed from office by a coup d&#x27;état. Seventeen-year-old King Peter was declared to be of age. The new Yugoslav government under General Dušan Simović, refused to ratify Yugoslavia&#x27;s signing of the Tripartite Pact, and started negotiations with Great Britain and Soviet Union. Winston Churchill commented that &quot;Yugoslavia has found its soul&quot;; however, Hitler invaded and quickly took control.

== Anti-Comintern Pact signatories ==
Some countries signed the Anti-Comintern Pact but not the Tripartite Pact. As such their adherence to the Axis may have been less than that of Tripartite Pact signatories. Some of these states were officially at war with members of the Allied powers, others remained neutral in the war and sent only volunteers. Signing the Anti-Comintern Pact was seen as &quot;a litmus test of loyalty&quot; by the Nazi leadership.

===China (Reorganized National Government of China)===

During the Second Sino-Japanese War, Japan advanced from its bases in Manchuria to occupy much of East and Central China. Several Japanese puppet states were organized in areas occupied by the Imperial Japanese Armed Forces, including the Provisional Government of the Republic of China at Beijing, which was formed in 1937, and the Reformed Government of the Republic of China at Nanjing, which was formed in 1938. These governments were merged into the Reorganized National Government of China at Nanjing on 29 March 1940. Wang Jingwei became head of state. The government was to be run along the same lines as the Nationalist regime and adopted its symbols.

The Nanjing Government had no real power; its main role was to act as a propaganda tool for the Japanese. The Nanjing Government concluded agreements with Japan and Manchukuo, authorising Japanese occupation of China and recognising the independence of Manchukuo under Japanese protection. The Nanjing Government signed the Anti-Comintern Pact of 1941 and declared war on the United States and the United Kingdom on 9 January 1943.

The government had a strained relationship with the Japanese from the beginning. Wang&#x27;s insistence on his regime being the true Nationalist government of China and in replicating all the symbols of the Kuomintang led to frequent conflicts with the Japanese, the most prominent being the issue of the regime&#x27;s flag, which was identical to that of the Republic of China.

The worsening situation for Japan from 1943 onwards meant that the Nanjing Army was given a more substantial role in the defence of occupied China than the Japanese had initially envisaged. The army was almost continuously employed against the communist New Fourth Army. Wang Jingwei died on 10 November 1944, and was succeeded by his deputy, Chen Gongbo. Chen had little influence; the real power behind the regime was Zhou Fohai, the mayor of Shanghai. Wang&#x27;s death dispelled what little legitimacy the regime had. On 9 September 1945, following the defeat of Japan, the area was surrendered to General He Yingqin, a nationalist general loyal to Chiang Kai-shek. Chen Gongbo was tried and executed in 1946.

===Denmark===
Denmark was occupied by Germany after April 1940 and never joined the Axis. On 31 May 1939, Denmark and Germany signed a treaty of non-aggression, which did not contain any military obligations for either party. On April 9, Germany attacked Scandinavia, and the speed of the German invasion of Denmark prevented King Christian X and the Danish government from going into exile. They had to accept &quot;protection by the Reich&quot; and the stationing of German forces in exchange for nominal independence. Denmark coordinated its foreign policy with Germany, extending diplomatic recognition to Axis collaborator and puppet regimes, and breaking diplomatic relations with the Allied governments-in-exile. Denmark broke diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union and signed the Anti-Comintern Pact in 1941. However the United States and Britain ignored Denmark and worked with Henrik Kauffmann Denmark&#x27;s ambassador in the US when it came to dealings about using Iceland, Greenland, and the Danish merchant fleet against Germany.

In 1941 Danish Nazis set up the &quot;Frikorps Danmark&quot;. Thousands of volunteers fought and many died as part of the German Army on the Eastern Front. Denmark sold agricultural and industrial products to Germany and made loans for armaments and fortifications. The German presence in Denmark included the construction of part of the Atlantic Wall fortifications which Denmark paid for and was never reimbursed.

The Danish protectorate government lasted until 29 August 1943, when the cabinet resigned after the regularly scheduled and largely free election concluding the Folketing&#x27;s current term. The Germans imposed martial law following Operation Safari, and Danish collaboration continued on an administrative level, with the Danish bureaucracy functioning under German command. The Royal Danish Navy scuttled 32 of its larger ships; Germany seized 64 ships and later raised and refitted 15 of the sunken vessels. 13 warships escaped to Sweden and formed a Danish naval flotilla in exile. Sweden allowed formation of a Danish military brigade in exile; it did not see combat. The Danish resistance movement was active in sabotage and issuing underground newspapers and blacklists of collaborators.

===Finland===
Although Finland never signed the Tripartite Pact, it fought against the Soviet Union alongside Germany in the 1941–44 Continuation War, during which the official position of the wartime Finnish government was that Finland was a co-belligerent of the Germans whom they described as &quot;brothers-in-arms&quot;. Finland did sign the revived Anti-Comintern Pact of November 1941. Finland signed a peace treaty with the Allied powers in 1947 which described Finland as having been &quot;an ally of Hitlerite Germany&quot; during the continuation war. As such, Finland was the only democracy to join the Axis. Finland&#x27;s relative independence from Germany put it in the most advantageous position of all the minor Axis powers. Finland was unusual in the Axis in its relative lack of participation in the Holocaust, and its lack of a fascist regime.

Whilst Finland&#x27;s relationship with Nazi Germany during the Continuation War remains controversial within Finland, in a 2008 survey of 28 Finnish historians, 16 agreed that Finland had been an ally of Nazi Germany, with only 6 disagreeing.

The August 1939 Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact between Germany and the Soviet Union contained a secret protocol dividing much of eastern Europe and assigning Finland to the Soviet sphere of influence. After unsuccessfully attempting to force territorial and other concessions on the Finns, the Soviet Union invaded Finland in November 1939, launching the Winter War, intending to establish a communist puppet government in Finland. The conflict threatened Germany&#x27;s iron-ore supplies and offered the prospect of Allied interference in the region. Despite Finnish resistance, a peace treaty was signed in March 1940, wherein Finland ceded some key territory to the Soviet Union, including the Karelian Isthmus, containing Finland&#x27;s second-largest city, Viipuri, and the critical defensive structure of the Mannerheim Line. After this war, Finland sought protection and support from the United Kingdom and non-aligned Sweden, but was thwarted by Soviet and German actions. This resulted in Finland being drawn closer to Germany, first with the intent of enlisting German support as a counterweight to thwart continuing Soviet pressure, and later to help regain lost territories.

In the opening days of Operation Barbarossa, Germany&#x27;s invasion of the Soviet Union, Finland permitted German planes returning from mine dropping runs over Kronstadt and Neva River to refuel at Finnish airfields before returning to bases in East Prussia. In retaliation, the Soviet Union launched a major air offensive against Finnish Air Force bases and towns, which resulted in a Finnish declaration of war against the Soviet Union on 25 June 1941. The Finnish conflict with the Soviet Union is generally referred to as the Continuation War.
Finland&#x27;s main objective was to regain territory lost to the Soviet Union in the Winter War. However, on 10 July 1941, Field Marshal Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim issued an Order of the Day that contained a formulation understood internationally as a Finnish territorial interest in Russian Karelia.

Diplomatic relations between the United Kingdom and Finland were severed on 1 August 1941, after the British Royal Air Force bombed German forces in the Finnish village and port of Petsamo. The United Kingdom repeatedly called on Finland to cease its offensive against the Soviet Union, and declared war on Finland on 6 December 1941, although no other military operations followed. War was never declared between Finland and the United States, though relations were severed between the two countries in 1944 as a result of the Ryti-Ribbentrop Agreement.

Finland maintained command of its armed forces and pursued war objectives independently of Germany. Germans and Finns did work closely together during Operation Silver Fox, a joint offensive against Murmansk. Finland took part in the Siege of Leningrad. Finland was one of Germany&#x27;s most important allies in its war with the USSR.

The relationship between Finland and Germany was also affected by the Ryti-Ribbentrop Agreement, which was presented as a German condition for help with munitions and air support, as the Soviet offensive coordinated with D-Day threatened Finland with complete occupation. The agreement, signed by President Risto Ryti but never ratified by the Finnish Parliament, bound Finland not to seek a separate peace.

After Soviet offensives were fought to a standstill, Ryti&#x27;s successor as president, Marshal Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim, dismissed the agreement and opened secret negotiations with the Soviets, which resulted in a ceasefire on 4 September and the Moscow Armistice on 19 September 1944. Under the terms of the armistice, Finland was obliged to expel German troops from Finnish territory, which resulted in the Lapland War.

===Manchuria (Manchukuo)===


Manchukuo, in the northeast region of China, had been a Japanese puppet state in Manchuria since the 1930s. It was nominally ruled by Puyi, the last Chinese Emperor of the Qing Dynasty, but was in fact controlled by the Japanese military, in particular the Kwantung Army. While Manchukuo ostensibly was a state for ethnic Manchus, the region had a Han Chinese majority.

Following the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931, the independence of Manchukuo was proclaimed on 18 February 1932, with Puyi as head of state. He was proclaimed the Emperor of Manchukuo a year later. The new Manchu nation was recognized by 23 of the League of Nations&#x27; 80 members. Germany, Italy, and the Soviet Union were among the major powers who recognised Manchukuo. Other countries who recognized the State were the Dominican Republic, Costa Rica, and El Salvador. Manchukuo was also recognised by the other Japanese allies and puppet states, including Mengjiang, the Burmese government of Ba Maw, Thailand, the Wang Jingwei regime, and the Indian government of Subhas Chandra Bose. The League of Nations later declared in 1934 that Manchuria lawfully remained a part of China. This precipitated Japanese withdrawal from the League. The Manchukuoan state ceased to exist after the Soviet invasion of Manchuria in 1945.

Manchukuo signed the Anti-Comintern Pact in 1939, but never signed the Tripartite Pact.

===Spain===


&quot;Caudillo&quot; Francisco Franco&#x27;s Spanish State gave moral, economic, and military assistance to the Axis powers, while nominally maintaining neutrality. Franco described Spain as a member of the Axis and signed the Anti-Comintern Pact in 1941 with Hitler and Mussolini. Members of the ruling Falange party in Spain held irredentist designs on Gibraltar. Falangists also supported Spanish colonial acquisition of the Tangier International Zone, French Morocco and northwestern French Algeria. In addition, Spain held ambitions on former Spanish colonies in Latin America. In June 1940 the Spanish government approached Germany to propose an alliance in exchange for Germany recognizing Spain&#x27;s territorial aims: the annexation of the Oran Province of Algeria, the incorporation of all Morocco, the extension of Spanish Sahara southward to the twentieth parallel, and the incorporation of French Cameroons into Spanish Guinea. Spain invaded and occupied the Tangier International Zone, maintaining its occupation until 1945. The occupation caused a dispute between Britain and Spain in November 1940; Spain conceded to protect British rights in the area and promised not to fortify the area. The Spanish government secretly held expansionist plans towards Portugal that it made known to the German government. In a communiqué with Germany on 26 May 1942, Franco declared that Portugal should be annexed into Spain.

Franco had previously won the Spanish Civil War with the help of Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy. Both were eager to establish another fascist state in Europe. Spain owed Germany over $212 million for supplies of matériel during the Spanish Civil War, and Italian Corpo Truppe Volontarie combat troops had actually fought in Spain on the side of Franco&#x27;s Nationalists.

When Germany invaded the Soviet Union in 1941, Franco immediately offered to form a unit of military volunteers to join the invasion. This was accepted by Hitler and, within two weeks, there were more than enough volunteers to form a division – the Blue Division (&quot;División Azul&quot;) under General Agustín Muñoz Grandes.

The possibility of Spanish intervention in World War II was of concern to the United States, which investigated the activities of Spain&#x27;s ruling Falange Espanola Tradicionalista y de las JONS in Latin America, especially Puerto Rico, where pro-Falange and pro-Franco sentiment was high, even amongst the ruling upper classes. The Falangists promoted the idea of supporting Spain&#x27;s former colonies in fighting against American domination. Prior to the outbreak of war, support for Franco and the Falange was high in the Philippines. The Falange Exterior, the international department of the Falange, collaborated with Japanese forces against the United States Armed Forces and the Philippine Commonwealth Army in the Philippines through the Philippine Falange.

== Bilateral Pacts with the Axis Powers ==
Some countries colluded with Germany, Italy, and Japan without signing either the Anti-Comintern Pact, or the Tripartite Pact. In some cases these bilateral agreements were formalised, in other cases it was less formal. Some of these countries were puppet states established by the Axis Powers themselves.

=== Burma (Ba Maw government) ===

The Japanese Army and Burma nationalists, led by Aung San, seized control of Burma from the United Kingdom during 1942. A State of Burma was formed on 1 August 1943 under the Burmese nationalist leader Ba Maw. A treaty of alliance was concluded between the Ba Maw regime and Japan was signed by Ba Maw for Burma and Sawada Renzo for Japan on the same day in which the Ba Maw government pledged itself to provide the Japanese &quot;with every necessary assistance in order to execute a successful military operation in Burma&quot;. The Ba Maw government mobilised Burmese society during the war to support the Axis war-effort.
The Ba Maw regime established the Burma Defence Army (later renamed the Burma National Army), which was commanded by Aung San which fought alongside the Japanese in the Burma campaign. The Ba Maw has been described as a state having &quot;independence without sovereignty&quot; and as being effectively a Japanese puppet state. On 27 March 1945 the Burma National Army revolted against the Japanese.

===Thailand===


As an ally of Japan during the war that deployed troops to fight on the Japanese side against Allied forces, Thailand is considered to have been part of the Axis alliance, or at least &quot;aligned with the Axis powers&quot;. For example, writing in 1945, the American politician Clare Boothe Luce described Thailand as &quot;undeniably an Axis country&quot; during the war. 
Thailand waged the Franco-Thai War in October 1940 to May 1941 to reclaim territory from French Indochina. Japanese forces invaded Thailand an hour and a half before the attack on Pearl Harbor (because of the International Dateline, the local time was on the morning of 8 December 1941). Only hours after the invasion, Prime Minister Field Marshal Phibunsongkhram ordered the cessation of resistance against the Japanese. An outline plan of Japan-Thailand joint military operations, whereby Thai forces would invade Burma to defend the right flank of Japanese forces, was agreed on 14 December 1941. On 21 December 1941, a military alliance with Japan was signed and on 25 January 1942, Sang Phathanothai read over the radio Thailand&#x27;s formal declaration of war on the United Kingdom and the United States. The Thai ambassador to the United States, Mom Rajawongse Seni Pramoj, did not deliver his copy of the declaration of war. Therefore, although the British reciprocated by declaring war on Thailand and considered it a hostile country, the United States did not.

The Thais and Japanese agreed that the Burmese Shan State and Karenni State were to be under Thai control. The rest of Burma was to be under Japanese control. On 10 May 1942, the Thai Phayap Army entered Burma&#x27;s eastern Shan State, which had been claimed by Siamese kingdoms. Three Thai infantry and one cavalry division, spearheaded by armoured reconnaissance groups and supported by the air force, engaged the retreating Chinese 93rd Division. Kengtung, the main objective, was captured on 27 May. Renewed offensives in June and November saw the Chinese retreat into Yunnan.

In November 1943 Thailand signed the Greater East Asia Joint Declaration, formally aligning itself with the Axis Powers. The area containing the Shan States and Kayah State was annexed by Thailand in 1942, and four northern states of Malaya were also transferred to Thailand by Japan as a reward for Thai co-operation. These areas were ceded back to Burma and Malaya in 1945. Thai military losses totalled 5,559 men during the war, of whom about 180 died resisting the Japanese invasion of 8 December 1941, roughly 150 died in action during the fighting in the Shan States, and the rest died of malaria and other diseases.
The Free Thai Movement (&quot;Seri Thai&quot;) was established during these first few months. Parallel Free Thai organizations were also established in the United Kingdom. The king&#x27;s aunt, Queen Rambai Barni, was the nominal head of the British-based organization, and Pridi Banomyong, the regent, headed its largest contingent, which was operating within Thailand. Aided by elements of the military, secret airfields and training camps were established, while American Office of Strategic Services and British Force 136 agents slipped in and out of the country.

As the war dragged on, the Thai population came to resent the Japanese presence. In June 1944, Phibun was overthrown in a coup d&#x27;état. The new civilian government under Khuang Aphaiwong attempted to aid the resistance while maintaining cordial relations with the Japanese. After the war, U.S. influence prevented Thailand from being treated as an Axis country, but the British demanded three million tons of rice as reparations and the return of areas annexed from Malaya during the war. Thailand also returned the portions of British Burma and French Indochina that had been annexed. Phibun and a number of his associates were put on trial on charges of having committed war crimes and of collaborating with the Axis powers. However, the charges were dropped due to intense public pressure. Public opinion was favourable to Phibun, as he was thought to have done his best to protect Thai interests.

===Soviet Union===
In 1939 the Soviet Union considered forming an alliance with either Britain and France or with Germany. When negotiations with Britain and France failed, they turned to Germany and signed the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact in August 1939. Germany was now freed from the risk of war with the Soviets, and was assured a supply of oil. This included a secret protocol whereby territories controlled by Poland, Finland, Estonia, Romania, Latvia and Lithuania were divided into spheres of interest of the parties. The Soviet Union sought to re-annex some of territories that were under control of those states, formerly acquired by the Russian Empire in the centuries prior and lost to Russia in the aftermath of World War I; that included land such as the Kresy (Western Belarus and Western Ukraine) region ceded to Poland after losing the Soviet-Polish War of 1919–1921.

On 1 September, barely a week after the pact had been signed, Germany invaded Poland. The Soviet Union invaded Poland from the east on 17 September and on 28 September signed a secret treaty with Nazi Germany to coordinate fighting against the Polish resistance. The Soviets targeted intelligence, entrepreneurs and officers with mass arrests, with many victims sent to the Gulag in Siberia, committing a string of atrocities that culminated in the Katyn massacre. Soon after the invasion of Poland, the Soviet Union occupied the Baltic countries of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, and annexed Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina from Romania. The Soviet Union attacked Finland on 30 November 1939, which started the Winter War. Finnish defenses prevented an all-out invasion, resulting in an interim peace, but Finland was forced to cede strategically important border areas near Leningrad.

The Soviet Union provided material support to Germany in the war effort against Western Europe through a pair of commercial agreements, the first in 1939 and the second in 1940, which involved exports of raw materials (phosphates, chromium and iron ore, mineral oil, grain, cotton, and rubber). These and other export goods transported through Soviet and occupied Polish territories allowed Germany to circumvent the British naval blockade. In October and November 1940, German–Soviet talks about the potential of joining the Axis took place in Berlin. Joseph Stalin later personally countered with a separate proposal in a letter on 25 November that contained several secret protocols, including that &quot;the area south of Batum and Baku in the general direction of the Persian Gulf is recognized as the center of aspirations of the Soviet Union&quot;, referring to an area approximating present day Iraq and Iran, and a Soviet claim to Bulgaria. Hitler never responded to Stalin&#x27;s letter. Shortly thereafter, Hitler issued a secret directive on the invasion of the Soviet Union. Reasons included the Nazi ideologies of Lebensraum and Heim ins Reich

===Vichy France===

The German army entered Paris on 14 June 1940, following the battle of France. Pétain became the last Prime Minister of the French Third Republic on 16 June 1940. He sued for peace with Germany and on 22 June 1940, the French government concluded an armistice with Hitler and Mussolini, which came into effect at midnight on 25 June. Under the terms of the agreement, Germany occupied two-thirds of France, including Paris. Pétain was permitted to keep an &quot;armistice army&quot; of 100,000 men within the unoccupied southern zone. This number included neither the army based in the French colonial empire nor the French Navy. In Africa the Vichy regime was permitted to maintain 127,000. The French also maintained substantial garrisons at the French-mandate territory of Syria and Greater Lebanon, the French colony of Madagascar, and in French Somaliland. Some members of the Vichy government pushed for closer cooperation, but they were rebuffed by Pétain. Neither did Hitler accept that France could ever become a full military partner, and constantly prevented the buildup of Vichy&#x27;s military strength.

After the armistice, relations between the Vichy French and the British quickly worsened. Although the French had told Churchill they would not allow their fleet to be taken by the Germans, the British launched naval attacks intended to prevent the French navy being used, the most notable of which was the attack on the Algerian harbour of Mers el-Kebir on 3 July 1940. Though Churchill defended his controversial decision to attack the French fleet, the action deteriorated greatly the relations between France and Britain. German propaganda trumpeted these attacks as an absolute betrayal of the French people by their former allies.


On 10 July 1940, Pétain was given emergency &quot;full powers&quot; by a majority vote of the French National Assembly. The following day approval of the new constitution by the Assembly effectively created the French State (&quot;l&#x27;État Français&quot;), replacing the French Republic with the government unofficially called &quot;Vichy France,&quot; after the resort town of Vichy, where Pétain maintained his seat of government. This continued to be recognised as the lawful government of France by the neutral United States until 1942, while the United Kingdom had recognised de Gaulle&#x27;s government-in-exile in London. Racial laws were introduced in France and its colonies and many foreign Jews in France were deported to Germany. Albert Lebrun, last President of the Republic, did not resign from the presidential office when he moved to Vizille on 10 July 1940. By 25 April 1945, during Pétain&#x27;s trial, Lebrun argued that he thought he would be able to return to power after the fall of Germany, since he had not resigned.

In September 1940, Vichy France was forced to allow Japan to occupy French Indochina, a federation of French colonial possessions and protectorates encompassing modern day Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. The Vichy regime continued to administer them under Japanese military occupation. French Indochina was the base for the Japanese invasions of Thailand, Malaya, and the Dutch East Indies. On 26 September 1940, de Gaulle led an attack by Allied forces on the Vichy port of Dakar in French West Africa. Forces loyal to Pétain fired on de Gaulle and repulsed the attack after two days of heavy fighting, drawing Vichy France closer to Germany.

During the Anglo-Iraqi War of May 1941, Vichy France allowed Germany and Italy to use air bases in the French mandate of Syria to support the Iraqi revolt. British and Free French forces attacked later Syria and Lebanon in June–July 1941, and in 1942 Allied forces took over French Madagascar. More and more colonies abandoned Vichy, joining the Free French territories of French Equatorial Africa, Polynesia, New Caledonia and others who had sided with de Gaulle from the start.

In November 1942 Vichy French troops briefly resisted the landing of Allied troops in French North Africa for two days, until Admiral François Darlan negotiated a local ceasefire with the Allies. In response to the landings, German and Italian forces invaded the non-occupied zone in southern France and ended Vichy France as an entity with any kind of autonomy; it then became a puppet government for the occupied territories. In June 1943, the formerly Vichy-loyal colonial authorities in French North Africa led by Henri Giraud came to an agreement with the Free French to merge with their own interim regime with the French National Committee (&quot;Comité Français National&quot;, CFN) to form a provisional government in Algiers, known as the French Committee of National Liberation (&quot;Comité Français de Libération Nationale&quot;, CFLN) initially led by Darlan.

In 1943 the Milice, a paramilitary force which had been founded by Vichy, was subordinated to the Germans and assisted them in rounding up opponents and Jews, as well as fighting the French Resistance. The Germans recruited volunteers in units independent of Vichy. Partly as a result of the great animosity of many right-wingers against the pre-war Front Populaire, volunteers joined the German forces in their anti-communist crusade against the USSR. Almost 7,000 joined &quot;Légion des Volontaires Français&quot; (LVF) from 1941 to 1944. The LVF then formed the cadre of the Waffen-SS Division &quot;Charlemagne&quot; in 1944–1945, with a maximum strength of some 7,500. Both the LVF and the &quot;Division Charlemagne&quot; fought on the eastern front.

Deprived of any military assets, territory or resources, the members of the Vichy government continued to fulfil their role as German puppets, being quasi-prisoners in the so-called &quot;Sigmaringen enclave&quot; in a castle in Baden-Württemberg at the end of the war in May 1945.

===Iraq===
In April 1941 the Arab nationalist Rashīd ʿAlī al-Gaylānī, who was pro-Axis, seized power in Iraq. British forces responded by deploying to Iraq and in turn removing Rashi Ali from power. During fighting between Iraqi and British forces, Axis forces were deployed to Iraq to support the Iraqis. However, Rashid Ali was never able to conclude a formal alliance with the Axis.

Anti-British sentiments were widespread in Iraq prior to 1941. Rashid Ali al-Gaylani was appointed Prime Minister of Iraq in 1940. When Italy declared war on Britain, Rashid Ali had maintained ties with the Italians. This angered the British government. In December 1940, as relations with the British worsened, Rashid Ali formally requested weapons and military supplies from Germany. In January 1941 Rashid Ali was forced to resign as a result of British pressure.

In April 1941 Rashid Ali, on seizing power in a coup, repudiated the Anglo-Iraqi Treaty of 1930 and demanded that the British abandon their military bases and withdraw from the country.

On 9 May 1941, Mohammad Amin al-Husayni, the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem who was an associate of Rashid Ali and in asylum in Iraq, declared Jihad against the British and called on Arabs throughout the Middle East to rise up against British rule. On 25 May 1941, the Germans stepped up offensive operations in the Middle East.

Hitler issued Order 30: &quot;The Arab Freedom Movement in the Middle East is our natural ally against England. In this connection special importance is attached to the liberation of Iraq ... I have therefore decided to move forward in the Middle East by supporting Iraq.&quot;

Hostilities between the Iraqi and British forces began on 2 May 1941, with heavy fighting at the RAF air base in Habbaniyah. The Germans and Italians dispatched aircraft and aircrew to Iraq utilizing Vichy French bases in Syria; this led to Australian, British, Indian and Free French forces entering and conquering Syria in June and July. With the advance of British and Indian forces on Baghdad, Iraqi military resistance ended by 31 May 1941. Rashid Ali and al-Husayn, the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem, fled to Iran, then Turkey, Italy, and finally Germany, where both were welcomed by Hitler and remained throughout the years of the war; Hitler considered Ali to be head of the Iraqi government-in-exile in Berlin.

==Puppet states==
Various nominally-independent governments formed out of local sympathisers under varying degrees of German, Italian, and Japanese control were established within the territories that they occupied during the war. Some of these governments declared themselves to be neutral in the conflict with the allies, or never concluded any formal alliance with the Axis powers, but their effective control by the Axis powers rendered them in reality an extension of it and hence part of it. These differed from military authorities and civilian commissioners provided by the occupying power in that they were formed from nationals of the occupied country, and that the supposed legitimacy of the puppet state was recognised by the occupier &quot;de jure&quot; if not &quot;de facto&quot;.

===German===
The collaborationist administrations of German-occupied countries in Europe had varying degrees of autonomy, and not all of them qualified as fully recognized sovereign states. The General Government in occupied Poland was a fully German administration. In occupied Norway, the National Government headed by Vidkun Quisling – whose name came to symbolize pro-Axis collaboration in several languages – was subordinate to the Reichskommissariat Norwegen. It was never allowed to have any armed forces, be a recognized military partner, or have autonomy of any kind. In the occupied Netherlands, Anton Mussert was given the symbolic title of &quot;Führer of the Netherlands&#x27; people&quot;. His National Socialist Movement formed a cabinet assisting the German administration, but was never recognized as a real Dutch government.

====Albania (Albanian Kingdom)====

After the Italian armistice, a vacuum of power opened up in Albania. The Italian occupying forces were rendered largely powerless, as the National Liberation Movement took control of the south and the National Front (Balli Kombëtar) took control of the north. Albanians in the Italian army joined the guerrilla forces. In September 1943 the guerrillas moved to take the capital of Tirana, but German paratroopers dropped into the city. Soon after the battle, the German High Command announced that they would recognize the independence of a greater Albania. They organized an Albanian government, police, and military in collaboration with the Balli Kombëtar. The Germans did not exert heavy control over Albania&#x27;s administration, but instead attempted to gain popular appeal by giving their political partners what they wanted. Several Balli Kombëtar leaders held positions in the regime. The joint forces incorporated Kosovo, western Macedonia, southern Montenegro, and Presevo into the Albanian state. A High Council of Regency was created to carry out the functions of a head of state, while the government was headed mainly by Albanian conservative politicians. Albania was the only European country occupied by the Axis powers that ended World War II with a larger Jewish population than before the war. The Albanian government had refused to hand over their Jewish population. They provided Jewish families with forged documents and helped them disperse in the Albanian population. Albania was completely liberated on November 29, 1944.

==== Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia ====

The Government of National Salvation, also referred to as the Nedić regime, was the second Serbian puppet government, after the Commissioner Government, established on the Territory of the (German) Military Commander in Serbia during World War II. It was appointed by the German Military Commander in Serbia and operated from 29 August 1941 to October 1944. Although the Serbian puppet regime had some support, it was unpopular with a majority of Serbs who either joined the Yugoslav Partisans or Draža Mihailović&#x27;s Chetniks. The Prime Minister throughout was General Milan Nedić. The Government of National Salvation was evacuated from Belgrade to Kitzbühel, Germany in the first week of October 1944 before the German withdrawal from Serbia was complete.

Racial laws were introduced in all occupied territories with immediate effects on Jews and Roma people, as well as causing the imprisonment of those opposed to Nazism. Several concentration camps were formed in Serbia and at the 1942 Anti-Freemason Exhibition in Belgrade the city was pronounced to be free of Jews (Judenfrei). On 1 April 1942, a Serbian Gestapo was formed. An estimated 120,000 people were interned in German-run concentration camps in Nedić&#x27;s Serbia between 1941 and 1944. However the Banjica Concentration Camp was jointly run by the German Army and Nedic&#x27;s regime. 50,000 to 80,000 were killed during this period. Serbia became the second country in Europe, following Estonia, to be proclaimed Judenfrei (free of Jews). Approximately 14,500 Serbian Jews – 90 percent of Serbia&#x27;s Jewish population of 16,000 – were murdered in World War II.

Nedić was captured by the Americans when they occupied the former territory of Austria, and was subsequently handed over to the Yugoslav communist authorities to act as a witness against war criminals, on the understanding he would be returned to American custody to face trial by the Allies. The Yugoslav authorities refused to return Nedić to United States custody. He died on 4 February 1946 after either jumping or falling out of the window of a Belgrade hospital, under circumstances which remain unclear.

====Italy (Italian Social Republic)====


Italian Fascist leader Benito Mussolini formed the Italian Social Republic (&quot;Repubblica Sociale Italiana&quot; in Italian) on 23 September 1943, succeeding the Kingdom of Italy as a member of the Axis.

Mussolini had been removed from office and arrested by King Victor Emmanuel III on 25 July 1943. After the Italian armistice, in a raid led by German paratrooper Otto Skorzeny, Mussolini was rescued from arrest.

Once restored to power, Mussolini declared that Italy was a republic and that he was the new head of state. He was subject to German control for the duration of the war.

===Joint German–Italian client states===
====Greece (Hellenic State)====
Following the German invasion of Greece and the flight of the Greek government to Crete and then Egypt, the Hellenic State was formed in May 1941 as a puppet state of both Italy and Germany. Initially, Italy had wished to annex Greece, but was pressured by Germany to avoid civil unrest such as had occurred in Bulgarian-annexed areas. The result was Italy accepting the creation of a puppet regime with the support of Germany. Italy had been assured by Hitler of a primary role in Greece. Most of the country was held by Italian forces, but strategic locations (Central Macedonia, the islands of the northeastern Aegean, most of Crete, and parts of Attica) were held by the Germans, who seized most of the country&#x27;s economic assets and effectively controlled the collaborationist government. The puppet regime never commanded any real authority, and did not gain the allegiance of the people. It was somewhat successful in preventing secessionist movements like the Aromanian Roman Legion from establishing themselves. By mid-1943, the Greek Resistance had liberated large parts of the mountainous interior (&quot;Free Greece&quot;), setting up a separate administration there. After the Italian armistice, the Italian occupation zone was taken over by the German armed forces, who remained in charge of the country until their withdrawal in autumn 1944. In some Aegean islands, German garrisons were left behind, and surrendered only after the end of the war.

===Japanese===

The Empire of Japan created a number of client states in the areas occupied by its military, beginning with the creation of Manchukuo in 1932. These puppet states achieved varying degrees of international recognition.

====Cambodia====

The Kingdom of Kampuchea was a short-lived Japanese puppet state that lasted from 9 March 1945 to 15 August 1945. The Japanese entered the French protectorate of Cambodia in mid-1941, but allowed Vichy French officials to remain in administrative posts while Japanese calls for an &quot;Asia for the Asiatics&quot; won over many Cambodian nationalists.

In March 1945, in order to gain local support, the Japanese dissolved French colonial rule and pressured Cambodia to declare independence within the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. King Sihanouk declared the Kingdom of Kampuchea (replacing the French name) independent. Son Ngoc Thanh who had fled to Japan in 1942 returned in May and was appointed foreign minister. On the date of Japanese surrender, a new government was proclaimed with Son Ngoc Thanh as prime minister. When the Allies occupied Phnom Penh in October, Son Ngoc Thanh was arrested for collaborating with the Japanese and was exiled to France.

====Azad Hind====
The &quot;Arzi Hukumat-e-Azad Hind&quot;, the &quot;Provisional Government of Free India&quot; was a state that was recognized by nine Axis governments, and accepted as part of the axis by the Japanese.

It was led by Subhas Chandra Bose, an Indian nationalist who rejected Mahatma Gandhi&#x27;s nonviolent methods for achieving independence. The First Indian National Army faltered after its leadership objected to being a propaganda tool for Japanese war aims, and the role of Japanese liaison office. It was revived by the Indian Independence League with Japanese support in 1942 after the ex-PoWs and Indian civilians in South-east Asia agreed to participate in the INA venture on the condition it was led by Bose. From occupied Singapore Bose declared India&#x27;s independence on October 21, 1943 . The Indian National Army was committed as a part of the U Go Offensive. It played a largely marginal role in the battle, and suffered serious casualties and had to withdraw with the rest of Japanese forces after the siege of Imphal was broken. It was later committed to the defence of Burma against the Allied offensive. It suffered a large number of desertions in this latter part. The remaining troops of the INA maintained order in Rangoon after the withdrawal of Ba Maw&#x27;s government. The provisional government was given nominal control of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands from November 1943 to August 1945.

====Inner Mongolia (Mengjiang)====

Mengjiang was a Japanese puppet state in Inner Mongolia. It was nominally ruled by Prince Demchugdongrub, a Mongol nobleman descended from Genghis Khan, but was in fact controlled by the Japanese military. Mengjiang&#x27;s independence was proclaimed on 18 February 1936, following the Japanese occupation of the region.

The Inner Mongolians had several grievances against the central Chinese government in Nanjing, including their policy of allowing unlimited migration of Han Chinese to the region. Several of the young princes of Inner Mongolia began to agitate for greater freedom from the central government, and it was through these men that Japanese saw their best chance of exploiting Pan-Mongol nationalism and eventually seizing control of Outer Mongolia from the Soviet Union.

Japan created Mengjiang to exploit tensions between ethnic Mongolians and the central government of China, which in theory ruled Inner Mongolia. When the various puppet governments of China were unified under the Wang Jingwei government in March 1940, Mengjiang retained its separate identity as an autonomous federation. Although under the firm control of the Japanese Imperial Army, which occupied its territory, Prince Demchugdongrub had his own independent army. Mengjiang vanished in 1945 following Japan&#x27;s defeat in World War II.

====Laos====

French Indochina, including Laos, had been occupied by the Japanese in 1941, though government by the Vichy French colonial officials had continued. The liberation of France in 1944, bringing Charles de Gaulle to power, meant the end of the alliance between Japan and the Vichy French administration in Indochina. On 9 March 1945 the Japanese staged a military coup in Hanoi, and on 8 April they reached Luang Phrabang. King Sīsavāngvong was detained by the Japanese, and forced to issue a declaration of independence, albeit one that does not appear to have ever been formalised. French control over Laos was re-asserted in 1946.

====Philippines (Second Republic)====

After the surrender of the Filipino and American forces in Bataan Peninsula and Corregidor Island, the Japanese established a puppet state in the Philippines in 1942. The following year, the Philippine National Assembly declared the Philippines an independent Republic and elected José Laurel as its President. There was never widespread civilian support for the state, largely because of the general anti-Japanese sentiment stemming from atrocities committed by the Imperial Japanese Army. The Second Philippine Republic ended with Japanese surrender in 1945, and Laurel was arrested and charged with treason by the US government. He was granted amnesty by President Manuel Roxas, and remained active in politics, ultimately winning a seat in the post-war Senate.

====Vietnam (Empire of Vietnam)====

The Empire of Vietnam was a short-lived Japanese puppet state that lasted from 11 March to 23 August 1945. When the Japanese seized control of French Indochina, they allowed Vichy French administrators to remain in nominal control. This French rule ended on 9 March 1945, when the Japanese officially took control of the government. Soon after, Emperor Bảo Đại voided the 1884 treaty with France and Trần Trọng Kim, a historian, became prime minister.

==German, Italian and Japanese World War II cooperation==
===German–Japanese Axis-cooperation===

On 7 December 1941, Japan attacked the US naval bases in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. According to the stipulation of the Tripartite Pact, Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy were required to come to the defense of their allies only if they were attacked. Since Japan had made the first move, Germany and Italy were not obliged to aid her until the United States counterattacked. Nevertheless, expecting the US to declare war on Germany in any event, Hitler ordered the &quot;Reichstag&quot; to formally declare war on the United States. Hitler had agreed that Germany would almost certainly declare war when the Japanese first informed him of their intention to go to war with the United States on 17 November 1941. Italy also declared war on the US.

Historian Ian Kershaw suggests that this declaration of war against the United States was a serious blunder made by Germany and Italy, as it allowed the United States to join the war in Europe and North Africa without any limitation. On the other hand, American destroyers escorting convoys had been effectively intervening in the Battle of the Atlantic with German and Italian ships and submarines, and the immediate war declaration made the Second Happy Time possible for U-boats. Franklin D. Roosevelt had said in his Fireside Chat on 9 December 1941, 2 days before the European Axis powers formally declared war on America, that Germany and Italy already considered themselves to be in a state of war with the United States. Plans for Rainbow Five had been published by the press early in December 1941, and Hitler could no longer ignore the amount of economic and military aid the US was giving Britain and the USSR.

==See also==

* Axis leaders of World War II
* Axis powers negotiations on the division of Asia
* Central Powers
* List of expansion operations and planning of the Axis powers
* Foreign relations of the Axis powers
* German-Soviet Axis talks
* Greater Germanic Reich
* Hakkō ichiu
* Hypothetical Axis victory in World War II
* Italian imperialism under Fascism
* Croatian–Romanian–Slovak friendship proclamation
* List of pro-Axis leaders and governments or direct control in occupied territories
* New Order (Nazism)
* World War II by country
* &quot;Hitlers Zweites Buch&quot;

==Notes==
==Citations==
==References==
===Print sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


===Online sources===

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* Highly detailed coverage of conquered territories.


==External links==
* Full text of the Pact of Steel
* Full text of the Anti-Comintern Pact
* Full text of The Tripartite Pact
* Silent movie of the signing of The Tripartite Pact</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="4" end="15" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="39" end="55" title="Axis powers" label="Rome–Berlin Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="65" end="87" title="Axis powers" label="Rome–Berlin–Tokyo Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q124964" start="106" end="115" title="coalition" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="132" end="144" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="168" end="174" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="203" end="215" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="217" end="230" title="Fascist Italy" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="239" end="254" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973178" start="589" end="625" title="Italo-German protocol of 23 October 1936" label="protocol signed by Germany and Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="670" end="686" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q152195" start="871" end="890" title="Anti-Comintern Pact" label="Anti-Comintern Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="895" end="909" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="987" end="994" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–1946)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="999" end="1004" title="Francoist Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237584" start="1056" end="1073" title="Collective defense" label="military alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q161859" start="1108" end="1121" title="Pact of Steel" label="Pact of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="1138" end="1153" title="Tripartite Pact" label="Tripartite Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="1465" end="1477" title="puppet state" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="2086" end="2102" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="2489" end="2504" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="2513" end="2523" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="2528" end="2534" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q548114" start="2559" end="2578" title="Free State of Fiume" label="Free State of Fiume"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="2602" end="2609" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–1946)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q381868" start="2632" end="2644" title="Gyula Gömbös" label="Gyula Gömbös"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718663" start="2779" end="2793" title="Rome Protocols" label="Rome Protocols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="2858" end="2864" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q902355" start="2884" end="2898" title="Kálmán Darányi" label="Kálmán Darányi"/>
<link wikidata="Q220105" start="3042" end="3056" title="Galeazzo Ciano" label="Galeazzo Ciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q213537" start="3085" end="3103" title="Ulrich von Hassell" label="Ulrich von Hassell"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973178" start="3119" end="3138" title="Italo-German protocol of 23 October 1936" label="Nine-Point Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q153421" start="3184" end="3206" title="Konstantin von Neurath" label="Konstantin von Neurath"/>
<link wikidata="Q714189" start="3400" end="3404" title="Duce" label="Duce"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="3411" end="3427" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="3584" end="3599" title="Italian Fascism" label="Italian Fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="3675" end="3709" title="Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920)" label="Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920)"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3718" end="3729" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q157608" start="3927" end="3937" title="Reichswehr" label="Reichswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="4007" end="4027" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q936846" start="4311" end="4324" title="Luigi Capello" label="Luigi Capello"/>
<link wikidata="Q58579" start="4394" end="4410" title="Erich Ludendorff" label="Erich Ludendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q353201" start="4826" end="4837" title="Dino Grandi" label="Dino Grandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="5305" end="5317" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="5337" end="5350" title="Machtergreifung" label="came to power"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="5469" end="5490" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q48244" start="5855" end="5865" title="Mein Kampf" label="Mein Kampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="6692" end="6701" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q11734" start="6869" end="6887" title="Engelbert Dollfuss" label="Engelbert Dollfuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q518101" start="6895" end="6918" title="First Austrian Republic" label="First Austrian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="7265" end="7279" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037291" start="7366" end="7380" title="Austrian Nazism" label="Austrian Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="8051" end="8057" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="8446" end="8460" title="Sturmabteilung" label="Sturmabteilung"/>
<link wikidata="Q130783" start="8496" end="8520" title="Night of the Long Knives" label="Night of the Long Knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q220105" start="8570" end="8584" title="Galeazzo Ciano" label="Galeazzo Ciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q212946" start="9048" end="9060" title="Brenner Pass" label="Brenner Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q385936" start="10081" end="10095" title="Hiroshi Ōshima" label="Hiroshi Ōshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q101886" start="10104" end="10126" title="Joachim von Ribbentrop" label="Joachim von Ribbentrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="10504" end="10513" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="10659" end="10681" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q222241" start="10690" end="10715" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Japan)" label="Japanese Foreign Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q541195" start="10918" end="10939" title="Anglo-Japanese Alliance" label="Anglo-Japanese accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="11295" end="11312" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q220105" start="11721" end="11735" title="Galeazzo Ciano" label="Galeazzo Ciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="13195" end="13209" title="Western world" label="Western powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="13242" end="13251" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="13297" end="13304" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q177266" start="13306" end="13316" title="militarism" label="militarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="13318" end="13330" title="conservatism" label="conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q309070" start="13335" end="13342" title="autarky" label="autarky"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="14084" end="14106" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q550207" start="14168" end="14189" title="Geary–Khamis dollar" label="international dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="14423" end="14445" title="gross national product" label="gross national product"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="14958" end="14977" title="international trade" label="international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="15266" end="15273" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q575347" start="15618" end="15656" title="King Michael&amp;#x27;s Coup" label="defection from the Axis in August 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q156908" start="16245" end="16253" title="Welthauptstadt Germania" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q331439" start="16396" end="16410" title="Human overpopulation" label="overpopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q157136" start="16597" end="16607" title="lebensraum" label="lebensraum"/>
<link wikidata="Q695219" start="16983" end="17012" title="German minority in Poland" label="German minority within Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="17090" end="17109" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Free City of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q126413" start="17362" end="17381" title="German–Polish declaration of non-aggression" label="Non-Aggression Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892507" start="17974" end="17999" title="Danzig crisis" label="diplomatic crisis erupted"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="18240" end="18259" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Free City of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="18509" end="18522" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="18713" end="18717" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q33785" start="19142" end="19155" title="Achilles heel" label="Achilles heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="19499" end="19542" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Germany&amp;#x27;s invasion of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q157136" start="19576" end="19586" title="lebensraum" label="lebensraum"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="19594" end="19608" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="19663" end="19675" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="19820" end="19831" title="German Army (Wehrmacht)" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q164587" start="19861" end="19884" title="Russian Liberation Army" label="Russian Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q157615" start="19898" end="19911" title="Andrey Vlasov" label="Andrey Vlasov"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="20077" end="20090" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q162312" start="20168" end="20183" title="Reichsführer-SS" label="Reichsführer-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="20184" end="20200" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="20213" end="20244" title="Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q181978" start="20395" end="20411" title="Atlantic Charter" label="Atlantic Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="20420" end="20434" title="Lend-Lease Act" label="Lend-Lease Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="20608" end="20616" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="20654" end="20675" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="21068" end="21088" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247294" start="21107" end="21123" title="Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles" label="war guilt clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q695052" start="21328" end="21365" title="Inflation in the Weimar Republic" label="hyperinflation during the early 1920s"/>
<link wikidata="Q40625" start="21375" end="21410" title="Occupation of the Ruhr" label="the French occupied the Ruhr region"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="21532" end="21548" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q160944" start="21718" end="21741" title="stab-in-the-back legend" label="stab-in-the-back legend"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21873" end="21888" title="German question#Later influence" label="Greater Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q155144" start="21908" end="21923" title="Alsace-Lorraine" label="Alsace-Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="21934" end="21945" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="22079" end="22092" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q157136" start="22160" end="22170" title="Lebensraum" label="Lebensraum"/>
<link wikidata="Q900636" start="22207" end="22233" title="Central and Eastern Europe" label="Central and Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q697659" start="22280" end="22307" title="remilitarization of the Rhineland" label="remilitarized the Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="22419" end="22428" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="22451" end="22463" title="Kriegsmarine" label="Kriegsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="22481" end="22504" title="Anschluss" label="annexed Austria in 1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q275618" start="22510" end="22521" title="German occupation of Czechoslovakia" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161334" start="22551" end="22566" title="Memel territory" label="Memel territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="22572" end="22581" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q152750" start="22661" end="22696" title="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia" label="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="22716" end="22724" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="22786" end="22809" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="23079" end="23098" title="Wehrmacht" label="its military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="23189" end="23209" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q130861" start="23218" end="23233" title="Battle of Kursk" label="Battle of Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="23305" end="23323" title="Normandy Landings" label="landings in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="23328" end="23333" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152750" start="23483" end="23518" title="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia" label="Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="23649" end="23664" title="Slovak Republic (1939–1945)" label="Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010024" start="23705" end="23733" title="Second Czechoslovak Republic" label="Second Czechoslovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="23743" end="23755" title="Slovak State" label="Slovak State"/>
<link wikidata="Q156111" start="24013" end="24031" title="General Government" label="General Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="24073" end="24088" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)" label="occupied Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276549" start="24103" end="24141" title="Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany" label="directly annexed into German provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q543813" start="24255" end="24273" title="Reichskommissariat" label="Reichskommissariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q156031" start="24526" end="24552" title="Reichskommissariat Ostland" label="Reichskommissariat Ostland"/>
<link wikidata="Q46315" start="24569" end="24595" title="Reichskommissariat Ukraine" label="Reichskommissariat Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q335200" start="24682" end="24709" title="Reichskommissariat Norwegen" label="Reichskommissariat Norwegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616953" start="24715" end="24730" title="Quisling regime" label="Quisling regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q151364" start="24742" end="24757" title="Vidkun Quisling" label="Vidkun Quisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q819274" start="24807" end="24828" title="Occupation of Norway by Nazi Germany" label="during the occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154927" start="24841" end="24851" title="Haakon VII" label="Haakon VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082716" start="24866" end="24890" title="Nygaardsvold&amp;#x27;s Cabinet" label="government were in exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q156170" start="24946" end="24962" title="5th SS Panzer Division Wiking" label="in the Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419495" start="25062" end="25091" title="Norwegian resistance movement" label="Norwegian resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q167189" start="25162" end="25178" title="Nasjonal Samling" label="Nasjonal Samling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094191" start="25303" end="25333" title="resistance during World War II" label="resistance during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698974" start="25409" end="25455" title="Legal purge in Norway after World War II" label="Quisling and other collaborators were executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q204335" start="25506" end="25512" title="eponym" label="eponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="25517" end="25524" title="traitor" label="traitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q714189" start="25572" end="25576" title="Duce" label="Duce"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="25583" end="25599" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q131708" start="25760" end="25771" title="Plutocracy" label="plutocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="25776" end="25787" title="reactionary" label="reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="25788" end="25799" title="Democracy" label="democracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="25807" end="25811" title="Western world" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="25901" end="25915" title="Italians" label="Italian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="26021" end="26047" title="Second Italo-Ethiopian War" label="Second Italo-Ethiopian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232988" start="26137" end="26152" title="Italian Eritrea" label="Italian Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26160" end="26175" title="Abyssinia Crisis#Walwal incident" label="Walwal incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574161" start="26304" end="26317" title="spazio vitale" label="spazio vitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q223604" start="26953" end="26996" title="Greco-Italian War" label="intervention against Greece in October 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="27024" end="27041" title="Kingdom of Greece" label="Kingdom of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="27242" end="27287" title="invasion of Yugoslavia" label="intervention against Yugoslavia in April 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702969" start="27352" end="27360" title="Albanian nationalism" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265120" start="27362" end="27370" title="Croatian nationalism" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407487" start="27376" end="27398" title="Macedonian nationalism" label="Macedonian separatists"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="27425" end="27435" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969543" start="27525" end="27556" title="Parliament of Yugoslavia" label="National Assembly of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q347471" start="27588" end="27601" title="Stjepan Radić" label="Stjepan Radić"/>
<link wikidata="Q36965" start="27642" end="27654" title="Ante Pavelić" label="Ante Pavelić"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="27671" end="27677" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="27879" end="27895" title="Italian Empire" label="New Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="27936" end="27949" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="27964" end="27998" title="Second Italo-Abyssinian War" label="Italy invaded and annexed Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="28063" end="28077" title="Italian Empire" label="Italian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="28101" end="28118" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q152195" start="28607" end="28626" title="Anti-Comintern Pact" label="Anti-Comintern Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="28746" end="28753" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q161859" start="28784" end="28797" title="Pact of Steel" label="Pact of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="28974" end="28991" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="29007" end="29023" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742116" start="29031" end="29043" title="National faction (Spanish Civil War)" label="Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742163" start="29125" end="29140" title="Felice Guarneri" label="Felice Guarneri"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="30530" end="30542" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="30548" end="30562" title="Eastern Africa" label="Eastern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q626006" start="30685" end="30695" title="Yugoslavia during World War II" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="30894" end="30906" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="31003" end="31008" title="Italian Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="31046" end="31052" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="31466" end="31491" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Allied invasion of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="31622" end="31631" title="armistice between Italy and Allied armed forces" label="armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q698778" start="31724" end="31737" title="Gran Sasso raid" label="Operation Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="31788" end="31811" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Italian Social Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="31896" end="31910" title="northern Italy" label="northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137428" start="31991" end="32005" title="Co-belligerence" label="co-belligerent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118964" start="32057" end="32066" title="Italian civil war" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732906" start="32077" end="32104" title="Italian Co-Belligerent Army" label="Italian Co-Belligerent Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q706633" start="32113" end="32122" title="Italian resistance movement" label="partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863238" start="32299" end="32319" title="Death of Benito Mussolini" label="Mussolini was killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q555185" start="32461" end="32479" title="Italian Islands of the Aegean" label="Dodecanese Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q555185" start="32520" end="32549" title="Italian Islands of the Aegean" label="Italian Islands of the Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q616992" start="32638" end="32663" title="Italian governorate of Montenegro" label="Governorate of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q181530" start="32924" end="32944" title="Elena of Montenegro" label="Queen Elena of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q283255" start="32989" end="32999" title="Nicholas I of Montenegro" label="Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905183" start="33020" end="33043" title="Montenegrin nationalism" label="Montenegrin nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q656898" start="33044" end="33059" title="Sekula Drljević" label="Sekula Drljević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566835" start="33261" end="33298" title="Uprising in Montenegro (1941)" label="general uprising against the Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257793" start="33406" end="33424" title="Royal Italian Army" label="Royal Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448131" start="33446" end="33454" title="Albanian Kingdom (1939–43)" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11787348" start="33459" end="33465" title="Sandžak Muslim militia" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q328478" start="34077" end="34096" title="Italian East Africa" label="Italian East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="34291" end="34296" title="Italian Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="34626" end="34635" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q696192" start="34667" end="34705" title="Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere" label="Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q26764649" start="34722" end="34733" title="East Asian people" label="East Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q908162" start="34813" end="34825" title="Pan-Asianism" label="Pan-Asianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="34930" end="34954" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="34971" end="34986" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-Shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="34994" end="35016" title="Nationalist Government" label="Nationalist Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="35273" end="35282" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="35693" end="35707" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202979" start="35869" end="35881" title="Cordell Hull" label="Cordell Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="36007" end="36024" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q494920" start="36048" end="36075" title="United States Pacific Fleet" label="United States Pacific Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669602" start="36085" end="36108" title="Pearl Harbor Naval Base" label="Pearl Harbor Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q154605" start="36417" end="36426" title="total war" label="total war"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158489" start="36544" end="36600" title="Japanese declaration of war on the United States and the British Empire" label="declared war on the United States and the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="36626" end="36641" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34479" start="36674" end="36682" title="Hirohito" label="Hirohito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="36731" end="36751" title="Asia-Pacific" label="Asia and the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q702397" start="36804" end="36833" title="Imperial General Headquarters" label="Imperial General Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q696192" start="37027" end="37065" title="Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere" label="Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="37075" end="37084" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="37086" end="37100" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="37134" end="37150" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="37156" end="37173" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="37192" end="37197" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q702868" start="37347" end="37368" title="Japanese militarism" label="militaristic elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="37684" end="37701" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q152195" start="37868" end="37887" title="Anti-Comintern Pact" label="Anti-Comintern Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="38005" end="38024" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="against the Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q192055" start="38152" end="38168" title="Nanjing Massacre" label="Nanjing Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q648346" start="38177" end="38194" title="Three Alls Policy" label="Three Alls Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q696389" start="38214" end="38231" title="Soviet–Japanese border conflicts" label="fought skirmishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212056" start="38244" end="38253" title="Mongolian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623" start="38264" end="38273" title="Manchukuo" label="Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q696256" start="38353" end="38372" title="Soviet–Japanese Neutrality Pact" label="non-aggression pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="38534" end="38556" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="38610" end="38632" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q274948" start="38670" end="38693" title="Prime Minister of Japan" label="Prime Minister of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q160847" start="38702" end="38713" title="Hideki Tojo" label="Hideki Tojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q152325" start="38954" end="38970" title="Isoroku Yamamoto" label="Isoroku Yamamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="39766" end="39791" title="Battle of France" label="German invasion of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="39814" end="39830" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="39836" end="39848" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q146328" start="40222" end="40233" title="Commonwealth of the Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q702397" start="40268" end="40297" title="Imperial General Headquarters" label="Imperial General Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="40306" end="40315" title="Attack on Pearl Harbor" label="an attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="40340" end="40352" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q696664" start="40400" end="40406" title="Japanese invasion of Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q697059" start="40411" end="40420" title="Battle of Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="40540" end="40551" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="40569" end="40610" title="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165880" start="40673" end="40696" title="Soviet invasion of Manchuria" label="engaged Japanese forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="40767" end="40773" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q137816" start="40780" end="40799" title="Taiwan under Japanese rule" label="Japanese dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="40821" end="40826" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="40833" end="40869" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="Japanese protectorate and dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q495558" start="40898" end="40924" title="Japan–Korea Treaty of 1910" label="Japan–Korea Treaty of 1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q718763" start="40931" end="40949" title="South Seas Mandate" label="South Seas Mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q702310" start="41199" end="41235" title="Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies" label="Japan occupied the Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="41320" end="41329" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76127" start="41417" end="41424" title="Sukarno" label="Sukarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="41650" end="41665" title="Tripartite Pact" label="Tripartite Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="42064" end="42082" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–1946)" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="42093" end="42099" title="Regent" label="Regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q117144" start="42108" end="42121" title="Miklós Horthy" label="Miklós Horthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159211" start="42348" end="42370" title="Austro-Hungarian Navy" label="Austro-Hungarian naval"/>
<link wikidata="Q696970" start="42484" end="42519" title="Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen" label="Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="42537" end="42554" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="Treaty of Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q381868" start="42581" end="42593" title="Gyula Gömbös" label="Gyula Gömbös"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="42760" end="42772" title="anti-Semitism" label="anti-Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q126604" start="43235" end="43253" title="First Vienna Award" label="First Vienna Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="43276" end="43290" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148511" start="43329" end="43348" title="Carpathian Ruthenia" label="Carpathian Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q917134" start="43370" end="43391" title="Northern Transylvania" label="Northern Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q243618" start="43413" end="43432" title="Second Vienna Award" label="Second Vienna Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="43515" end="43537" title="invasion of Yugoslavia" label="invasion of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="43836" end="43871" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="German invasion of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="43889" end="43901" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="43975" end="43988" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q209512" start="44134" end="44155" title="Hungarian Second Army" label="Hungarian Second Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q277985" start="44508" end="44522" title="Voronezh Front" label="Voronezh Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229" start="44544" end="44553" title="Don River (Russia)" label="Don River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059658" start="44569" end="44586" title="Operation Margarethe" label="German occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q117144" start="44857" end="44870" title="Miklós Horthy" label="Miklós Horthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q89383" start="45077" end="45090" title="Otto Skorzeny" label="Otto Skorzeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311171" start="45124" end="45145" title="Operation Panzerfaust" label="Operation Panzerfaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q427359" start="45261" end="45289" title="Government of National Unity (Hungary)" label="Government of National Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q156473" start="45298" end="45312" title="Ferenc Szálasi" label="Ferenc Szálasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315094" start="45326" end="45351" title="Prime Minister of Hungary" label="Prime Minister of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q160159" start="45393" end="45402" title="Hungarism" label="Hungarist"/>
<link wikidata="Q160159" start="45403" end="45420" title="Arrow Cross Party" label="Arrow Cross Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q852742" start="45505" end="45520" title="central Hungary" label="central Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="45529" end="45537" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="45576" end="45584" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q469544" start="45769" end="45783" title="History of the Jews in Hungary" label="Hungarian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q28085" start="45813" end="45827" title="Adolf Eichmann" label="Adolf Eichmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="46211" end="46219" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="46249" end="46257" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="46829" end="46847" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q12742518" start="46916" end="46951" title="German–Romanian Treaty for the Development of Economic Relations between the Two Countries (1939)" label="treaty signed in the spring of 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916505" start="47065" end="47070" title="Polish–Romanian alliance" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="47115" end="47133" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="47209" end="47222" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="47347" end="47370" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="47443" end="47453" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="47459" end="47476" title="Northern Bukovina" label="Northern Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266004" start="47533" end="47601" title="Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and northern Bukovina" label="occupied and annexed Bessarabia, as well as part of northern Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514696" start="47610" end="47623" title="Hertsa region" label="Hertsa region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="47663" end="47669" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="47670" end="47677" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q243618" start="47689" end="47708" title="Second Vienna Award" label="Second Vienna Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q917134" start="47729" end="47750" title="Northern Transylvania" label="Northern Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q912868" start="47763" end="47779" title="Southern Dobruja" label="Southern Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="47793" end="47801" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="47915" end="47928" title="Carol II of Romania" label="King Carol II"/>
<link wikidata="Q152030" start="47951" end="47964" title="Ion Antonescu" label="Ion Antonescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="48099" end="48106" title="Michael of Romania" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q868715" start="48158" end="48168" title="Conducător" label="Conducător"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507497" start="48225" end="48249" title="National Legionary State" label="National Legionary State"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="48291" end="48301" title="Iron Guard" label="Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="48464" end="48479" title="Tripartite Pact" label="Tripartite Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q835412" start="48580" end="48593" title="Romanian Armed Forces" label="Romanian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="48833" end="48849" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q223604" start="48896" end="48913" title="Greco-Italian War" label="Greco-Italian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545517" start="48980" end="49001" title="Legionnaires&amp;#x27; rebellion and Bucharest pogrom" label="ousted the Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="49154" end="49176" title="Invasion of Yugoslavia" label="Invasion of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984402" start="49237" end="49242" title="Banat (1941-1944)" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q134350" start="49318" end="49323" title="Tisza" label="Tisza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960162" start="49604" end="49621" title="Operation Munchen" label="Operation Munchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q167641" start="49686" end="49710" title="Transnistria Governorate" label="Transnistria Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q682409" start="49722" end="49737" title="Siege of Odessa" label="Siege of Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q700937" start="49803" end="49835" title="Crimean Campaign" label="fought their way into the Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q154860" start="49897" end="49916" title="Siege of Sevastopol (1941–42)" label="Siege of Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265" start="50013" end="50020" title="Nalchik" label="Nalchik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362529" start="50057" end="50070" title="Romanian armies in the battle of Stalingrad" label="at Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50152" end="50184" title="Arms industry in Romania#Weapons produced during World War II and the Interwar period" label="Romania&amp;#x27;s military industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387294" start="50367" end="50380" title="Romanian Naval Forces" label="Romanian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q507817" start="50489" end="50507" title="Romanian Air Force" label="Romanian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q917633" start="50557" end="50563" title="IAR-80" label="IAR-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q785044" start="50585" end="50591" title="IAR-37" label="IAR-37"/>
<link wikidata="Q31180366" start="50609" end="50640" title="Romanian armored fighting vehicle production during World War II" label="built armored fighting vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4283238" start="50667" end="50689" title="Mareșal tank destroyer" label="Mareșal tank destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q156662" start="50739" end="50745" title="Hetzer" label="Hetzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179585" start="50874" end="50882" title="Ploiești" label="Ploiești"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189074" start="50963" end="50978" title="Dennis Deletant" label="Dennis Deletant"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="51619" end="51627" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="51632" end="51642" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q715700" start="52022" end="52043" title="First Jassy–Kishinev Offensive" label="unsuccessful invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q552727" start="52116" end="52154" title="Kerch-Eltigen Operation" label="helped repulse initial Soviet landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387294" start="52234" end="52247" title="Romanian Navy" label="Romanian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579880" start="52344" end="52360" title="Horia Macellariu" label="Horia Macellariu"/>
<link wikidata="Q165558" start="52365" end="52402" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q311765" start="52415" end="52439" title="Second Jassy–Kishinev Offensive" label="Jassy-Kishinev Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q575347" start="52464" end="52478" title="King Michael&amp;#x27;s Coup" label="switched sides"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="52725" end="52747" title="Armistice of Cassibile" label="Armistice of Cassibile"/>
<link wikidata="Q714259" start="52846" end="52861" title="Operation Achse" label="Operation Achse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773877" start="52865" end="52890" title="CB-class midget submarine" label="CB-class midget submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q151475" start="53327" end="53337" title="Panzer III" label="Panzer III"/>
<link wikidata="Q12186" start="53339" end="53348" title="Panzer IV" label="Panzer IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q117936" start="53353" end="53370" title="Sturmgeschütz III" label="Sturmgeschütz III"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="53460" end="53480" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Messerschmitt Bf 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q691446" start="53786" end="53797" title="Wunderwaffe" label="Wunderwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019014" start="53818" end="53835" title="Werfer-Granate 21" label="Werfer-Granate 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q156894" start="53861" end="53875" title="Fiesler Storch" label="Fiesler Storch"/>
<link wikidata="Q442850" start="54075" end="54081" title="Alkett" label="Alkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q325635" start="54126" end="54136" title="Telefunken" label="Telefunken"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005151" start="54155" end="54161" title="Böhler" label="Böhler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643432" start="54187" end="54203" title="75 mm Reșița Model 1943" label="75 mm Reșița gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q259122" start="54286" end="54292" title="Pak 40" label="Pak 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q4283238" start="54462" end="54484" title="Mareșal tank destroyer" label="Mareșal tank destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q655369" start="54539" end="54548" title="Waffenamt" label="Waffenamt"/>
<link wikidata="Q585349" start="54641" end="54665" title="Army Group South Ukraine" label="Army Group South Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q152030" start="54726" end="54739" title="Ion Antonescu" label="Ion Antonescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q575347" start="54804" end="54820" title="King Michael&amp;#x27;s Coup" label="he was dismissed"/>
<link wikidata="Q161213" start="54846" end="54853" title="6th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="the 6th"/>
<link wikidata="Q372473" start="54936" end="54952" title="Petre Dumitrescu" label="Petre Dumitrescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="55203" end="55218" title="Slovak Republic (1939-1945)" label="Slovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q154346" start="55235" end="55245" title="Josef Tiso" label="Josef Tiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150620" start="55513" end="55563" title="Slovak invasion of Poland" label="Slovak troops joined the German invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q205530" start="55584" end="55588" title="Spiš" label="Spiš"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028412" start="55593" end="55598" title="Orava (region)" label="Orava"/>
<link wikidata="Q126781" start="55630" end="55645" title="Cieszyn Silesia" label="Cieszyn Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684359" start="55656" end="55664" title="Polish-Czechoslovak border conflicts" label="disputed"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="55754" end="55770" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q163780" start="56299" end="56323" title="Slovak National Uprising" label="Slovak National Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q147909" start="56619" end="56638" title="Tsardom of Bulgaria (1908–1946)" label="Tsardom of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q159585" start="56652" end="56666" title="Boris III of Bulgaria" label="Тsar Boris III"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="56911" end="56920" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="56925" end="56931" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="56953" end="56974" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="56980" end="56997" title="Kingdom of Greece" label="Kingdom of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292449" start="57158" end="57175" title="Treaty of Craiova" label="Treaty of Craiova"/>
<link wikidata="Q912868" start="57213" end="57230" title="Southern Dobrudja" label="Southern Dobrudja"/>
<link wikidata="Q194113" start="57384" end="57405" title="Treaty of San Stefano" label="Treaty of San Stefano"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="57437" end="57464" title="Axis invasion of Yugoslavia" label="Axis invasion of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q939101" start="57684" end="57699" title="Vardar Banovina" label="Vardar Banovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="57736" end="57751" title="Greek Macedonia" label="Greek Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="57756" end="57768" title="Greek Thrace" label="Greek Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q138796" start="57873" end="57892" title="resistance movement" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="57954" end="57987" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Axis invasion of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188381" start="58045" end="58059" title="Bulgarian Navy" label="Bulgarian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="58127" end="58142" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="58289" end="58303" title="Allies of World War II" label="Western Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="58596" end="58601" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="58733" end="58741" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q618048" start="59126" end="59162" title="Bulgarian coup d&amp;#x27;état of 1944" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état of 9 September 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453048" start="59209" end="59225" title="Fatherland Front (Bulgaria)" label="Fatherland Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414156" start="59299" end="59318" title="3rd Ukrainian Front" label="3rd Ukrainian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q322943" start="59416" end="59434" title="Paris Peace Treaties, 1947" label="Paris Peace Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q912868" start="59515" end="59531" title="Southern Dobruja" label="Southern Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="59667" end="59695" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="59968" end="59986" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Yugoslav Partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36965" start="60006" end="60018" title="Ante Pavelić" label="Ante Pavelić"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="60074" end="60080" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048318" start="60146" end="60155" title="Poglavnik" label="Poglavnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q139596" start="60299" end="60321" title="National Fascist Party" label="National Fascist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="60801" end="60815" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q169902" start="60833" end="60844" title="Tomislav II" label="Tomislav II"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="60920" end="60928" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265120" start="61759" end="61780" title="Croatian nationalism" label="Croatian nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="61854" end="61879" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="Alexander I of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q650723" start="61899" end="61945" title="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization" label="Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="61987" end="62004" title="Yugoslav Partisans" label="Yugoslav Partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="62230" end="62245" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="62281" end="62291" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296449" start="62467" end="62486" title="Croatian Home Guard (World War II)" label="Croatian Home Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435190" start="62857" end="62871" title="Ustaše militia" label="Ustaše militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="63293" end="63306" title="Romani people" label="Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q155032" start="63407" end="63435" title="Jasenovac concentration camp" label="Jasenovac concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="63442" end="63466" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q238990" start="63687" end="63726" title="United States Holocaust Memorial Museum" label="United States Holocaust Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278544" start="63756" end="63804" title="Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia" label="320,000 and 340,000 Serbs were killed in the NDH"/>
<link wikidata="Q313128" start="64669" end="64680" title="Prince Paul of Yugoslavia" label="Prince Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118311" start="64730" end="64746" title="Yugoslav coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q223183" start="64767" end="64777" title="Peter II of Yugoslavia" label="King Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q219017" start="64847" end="64860" title="Dušan Simović" label="Dušan Simović"/>
<link wikidata="Q13570122" start="65521" end="65532" title="Litmus test (politics)" label="litmus test"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="65642" end="65666" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139796" start="65824" end="65854" title="Imperial Japanese Armed Forces" label="Imperial Japanese Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q704714" start="65870" end="65917" title="Provisional Government of the Republic of China (1937–1940)" label="Provisional Government of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="65921" end="65928" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q708865" start="65964" end="66008" title="Reformed Government of the Republic of China" label="Reformed Government of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q696242" start="66086" end="66126" title="Reorganized National Government of China" label="Reorganized National Government of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q22303" start="66156" end="66168" title="Wang Jingwei" label="Wang Jingwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="66933" end="66943" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="67086" end="67103" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q709541" start="67360" end="67375" title="New Fourth Army" label="New Fourth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q704276" start="67449" end="67460" title="Chen Gongbo" label="Chen Gongbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q715849" start="67526" end="67536" title="Zhou Fohai" label="Zhou Fohai"/>
<link wikidata="Q705832" start="67716" end="67726" title="He Yingqin" label="He Yingqin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="67759" end="67774" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q150939" start="68067" end="68087" title="Operation Weserübung" label="attacked Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308186" start="68110" end="68136" title="German invasion of Denmark (1940)" label="German invasion of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q156617" start="68152" end="68163" title="Christian X of Denmark" label="Christian X"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525920" start="68712" end="68728" title="Henrik Kauffmann" label="Henrik Kauffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215761" start="68802" end="68809" title="Iceland in World War II" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776884" start="68811" end="68820" title="Greenland in World War II" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q655472" start="68908" end="68924" title="Frikorps Danmark" label="Frikorps Danmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q57370" start="69208" end="69221" title="Atlantic Wall" label="Atlantic Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886825" start="69387" end="69432" title="Danish Folketing election, 1943" label="regularly scheduled and largely free election"/>
<link wikidata="Q209151" start="69448" end="69457" title="Folketing" label="Folketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="69499" end="69510" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q325013" start="69521" end="69537" title="Operation Safari" label="Operation Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006452" start="69668" end="69685" title="Royal Danish Navy" label="Royal Danish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10466708" start="69904" end="69936" title="Danish Brigade in Sweden" label="Danish military brigade in exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q708767" start="69965" end="69991" title="Danish resistance movement" label="Danish resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="70217" end="70233" title="Continuation War" label="Continuation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q322943" start="70494" end="70506" title="Paris Peace Treaties, 1947" label="peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="70899" end="70912" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="71542" end="71552" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q62519" start="71567" end="71606" title="Finnish Democratic Republic" label="establish a communist puppet government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068477" start="71643" end="71675" title="Swedish iron-ore industry during World War II" label="Germany&amp;#x27;s iron-ore supplies"/>
<link wikidata="Q209010" start="71884" end="71900" title="Karelian Isthmus" label="Karelian Isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14657" start="71949" end="71956" title="Viipuri" label="Viipuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q155093" start="72002" end="72017" title="Mannerheim Line" label="Mannerheim Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q155863" start="72536" end="72545" title="Kronstadt" label="Kronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q645" start="72550" end="72560" title="Neva River" label="Neva River"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="72621" end="72633" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q847492" start="72707" end="72724" title="Finnish Air Force" label="Finnish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="72906" end="72922" title="Continuation War" label="Continuation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q152306" start="73062" end="73089" title="Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim" label="Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809982" start="73100" end="73116" title="Order of the Day" label="Order of the Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q192273" start="73218" end="73225" title="Karelia" label="Karelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="73337" end="73352" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013438" start="73409" end="73416" title="Pechenga (urban-type settlement), Murmansk Oblast" label="Petsamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q476914" start="73756" end="73781" title="Ryti-Ribbentrop Agreement" label="Ryti-Ribbentrop Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q327042" start="73814" end="73830" title="Finnish Defence Forces" label="its armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q313442" start="73935" end="73955" title="Operation Silver Fox" label="Operation Silver Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q151860" start="74018" end="74036" title="Siege of Leningrad" label="Siege of Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q476914" start="74191" end="74216" title="Ryti-Ribbentrop Agreement" label="Ryti-Ribbentrop Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q700533" start="74308" end="74347" title="Fourth strategic offensive" label="Soviet offensive coordinated with D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q209435" start="74428" end="74438" title="Risto Ryti" label="Risto Ryti"/>
<link wikidata="Q152306" start="74627" end="74654" title="Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim" label="Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321586" start="74782" end="74798" title="Moscow Armistice" label="Moscow Armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q154940" start="74944" end="74955" title="Lapland War" label="Lapland War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057925" start="75006" end="75031" title="Northeast China" label="northeast region of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="75069" end="75078" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q185152" start="75122" end="75126" title="Puyi" label="Puyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q268218" start="75137" end="75152" title="Emperor of China" label="Chinese Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="75160" end="75172" title="Qing Dynasty" label="Qing Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q646394" start="75245" end="75258" title="Kwantung Army" label="Kwantung Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="75310" end="75317" title="Manchu people" label="Manchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="75336" end="75347" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q242099" start="75373" end="75403" title="Mukden Incident" label="Japanese invasion of Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="75614" end="75631" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="75791" end="75809" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="75811" end="75821" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="75827" end="75838" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q713427" start="75965" end="75971" title="Ba Maw" label="Ba Maw"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="75973" end="75981" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153" start="76037" end="76056" title="Subhas Chandra Bose" label="Subhas Chandra Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165880" start="76256" end="76284" title="Soviet invasion of Manchuria" label="Soviet invasion of Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="76398" end="76442" title="Francisco Franco" label="&amp;quot;Caudillo&amp;quot; Francisco Franco&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="76443" end="76456" title="Spain under Franco" label="Spanish State"/>
<link wikidata="Q152195" start="76625" end="76644" title="Anti-Comintern Pact" label="Anti-Comintern Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q207308" start="76702" end="76709" title="Falange Española y de las JONS" label="Falange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="76753" end="76762" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497642" start="76826" end="76852" title="Tangier International Zone" label="Tangier International Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q907234" start="76854" end="76868" title="French Morocco" label="French Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q218272" start="76886" end="76900" title="French Algeria" label="French Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q111180987" start="76946" end="76979" title="Spanish America" label="Spanish colonies in Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q231331" start="77148" end="77161" title="Oran Province" label="Oran Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="77165" end="77172" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="77199" end="77206" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q689837" start="77225" end="77239" title="Spanish Sahara" label="Spanish Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028848" start="77302" end="77318" title="French Cameroons" label="French Cameroons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232509" start="77324" end="77338" title="Spanish Guinea" label="Spanish Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="77859" end="77876" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359118" start="78041" end="78049" title="matériel" label="matériel"/>
<link wikidata="Q798836" start="78092" end="78115" title="Corpo Truppe Volontarie" label="Corpo Truppe Volontarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q159901" start="78452" end="78465" title="Blue Division" label="Blue Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q399358" start="78508" end="78529" title="Agustín Muñoz Grandes" label="Agustín Muñoz Grandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249339" start="78682" end="78728" title="Falange Espanola Tradicionalista y de las JONS" label="Falange Espanola Tradicionalista y de las JONS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="78732" end="78745" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="78758" end="78769" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q28501255" start="79078" end="79094" title="Falange Exterior" label="Falange Exterior"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="79187" end="79213" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799545" start="79222" end="79250" title="Philippine Commonwealth Army" label="Philippine Commonwealth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="79258" end="79269" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185046" start="79282" end="79300" title="Philippine Falange" label="Philippine Falange"/>
<link wikidata="Q194161" start="79737" end="79745" title="Aung San" label="Aung San"/>
<link wikidata="Q704358" start="79810" end="79824" title="State of Burma" label="State of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q713427" start="79890" end="79896" title="Ba Maw" label="Ba Maw"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027248" start="80386" end="80405" title="Burma National Army" label="Burma National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q194161" start="80431" end="80439" title="Aung San" label="Aung San"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="80483" end="80497" title="Burma campaign" label="Burma campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909873" start="80841" end="80849" title="History of Thailand (1932–1973)" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q456413" start="81012" end="81029" title="Clare Boothe Luce" label="Clare Boothe Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909873" start="81108" end="81116" title="History of Thailand (1932–1973)" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q780845" start="81127" end="81142" title="Franco-Thai War" label="Franco-Thai War"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="81197" end="81213" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200928" start="81215" end="81247" title="Japanese invasion of Thailand" label="Japanese forces invaded Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="81278" end="81300" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q152777" start="81456" end="81471" title="Plaek Phibunsongkhram" label="Phibunsongkhram"/>
<link wikidata="Q25539142" start="81795" end="81812" title="Sang Phathanothai" label="Sang Phathanothai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787389" start="81962" end="81976" title="Mom Rajawongse" label="Mom Rajawongse"/>
<link wikidata="Q714042" start="81977" end="81988" title="Seni Pramoj" label="Seni Pramoj"/>
<link wikidata="Q456847" start="82228" end="82238" title="Shan State" label="Shan State"/>
<link wikidata="Q18126598" start="82243" end="82256" title="Karenni States" label="Karenni State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181127" start="82365" end="82376" title="Phayap Army" label="Phayap Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027111" start="82632" end="82640" title="Kengtung" label="Kengtung"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="82755" end="82761" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765854" start="82909" end="82920" title="Shan States" label="Shan States"/>
<link wikidata="Q652845" start="82925" end="82936" title="Kayah State" label="Kayah State"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="82998" end="83004" title="British Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="83114" end="83119" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q708957" start="83391" end="83409" title="Free Thai Movement" label="Free Thai Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q248893" start="83559" end="83574" title="Ananda Mahidol" label="The king&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278050" start="83587" end="83599" title="Rambai Barni" label="Rambai Barni"/>
<link wikidata="Q714934" start="83661" end="83676" title="Pridi Banomyong" label="Pridi Banomyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="83862" end="83890" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750809" start="83903" end="83912" title="Force 136" label="Force 136"/>
<link wikidata="Q719235" start="84130" end="84146" title="Khuang Aphaiwong" label="Khuang Aphaiwong"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="84426" end="84432" title="British Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376315" start="84488" end="84501" title="British Burma" label="British Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896822" start="84949" end="84967" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact negotiations" label="Britain and France"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="85273" end="85279" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="85290" end="85297" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="85299" end="85306" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="85308" end="85314" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="85319" end="85328" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q593682" start="85347" end="85366" title="spheres of interest" label="spheres of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="85505" end="85519" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519948" start="85569" end="85593" title="aftermath of World War I" label="aftermath of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411476" start="85626" end="85631" title="Kresy" label="Kresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="85641" end="85648" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="85710" end="85727" title="Soviet-Polish War" label="Soviet-Polish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="85805" end="85827" title="Invasion of Poland" label="Germany invaded Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305266" start="85846" end="85874" title="Soviet invasion of Poland" label="invaded Poland from the east"/>
<link wikidata="Q26195" start="85920" end="85933" title="German-Soviet Frontier Treaty" label="secret treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363019" start="85987" end="86004" title="Polish resistance movement in World War II" label="Polish resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="86117" end="86122" title="Gulag" label="Gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q134301" start="86192" end="86206" title="Katyn massacre" label="Katyn massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q58473" start="86260" end="86289" title="Occupation of Baltic Republics" label="occupied the Baltic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="86336" end="86346" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="86351" end="86368" title="Bukovina" label="Northern Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="86456" end="86466" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q695285" start="86532" end="86545" title="Moscow Peace Treaty" label="interim peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="86620" end="86629" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q573331" start="86768" end="86777" title="German-Soviet Commercial Agreement (1939)" label="the first"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552224" start="86790" end="86800" title="German-Soviet Commercial Agreement (1940)" label="the second"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="86851" end="86861" title="phosphates" label="phosphates"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="86863" end="86871" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="86876" end="86884" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q583582" start="86886" end="86897" title="mineral oil" label="mineral oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749007" start="87103" end="87122" title="German–Soviet Axis talks" label="German–Soviet talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="87185" end="87198" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25475" start="87358" end="87363" title="Batum" label="Batum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="87368" end="87372" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="87405" end="87417" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="87686" end="87718" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="the invasion of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q157136" start="87760" end="87770" title="Lebensraum" label="Lebensraum"/>
<link wikidata="Q636261" start="87775" end="87789" title="Heim ins Reich" label="Heim ins Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="87872" end="87888" title="battle of France" label="battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587677" start="87913" end="87956" title="Prime Minister of France" label="Prime Minister of the French Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170360" start="88048" end="88070" title="Armistice with France (Second Compiègne)" label="concluded an armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="88187" end="88206" title="occupied France" label="occupied two-thirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862886" start="88273" end="88287" title="Armistice Army" label="armistice army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575913" start="88320" end="88344" title="Zone libre" label="unoccupied southern zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="88397" end="88419" title="French colonial empire" label="French colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="88428" end="88439" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26234937" start="88587" end="88592" title="Mandatory Syrian Republic" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q130842" start="88597" end="88612" title="Greater Lebanon" label="Greater Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501842" start="88618" end="88645" title="French Madagascar" label="French colony of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q333126" start="88654" end="88671" title="French Somaliland" label="French Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q503347" start="89232" end="89283" title="Attack on Mers-el-Kébir" label="the attack on the Algerian harbour of Mers el-Kebir"/>
<link wikidata="Q705157" start="89455" end="89472" title="Propaganda in Nazi Germany" label="German propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q193582" start="89662" end="89686" title="French National Assembly" label="French National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="89779" end="89791" title="French State" label="French State"/>
<link wikidata="Q93351" start="89949" end="89954" title="Vichy" label="Vichy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="90152" end="90198" title="Free France" label="de Gaulle&amp;#x27;s government-in-exile in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q702758" start="90264" end="90286" title="History of the Jews in France" label="foreign Jews in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q158749" start="90313" end="90326" title="Albert Lebrun" label="Albert Lebrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q636262" start="90421" end="90428" title="Vizille" label="Vizille"/>
<link wikidata="Q140025" start="90665" end="90697" title="invasion of French Indochina" label="Japan to occupy French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="90896" end="90912" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200928" start="90943" end="90964" title="Japanese invasion of Thailand" label="invasions of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q696664" start="90966" end="90972" title="Malayan Campaign" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q698226" start="90978" end="90999" title="Dutch East Indies campaign" label="the Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q696829" start="91033" end="91090" title="Battle of Dakar" label="led an attack by Allied forces on the Vichy port of Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q210682" start="91094" end="91112" title="French West Africa" label="French West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q696848" start="91266" end="91281" title="Anglo-Iraqi War" label="Anglo-Iraqi War"/>
<link wikidata="Q139708" start="91358" end="91381" title="French mandate of Syria" label="French mandate of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q770698" start="91457" end="91492" title="Syria-Lebanon campaign" label="Syria and Lebanon in June–July 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052651" start="91520" end="91547" title="Battle of Madagascar" label="took over French Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q271894" start="91628" end="91652" title="French Equatorial Africa" label="French Equatorial Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="91654" end="91663" title="French Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="91665" end="91678" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078515" start="91719" end="91733" title="Appeal of 18 June" label="from the start"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="91794" end="91841" title="Operation Torch" label="landing of Allied troops in French North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q156916" start="91870" end="91885" title="François Darlan" label="François Darlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q691565" start="91961" end="92035" title="Case Anton" label="German and Italian forces invaded the non-occupied zone in southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q352061" start="92227" end="92246" title="French North Africa" label="French North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q318122" start="92254" end="92266" title="Henri Giraud" label="Henri Giraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="92297" end="92308" title="Free France" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92357" end="92382" title="Free France#Creation of the French National Committee (CNF)" label="French National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q59281" start="92437" end="92459" title="provisional government" label="provisional government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="92463" end="92470" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q565213" start="92485" end="92524" title="French Committee of National Liberation" label="French Committee of National Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q579564" start="92623" end="92629" title="Milice" label="Milice"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="92794" end="92811" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422284" start="92961" end="92976" title="Popular Front (France)" label="Front Populaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q568676" start="93090" end="93121" title="Legion of French Volunteers Against Bolshevism" label="Légion des Volontaires Français"/>
<link wikidata="Q225723" start="93190" end="93232" title="33rd Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS Charlemagne (1st French)" label="Waffen-SS Division &amp;quot;Charlemagne&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544916" start="93558" end="93577" title="Sigmaringen enclave" label="Sigmaringen enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="93599" end="93616" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="93682" end="93698" title="Arab nationalist" label="Arab nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q369936" start="93699" end="93721" title="Rashid Ali al-Gaylani" label="Rashīd ʿAlī al-Gaylānī"/>
<link wikidata="Q641205" start="93741" end="93761" title="1941 Iraqi coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="seized power in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q369936" start="94103" end="94124" title="Rashid Ali al-Gaylani" label="Rashid Ali al-Gaylani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476165" start="94139" end="94161" title="Prime Minister of Iraq" label="Prime Minister of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q541372" start="94577" end="94603" title="Anglo-Iraqi Treaty (1930)" label="Anglo-Iraqi Treaty of 1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q164745" start="94710" end="94734" title="Mohammad Amin al-Husayni" label="Mohammad Amin al-Husayni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774336" start="94740" end="94764" title="Grand Mufti of Jerusalem" label="Grand Mufti of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="94832" end="94837" title="Jihad" label="Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511741" start="95033" end="95041" title="Führer Directive No. 30" label="Order 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928141" start="95391" end="95407" title="RAF Habbaniya" label="the RAF air base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032220" start="95411" end="95421" title="Habbaniyah" label="Habbaniyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q770698" start="95590" end="95619" title="Syria–Lebanon campaign" label="entering and conquering Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q678116" start="95982" end="96001" title="government-in-exile" label="government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320053" start="96864" end="96899" title="German-occupied Europe" label="German-occupied countries in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="96983" end="96998" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q156111" start="97005" end="97023" title="General Government" label="General Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="97027" end="97042" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)" label="occupied Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q819274" start="97081" end="97096" title="Occupation of Norway by Nazi Germany" label="occupied Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616953" start="97102" end="97121" title="Quisling regime" label="National Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q151364" start="97132" end="97147" title="Vidkun Quisling" label="Vidkun Quisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546863" start="97161" end="97201" title="Quisling" label="came to symbolize pro-Axis collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q335200" start="97248" end="97275" title="Reichskommissariat Norwegen" label="Reichskommissariat Norwegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q706454" start="97391" end="97415" title="History of the Netherlands (1939–1945)" label="the occupied Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q537005" start="97417" end="97430" title="Anton Mussert" label="Anton Mussert"/>
<link wikidata="Q325186" start="97519" end="97546" title="National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands" label="National Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448131" start="97751" end="97758" title="Albania under Italy" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299868" start="97829" end="97857" title="National Liberation Movement (Albania)" label="National Liberation Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q689339" start="97908" end="97922" title="Balli Kombëtar" label="Balli Kombëtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19689" start="98072" end="98078" title="Tirana" label="Tirana"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479665" start="98084" end="98103" title="Fallschirmjäger" label="German paratroopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="98154" end="98173" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="German High Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q331022" start="98232" end="98247" title="greater Albania" label="greater Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915020" start="98967" end="98984" title="History of the Jews in Albania" label="Jewish population"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589262" start="99302" end="99334" title="Government of National Salvation" label="Government of National Salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152793" start="99426" end="99449" title="Commissioner Government" label="Commissioner Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q701914" start="99470" end="99524" title="Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia" label="Territory of the (German) Military Commander in Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="99532" end="99544" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q156122" start="99795" end="99811" title="Draža Mihailović" label="Draža Mihailović"/>
<link wikidata="Q872672" start="99819" end="99827" title="Chetniks" label="Chetniks"/>
<link wikidata="Q167443" start="99871" end="99882" title="Milan Nedić" label="Milan Nedić"/>
<link wikidata="Q264665" start="99952" end="99961" title="Kitzbühel" label="Kitzbühel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="99963" end="99970" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q698270" start="100570" end="100596" title="Banjica Concentration Camp" label="Banjica Concentration Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="101515" end="101531" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="101611" end="101618" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q698778" start="101831" end="101835" title="Gran Sasso raid" label="raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q89383" start="101862" end="101875" title="Otto Skorzeny" label="Otto Skorzeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="101973" end="101981" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888837" start="102171" end="102196" title="German invasion of Greece" label="German invasion of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112644" start="102219" end="102235" title="Greek government in exile" label="Greek government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013827" start="102265" end="102279" title="Hellenic State (1941-1944)" label="Hellenic State"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152" start="102720" end="102737" title="Central Macedonia" label="Central Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="102787" end="102792" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="102807" end="102813" title="Attica" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q201111" start="103129" end="103138" title="Aromanians" label="Aromanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284745" start="103139" end="103151" title="Roman Legion (1941–1943)" label="Roman Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q490035" start="103199" end="103215" title="Greek Resistance" label="Greek Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16673775" start="103882" end="103902" title="Kingdom of Kampuchea (1945)" label="Kingdom of Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173090" start="104017" end="104048" title="French protectorate of Cambodia" label="French protectorate of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q696192" start="104381" end="104419" title="Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere" label="Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="104426" end="104434" title="Norodom Sihanouk" label="Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q367210" start="104510" end="104524" title="Son Ngoc Thanh" label="Son Ngoc Thanh"/>
<link wikidata="Q367210" start="104679" end="104693" title="Son Ngoc Thanh" label="Son Ngoc Thanh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="104738" end="104748" title="Phnom Penh" label="Phnom Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q715197" start="104895" end="104904" title="Azad Hind" label="Azad Hind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153" start="105088" end="105107" title="Subhas Chandra Bose" label="Subhas Chandra Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633888" start="105112" end="105130" title="Indian nationalist" label="Indian nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="105144" end="105158" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453094" start="105217" end="105243" title="First Indian National Army" label="First Indian National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977764" start="105349" end="105372" title="I Kikan" label="Japanese liaison office"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010104" start="105396" end="105422" title="Indian Independence League" label="Indian Independence League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404723" start="105731" end="105745" title="Operation U-Go" label="U Go Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q707238" start="105891" end="105906" title="Battle of Imphal" label="siege of Imphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15986363" start="105966" end="105994" title="Burma campaign 1944–45" label="against the Allied offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065239" start="106205" end="106255" title="Japanese occupation of the Andaman Islands" label="nominal control of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q697837" start="106328" end="106337" title="Mengjiang" label="Mengjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="106369" end="106383" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q715770" start="106418" end="106432" title="Demchugdongrub" label="Demchugdongrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="106436" end="106442" title="Mongol" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="106467" end="106479" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="107177" end="107187" title="Mongols" label="Mongolians"/>
<link wikidata="Q22303" start="107331" end="107343" title="Wang Jingwei" label="Wang Jingwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="107866" end="107883" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q379794" start="108099" end="108111" title="Sisavang Vong" label="Sīsavāngvong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="108355" end="108364" title="Battle of Bataan#Fall of Bataan" label="surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q13739" start="108404" end="108420" title="Bataan Peninsula" label="Bataan Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q928075" start="108425" end="108442" title="Corregidor Island" label="Corregidor Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116283" start="108536" end="108564" title="National Assembly of the Philippines" label="Philippine National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027229" start="108593" end="108613" title="Second Philippine Republic" label="independent Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q360113" start="108626" end="108637" title="José P. Laurel" label="José Laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209571" start="108645" end="108654" title="President of the Philippines" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q607286" start="108746" end="108769" title="anti-Japanese sentiment" label="anti-Japanese sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q223419" start="109013" end="109025" title="Manuel Roxas" label="Manuel Roxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418426" start="109102" end="109108" title="Senate of the Philippines" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q701337" start="109152" end="109169" title="Empire of Vietnam" label="Empire of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="109291" end="109307" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q223771" start="109501" end="109508" title="Bảo Đại" label="Bảo Đại"/>
<link wikidata="Q665382" start="109548" end="109562" title="Trần Trọng Kim" label="Trần Trọng Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="109725" end="109768" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attacked the US naval bases in Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="109814" end="109829" title="Tripartite Pact" label="Tripartite Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q637829" start="110163" end="110172" title="Reichstag (Weimar Republic)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q18245647" start="110182" end="110223" title="German declaration of war against the United States (1941)" label="formally declare war on the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164126" start="110415" end="110437" title="Italian declaration of war on the United States (1941)" label="declared war on the US"/>
<link wikidata="Q312532" start="110450" end="110461" title="Ian Kershaw" label="Ian Kershaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q157627" start="110771" end="110793" title="Battle of the Atlantic" label="Battle of the Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q569454" start="110883" end="110900" title="Second Happy Time" label="Second Happy Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391261" start="111179" end="111191" title="Rainbow Five" label="Rainbow Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q714218" start="111379" end="111407" title="Axis leaders of World War II" label="Axis leaders of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830637" start="111410" end="111458" title="Axis powers negotiations on the division of Asia" label="Axis powers negotiations on the division of Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="111461" end="111475" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420785" start="111478" end="111538" title="List of expansion operations and planning of the Axis powers" label="List of expansion operations and planning of the Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468574" start="111541" end="111577" title="Foreign relations of the Axis powers" label="Foreign relations of the Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749007" start="111580" end="111604" title="German-Soviet Axis talks" label="German-Soviet Axis talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914778" start="111607" end="111629" title="Greater Germanic Reich" label="Greater Germanic Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q717303" start="111632" end="111643" title="Hakkō ichiu" label="Hakkō ichiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205903" start="111646" end="111687" title="Hypothetical Axis victory in World War II" label="Hypothetical Axis victory in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q839554" start="111690" end="111723" title="Italian imperialism under Fascism" label="Italian imperialism under Fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48813091" start="111726" end="111774" title="Croatian–Romanian–Slovak friendship proclamation" label="Croatian–Romanian–Slovak friendship proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170659" start="111777" end="111859" title="List of pro-Axis leaders and governments or direct control in occupied territories" label="List of pro-Axis leaders and governments or direct control in occupied territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q649117" start="111862" end="111880" title="New Order (Nazism)" label="New Order (Nazism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q718921" start="111883" end="111906" title="World War II by country" label="World War II by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q706852" start="111915" end="111935" title="Hitlers Zweites Buch" label="Hitlers Zweites Buch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43508" wikidata="Q173445" url="?curid=43508" title="Amen">
<text>Amen (, ; , ; , ; , ) is an Abrahamic declaration of affirmation which is first found in the Hebrew Bible, and subsequently found in the New Testament. It is used in Jewish, Christian, and Islamic practices as a concluding word, or as a response to a prayer. Common English translations of the word &quot;amen&quot; include &quot;verily&quot;, &quot;truly&quot;, &quot;it is true&quot;, and &quot;let it be so&quot;. It is also used colloquially, to express strong agreement.

==Pronunciations==

In English, the word &quot;amen&quot; has two primary pronunciations, () or (), with minor additional variation in emphasis (e.g., the two syllables may be equally stressed instead of placing primary stress on the second). In Anglophone North American usage, the &quot;ah-men&quot; pronunciation is used in performances of classical music and in churches with more formalized liturgy.

The &quot;ay-men&quot; pronunciation is a product of the Great Vowel Shift (i.e., it dates from the 15th century); it is associated with Irish Protestantism and with conservative evangelical denominations generally. It is also the pronunciation typically used in gospel music.

==Etymology==
&quot;Amen&quot; is a word of Biblical Hebrew origin. It appears many times in the Hebrew Bible as a confirmatory response, especially following blessings. The basic triconsonantal root , from which the word is derived, is common to a number of languages in the Semitic branch of the Afroasiatic languages, including biblical Aramaic. Meanings of the root in Hebrew include &quot;to be firm or confirmed, to be reliable or dependable, to be faithful, to have faith, to believe.&quot; The word was imported into Greek from the Judaism of the early Church. From Greek, &quot;amen&quot; entered other European languages. According to a standard dictionary etymology of the English word, &quot;amen&quot; passed from Greek into Late Latin, and thence into English.

From Hebrew, the word was later adopted into the Arabic religious vocabulary and leveled to the Arabic root , which is of similar meanings to the Hebrew. The interjection occurs in the Christian and Islamic lexicons, most commonly in prayer, as well as secularly, albeit less commonly, so as to signify complete affirmation or deference. In religious texts, it occurs in Arabic translations of the Bible and after reciting the traditionally first chapter of the Quran, which is formally akin to religious supplications.

Popular among some theosophists, proponents of Afrocentric theories of history, and adherents of esoteric Christianity is the conjecture that &quot;amen&quot; is a derivative of the name of the Egyptian god Amun (which is sometimes also spelled Amen). Some adherents of Eastern religions believe that &quot;amen&quot; shares roots with the Hindu Sanskrit word &quot;Aum&quot;. Such external etymologies are not included in standard etymological reference works. The Hebrew word, as noted above, starts with aleph, while the Egyptian name begins with a yodh.

In French, the Hebrew word &quot;amen&quot; is sometimes translated as &quot;Ainsi soit-il&quot;, which means &quot;So be it.&quot;

The linguist Ghil&#x27;ad Zuckermann argues that, as in the case of Hallelujah, the word &quot;amen&quot; is usually not replaced by a translation due to the speakers&#x27; belief in iconicity, their perception that there is something intrinsic about the relationship between the sound of the signifier (the word) and what it signifies (its meaning).

===Hebrew Bible===
The word occurs in the Hebrew Bible 30 times; in Deuteronomy alone 12 times beginning at 27:15. The fixed phrase &#x27;Amen, Amen&#x27; is seen five times – Psalm 41:13; 72:19; 89:52; Numbers 5:22; Nehemiah 8:6. It is translated as &#x27;of truth&#x27; two times in Isaiah 65:16. Three distinct Biblical usages of &quot;amen&quot; may be noted:
# Initial &quot;amen&quot;, referring back to words of another speaker and introducing an affirmative sentence, e.g. 1 Kings 1:36.
# Detached &quot;amen&quot;, again referring to the words of another speaker but without a complementary affirmative sentence, e.g. Nehemiah 5:13.
# Final &quot;amen&quot;, with no change of speaker, as in the subscription to the first three divisions of Psalms.

===New Testament===

In the New Testament, the Greek word ἀμήν is used as an expression of faith or as a part of a liturgical formula. It also may appear as an introductory word, especially in sayings of Jesus. Unlike the initial &quot;amen&quot; in Hebrew, which refers back to something already said, it is used by Jesus to emphasize what he is about to say (ἀμὴν λέγω, &quot;truly I say to you&quot;), a rhetorical device that has no parallel in contemporary Jewish practice. Raymond Brown says that Jesus&#x27;s peculiar and authentic reminiscent use of amen in the Fourth Gospel is an affirmation that what he is about to say is an echo from the Father. The word occurs 52 times in the Synoptic Gospels; the Gospel of John has 25.

In the King James Bible, the word &quot;amen&quot; is seen in a number of contexts. Notable ones include:
* The catechism of curses of the Law found in Deuteronomy 27.
* A double &quot;amen&quot; (&quot;amen and amen&quot;) occurs in Psalm 89 (Psalm 41:13; 72:19; 89:52), to confirm the words and invoke the fulfillment of them.
* &quot;Amen&quot; occurs in several doxology formulas in Romans 1:25, 9:5, 11:36, 15:33, and several times in Chapter 16. It also appears in doxologies in the Psalms (41:14; 72:19; 89:53; 106:48). This liturgical form from Judaism.
* It concludes all of Paul&#x27;s general epistles.
* In Revelation 3:14, Jesus is referred to as, &quot;the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of God&#x27;s creation.&quot; The whole passage reads as &quot;And unto the angel of the church of the Laodiceans write; These things saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God&quot;. Notably, the text never specifically says that Jesus is the Amen. Although the letter is attributed to Jesus, the text refers to the Amen as having spoken the information that is being reported by Jesus in the letter. That the Amen is a witness, suggest some scholars, implies that the Amen is a being of some kind whose words are being referenced. 
* &quot;Amen&quot; concludes the last book of the New Testament, at Rev. 22:21.

==Congregational use==
===Judaism===
Although amen, in Judaism, is commonly used as a response to a blessing, it also is often used by Hebrew speakers as an affirmation of other forms of declaration (including outside of religious context).

Jewish rabbinical law requires an individual to say &quot;amen&quot; in a variety of contexts. With the rise of the synagogue during the Second Temple period, &quot;amen&quot; became a common response, especially to benedictions. It is recited communally to affirm a blessing made by the prayer reader. It is also mandated as a response during the kaddish doxology. The congregation is sometimes prompted to answer &quot;amen&quot; by the terms &quot;ve-&#x27;imru&quot; () = &quot;and [now] say (pl.),&quot; or, &quot;ve-nomar&quot; (ונאמר) = &quot;and we will say.&quot; Contemporary usage reflects ancient practice: As early as the 4th century BCE, Jews assembled in the Temple responded &quot;amen&quot; at the close of a doxology or other prayer uttered by a priest. This Jewish liturgical use of amen was adopted by the Christians. But Jewish law also requires individuals to answer &quot;amen&quot; whenever they hear a blessing recited, even in a non-liturgical setting.

The Talmud teaches homiletically that the word &quot;amen&quot; is an acronym for אל מלך נאמן (, &quot;God, trustworthy King&quot;), the phrase recited silently by an individual before reciting the Shma.

Jews usually use Hebrew pronunciations of the word: (Israeli and Sephardi) or (Ashkenazi).

===Christianity===
The use of &quot;amen&quot; has been generally adopted in Christian worship as a concluding word for prayers and hymns and an expression of strong agreement. The liturgical use of the word in apostolic times is attested (1 Corinthians 14:16), and Justin Martyr (c. 150) describes the congregation as responding &quot;amen&quot; to the benediction after the celebration of the Eucharist. Its introduction into the baptismal formula (in the Eastern Orthodox Church it is pronounced after the name of each person of the Trinity) was probably later.

In Isaiah 65:16, the authorized version has &quot;the God of truth&quot; (&quot;the God of amen&quot; in Hebrew). Jesus often used amen to put emphasis to his own words (translated: &quot;verily&quot; or &quot;truly&quot;). In John&#x27;s Gospel, it is repeated, &quot;Verily, verily&quot; (or &quot;Truly, truly&quot;). Amen is also used in oaths (Numbers 5:22; Deuteronomy 27:15–26; Nehemiah 5:13; 8:6; 1 Chronicles 16:36).
&quot;Amen&quot; is also used in standard, international French, but in Cajun French &quot;&quot; (&quot;so be it&quot;) is used instead.

Amen is used at the end of the Lord&#x27;s Prayer, which is also called the Our Father or the &quot;Pater Noster&quot;.

In some Christian churches, the &quot;amen corner&quot; or &quot;amen section&quot; is any subset of the congregation likely to call out &quot;Amen!&quot; in response to points in a preacher&#x27;s sermon. Metaphorically, the term can refer to any group of heartfelt traditionalists or supporters of an authority figure. The term has also been used as a place name, and as a title for musical and literary works; see &quot;Amen Corner&quot;.

===Islam===

&quot;ʾĀmīn&quot; () is the Arabic form of &quot;Amen&quot;. In Islam, it is used with the same meaning as in Judaism and Christianity; when concluding a prayer, especially after a supplication (du&#x27;a) or reciting the first surah Al Fatiha of the Qur&#x27;an, as in prayer (salat), and as an assent to the prayers of others.

Arabic dictionaries define &quot;ʾāmīn&quot; as an imperative verbal noun, whose meaning is &quot;answer&quot; or &quot;reply&quot; (i.e., imploring God to grant one&#x27;s prayer). The word was borrowed from Hebrew into Arabic in only this context, thus it is strictly used in Arabic as a final &quot;amen&quot; to conclude supplications or to declare affirmation, and has no initial &quot;amen&quot; usage with the meaning of &quot;truly&quot; or &quot;certainly&quot; as found in the word’s original Hebrew language grammar.

==See also==
*Selah
*Aum
*So mote it be

==References==
==Further reading==
* Schnitker, Thaddeus A. &quot;Amen.&quot; In &quot;The Encyclopedia of Christianity&quot;, edited by Erwin Fahlbusch and Geoffrey William Bromiley, 43–44. Vol. 1. Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 1999. 

==External links==
* &quot;Amen&quot; from the &quot;Catechism of the Catholic Church&quot;
* Strong&#x27;s Concordance H543
* Strong&#x27;s Concordance G281</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173445" start="0" end="4" title="Amen" label="Amen"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="28" end="37" title="Abrahamic" label="Abrahamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="93" end="105" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="137" end="150" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="166" end="172" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="174" end="183" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="189" end="196" title="Islam" label="Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40953" start="251" end="257" title="prayer" label="prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="266" end="273" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053766" start="723" end="747" title="Anglophone North America" label="Anglophone North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="820" end="835" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="873" end="880" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q268206" start="940" end="957" title="Great Vowel Shift" label="Great Vowel Shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251652" start="1020" end="1039" title="Protestantism in Ireland" label="Irish Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="1062" end="1073" title="evangelical" label="evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="1146" end="1158" title="gospel music" label="gospel music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="1205" end="1220" title="Biblical Hebrew" label="Biblical Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="1258" end="1270" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="1437" end="1451" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="1459" end="1480" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afroasiatic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="1492" end="1508" title="Aramaic language" label="biblical Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="1716" end="1728" title="early Church" label="early Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="1899" end="1909" title="Late Latin" label="Late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="1986" end="1992" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128781" start="2018" end="2025" title="phono-semantic matching" label="leveled"/>
<link wikidata="Q219669" start="2360" end="2391" title="al-Fatiha" label="the traditionally first chapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635660" start="2477" end="2489" title="Theosophy (Boehmian)" label="theosophists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876790" start="2505" end="2516" title="Afrocentrism" label="Afrocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082453" start="2555" end="2576" title="esoteric Christianity" label="esoteric Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q319141" start="2584" end="2594" title="conjecture" label="conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q58373" start="2665" end="2669" title="Amun" label="Amun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="2804" end="2812" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q184128" start="2824" end="2827" title="Om" label="Aum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525361" start="3010" end="3014" title="yodh" label="yodh"/>
<link wikidata="Q469925" start="3163" end="3186" title="Ghil&amp;#x27;ad Zuckermann" label="Ghil&amp;#x27;ad Zuckermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q190340" start="3218" end="3228" title="Hallelujah" label="Hallelujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483324" start="3333" end="3342" title="iconicity" label="iconicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="3544" end="3556" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q4224666" start="3985" end="3990" title="Books of Kings" label="Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="4252" end="4258" title="Psalms" label="Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q106046" start="4952" end="4968" title="Synoptic Gospels" label="Synoptic Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="4974" end="4988" title="Gospel of John" label="Gospel of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="5005" end="5021" title="King James Version of the Bible" label="King James Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q189279" start="5110" end="5119" title="catechism" label="catechism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="5137" end="5140" title="Torah" label="Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q42614" start="5150" end="5161" title="Deuteronomy" label="Deuteronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="5232" end="5237" title="Psalm" label="Psalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q844993" start="5364" end="5372" title="doxology" label="doxology"/>
<link wikidata="Q48203" start="5385" end="5391" title="Epistle to the Romans" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="5551" end="5558" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="5582" end="5593" title="Paul of Tarsus" label="Paul&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q215495" start="5602" end="5609" title="epistle" label="epistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="5617" end="5627" title="Book of Revelation" label="Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="6345" end="6358" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="6636" end="6639" title="halakha" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="6755" end="6768" title="Second Temple" label="Second Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q896575" start="6885" end="6893" title="brachah" label="blessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067977" start="6906" end="6919" title="Hazzan" label="prayer reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q732195" start="6966" end="6973" title="kaddish" label="kaddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="7292" end="7298" title="second temple" label="Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q728973" start="7382" end="7388" title="kohen" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="7402" end="7412" title="liturgical" label="liturgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="7460" end="7470" title="halakha" label="Jewish law"/>
<link wikidata="Q896575" start="7545" end="7553" title="brachah" label="blessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="7602" end="7608" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038158" start="7617" end="7630" title="Homiletics" label="homiletically"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="7668" end="7675" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q207607" start="7796" end="7800" title="Shma" label="Shma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916285" start="7868" end="7876" title="Sephardi Hebrew language" label="Sephardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740724" start="7882" end="7891" title="Ashkenazi Hebrew" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185117" start="8161" end="8174" title="Justin Martyr" label="Justin Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q188794" start="8464" end="8470" title="Isaiah" label="Isaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="8566" end="8572" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083213" start="8959" end="8971" title="Cajun French" label="Cajun French"/>
<link wikidata="Q23393" start="9057" end="9075" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970" start="9165" end="9173" title="Church (building)" label="churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q60797" start="9345" end="9351" title="sermon" label="sermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742379" start="9570" end="9581" title="Amen Corner (disambiguation)" label="Amen Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644480" start="9784" end="9796" title="supplication" label="supplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q879046" start="9798" end="9807" title="du&amp;#x27;a" label="du&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q219669" start="9837" end="9846" title="Al Fatiha" label="Al Fatiha"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="9854" end="9865" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q40953" start="9873" end="9879" title="prayer" label="prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q234869" start="9881" end="9886" title="salat" label="salat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350145" start="9995" end="10006" title="verbal noun" label="verbal noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q726616" start="10476" end="10481" title="Selah" label="Selah"/>
<link wikidata="Q184128" start="10483" end="10486" title="Aum" label="Aum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4153502" start="10488" end="10501" title="So mote it be" label="So mote it be"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991765" start="10590" end="10622" title="Encyclopedia of Christianity" label="The Encyclopedia of Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q75561" start="10794" end="10826" title="Catechism of the Catholic Church" label="Catechism of the Catholic Church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43512" wikidata="Q4666735" url="?curid=43512" title="Abendana">
<text>Abendana (, Ibn Danan, ) is a Sephardi Jewish surname of Arabic origin. Notable people with the name include:

* Jacob Abendana (1630–1695), &quot;hakam&quot; of London
* Isaac Abendana (–1699), &quot;hakam&quot; of the Spanish Portuguese Synagogue in London
* Isaac Sardo Abendana ( – 1709), Dutch Jewish jeweler and diamond merchant

== See also ==
* Kenneth Abendana Spencer (1929–2005), Jamaican artist

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4666735" start="0" end="8" title="Abendana" label="Abendana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4054689" start="113" end="127" title="Jacob Abendana" label="Jacob Abendana"/>
<link wikidata="Q10303764" start="171" end="185" title="Isaac Abendana" label="Isaac Abendana"/>
<link wikidata="Q113971404" start="261" end="281" title="Isaac Sardo Abendana" label="Isaac Sardo Abendana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389798" start="353" end="377" title="Kenneth Abendana Spencer" label="Kenneth Abendana Spencer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43513" wikidata="Q743659" url="?curid=43513" title="Rhodes piano">
<text>The Rhodes piano (also known as the Fender Rhodes piano) is an electric piano invented by Harold Rhodes, which became popular in the 1970s. Like a conventional piano, the Rhodes generates sound with keys and hammers, but instead of strings, the hammers strike thin metal tines, which vibrate next to an electromagnetic pickup. The signal is then sent through a cable to an external keyboard amplifier and speaker.

The instrument evolved from Rhodes&#x27;s attempt to manufacture pianos while teaching recovering soldiers during World War II. Development continued after the war and into the following decade. In 1959, Fender began marketing the Piano Bass, a cut-down version; the full-size instrument did not appear until after Fender&#x27;s sale to CBS in 1965. CBS oversaw mass production of the Rhodes piano in the 1970s, and it was used extensively through the decade, particularly in jazz, pop, and soul music, as well by many rock artists. It was less used in the 1980s because of competition with polyphonic and digital synthesizers such as the Yamaha DX7 and an inconsistent quality control caused by cost-cutting.

In 1987, the company was sold to Roland, which manufactured digital versions of the instrument, to Harold Rhodes&#x27; criticism. In the 1990s, the instrument experienced a resurgence in popularity, resulting in Rhodes re-obtaining the rights to the piano in 1997. Although Harold Rhodes died in 2000, the Rhodes piano has since been reissued, and his teaching methods are still in use.

==Features==
The Rhodes piano&#x27;s keyboard is laid out like a traditional acoustic piano, but some models contain 73 keys instead of 88. The 73-key model weighs around . The keyboard&#x27;s touch and action is designed to be like an acoustic piano. Pressing a key results in a hammer striking a thin metal rod called a tine connected to a larger &quot;tone bar&quot;. The tone generator assembly acts as a tuning fork as the tone bar reinforces and extends the tine&#x27;s vibrations. A pickup sits opposite the tine, inducing an electric current from the vibrations like an electric guitar. Simply hitting tines does not need an external power supply, and a Rhodes will make sound even when not plugged into an amplifier, though like an unplugged electric guitar, the volume level and tone will be diminished.

The Suitcase model Rhodes includes a built-in power amplifier and a tremolo feature that bounces the output signal from the piano across two speakers. This feature is inaccurately labeled &quot;vibrato&quot; (which is a variation in pitch) on some models to be consistent with the labelling on Fender amplifiers.

Although the Rhodes functions mechanically like a piano, its sound is very different. Vibrating tines produce a mellower timbre, and the sound changes with the tine&#x27;s relative position to the pickup. Putting the two close together gives a characteristic &quot;bell&quot; sound. The instrument has been compared with the Wurlitzer electronic piano, which uses a similar technology, but with the hammers striking metal reeds. The Rhodes has a better sustain, while the Wurlitzer produces significant harmonics when the keys are played hard, giving it a &quot;bite&quot;. According to Benjamin Love of Retro Rentals, an equalization spectrum analysis of the instrument will have a gap where the frequency of a lead vocal can be. This means the instrument can easily support a voice performance without overpowering it.
==History==

===Early models: Xylette, Pre-Piano (&quot;Bantam Piano&quot;) and Piano Bass===

Harold Rhodes started teaching piano when he was 19. He dropped out of the University of Southern California in 1929 to support his family through the Great Depression by full-time teaching. He designed a method that combined classical and jazz music, which became popular across the United States, and led to an hour-long nationally syndicated radio show. Rhodes continued to teach piano throughout his lifetime, and his piano method continues to be taught today. He continually refined and updated the design of the instrument up to 1984.

By 1942, Rhodes was in the Army Air Corps, where he created a piano teaching method to provide therapy for soldiers recovering from combat in hospital. From scrapped airplanes, he eventually developed miniature pianos that could be played in bed. Rhodes was discharged from the Army Air Corps in September 1944. He named his (non-amplified) lap instrument the &quot;Xylette,&quot; and a 1945 newspaper described its materials and their source: &quot;The Xylette is being constructed by patients in the craft shops of the convalescent hospitals. The [aluminum] xylophone bars are made from discarded hydraulic systems, the plywood from hatchways, keys from the fuselage spruce, and hammers from the hardwood of the propellor.&quot;

On 18 March 1945 Rhodes visited the Santa Ana Army Base Convalescent Hospital, in Santa Ana, California, bringing with him eight Xylettes, and having visited seven similar military hospitals across the U.S. When Rhodes had visited the Army&#x27;s Fort Logan convalescent hospital, in Fort Logan, Colorado, a month earlier, he supervised construction of Xylettes and provided instruction, noting that &quot;exercise afforded by a keyboard instrument is effective in the restoration of neuro-muscular coordination of fingers, hands and arms.&quot; A &quot;Popular Mechanics&quot; article in June 1945 pictured recovering veterans playing their Xylettes at the Army&#x27;s Ft. Thomas convalescent hospital, in Fort Thomas, Kentucky. Soon after, Rhodes won a service award for his therapy achievements. 

Rhodes, in California, next developed an electrically-amplified 38-key instrument, again without strings—instead, using carbon steel rods and advertised as &quot;never needing to be tuned.&quot; It was labeled the &quot;Pre-Piano,&quot; also being advertised as the &quot;Bantam Piano&quot; to broaden its appeal. Its public debut was in Los Angeles on 21 May 1948, at the Broadway department store. Rhodes was present as demonstrator, as was songwriter Jimmy McHugh; by that date, Rhodes had built 100 of the instruments in his factory space at 2370 E. Foothill Blvd. in Pasadena. 

By mid-1948 the Pre-Piano was being used for teaching in the Los Angeles public school system, and was eventually adopted in other cities, including Chicago. Among Rhodes&#x27;s promotional appearances away from Los Angeles was Chicago&#x27;s Lyon &amp; Healy music store, where he demonstrated the instrument between 21 July and 23 July 1948. During the summer of 1948 pianist and song-stylist Gwen Bari was Rhodes&#x27;s representative and demonstrator in Philadelphia,—including a local television broadcast. She likewise appeared for promotions in Cleveland, New York, and Chicago. Her husband and violinist-partner Gene Bari was Rhodes&#x27;s sales agent in Palm Springs (CA), advertising the instrument at $189.50 with amplification either built into the instrument or as an outboard unit, though it &quot;also plays without amplification.&quot; The instrument weighed twenty pounds by itself, and thirty pounds including its tubular base with attached seat, and the Baris were then using it in performances at Palm Springs&#x27; Desert Inn.

In 1958, Rhodes began a business affiliation with Leo Fender to manufacture instruments. For Fender, Rhodes developed a 32-note keyboard bass approximating the string bass&#x27;s range (E1-B3), known as the Piano Bass. The instrument introduced the design that would become common to subsequent Rhodes pianos, with the same Tolex body as Fender amplifiers and a fiberglass top. The tops came from a boat manufacturer who supplied whatever color happened to be available; consequently a number of different colored piano basses were produced.

Some recent, undocumented sources place Piano Bass manufacture as early as 1959. Actual production (for retail sale) in Fender&#x27;s Fullerton plant, however, began early in 1962—following manufacture of prototypes that &quot;[had then] been in use throughout the Southwest for more than a year.&quot; The earliest-known national advertisement for the instrument was in Down Beat&#x27;s July 1962 issue.

===Under CBS===

Fender was bought by CBS in 1965. Rhodes stayed with the company, and released the first Fender Rhodes piano, a 73-note model. The instrument comprised parts — the piano, and a separate enclosure underneath containing the power amplifier and loudspeaker. Like the piano bass, it was finished in black Tolex, and had a fiberglass top. During the late 1960s, two models of the Fender Rhodes Celeste also became available, which used the top three or four octaves, respectively, of the Fender Rhodes piano. The Celeste did not sell well and is now hard to find. In 1969, the fiberglass lid was replaced with vacuum-molded plastic; the earlier models became known retrospectively as &quot;silvertops&quot;.

The Student and Instructor models were introduced in 1965. They were designed to teach the piano in the classroom. By connecting the output of a network of student models, the teacher could listen to each student in isolation on the instructor model, and send an audio backing track to them. This allowed the teacher to monitor individual students&#x27; progress. Production of educational models ceased in 1974.

In 1970, the 73-note Stage Piano was introduced as a lighter () and more portable alternative to the existing two-piece style, featuring four detachable legs (used in Fender steel pedal guitars), a sustain pedal derived from a Rogers hi-hat stand and a single output jack. Although the Stage could be used with any amplifier, catalogs suggested the use of the Fender Twin Reverb. The older style piano continued to be sold alongside the Stage and was renamed the Suitcase Piano. An 88-note model was introduced in 1971.

The Rhodes became increasingly popular during the 1970s. In 1976, the company posted an advertisement claiming that of the top 100 &quot;Billboard&quot; albums featuring electric pianos, 82% of them used a Rhodes.

===Later models===

During the 1970s various changes were made to the Rhodes mechanics. In 1971 the hammer tips were changed to neoprene rubber instead of felt, to avoid the excessive need for regular maintenance, while in 1975 harp supports were changed from wood to aluminum. Although this made production cheaper, it changed the resonance of the instrument slightly. In 1977 the power amplifier design was changed from an 80 to a 100-watt model. The Mk II model was introduced in late 1979, which was simply a set of cosmetic changes over the most recent Mk I models. A 54-note model was added to the range.

The Rhodes Mk III EK-10 was a combination electric piano and synthesizer, introduced in 1980 before CBS bought ARP Instruments in 1981. It used analog oscillators and filters alongside the existing electromechanical elements. The overall effect was that of a Rhodes piano and a synthesizer being played simultaneously. The instrument was unreliable with a problematic production, particularly when a shipment of 150 units to Japan caused interference with local television reception. Compared to the new polyphonic synthesizers being marketed at the same time, it was limited in scope and sound, and very few units were sold.

The final Rhodes produced by the original company was the Mk V in 1984. Among other improvements, it had a lighter plastic body and an improved action that varied the dynamics with each note. The Mark V is the easiest of the original Rhodes pianos for touring musicians to transport. Rhodes pianos produced under the original run had an inconsistent quality as the company wanted to mass-produce the instrument.

During the late 1970s and 1980s, Chuck Monte manufactured an after-market modification to the Rhodes, known as Dyno My Piano. It included a lever that moved the relative position of the tines to the pickups, modifying the sound, and fed the output signal through additional electronics. This sound was emulated by the Yamaha DX7 with a patch known as the DX7 Rhodes that was popular during the 1980s, and caused several players to abandon the Rhodes in favor of the DX7.

===After CBS===
In 1983, Rhodes was sold to CBS boss William Schultz, who closed the main factory in 1985 and sold the business to the Japanese corporation Roland in 1987. Roland introduced digital pianos known as the Rhodes MK80 and MK60 in 1989, and were essentially re-engineered versions of Roland&#x27;s own RD-1000 (which they closely resembled), but Harold Rhodes disapproved of the instruments, which were made without his consultation.
Rhodes re-acquired the rights to the Rhodes piano in 1997. By then, he was in ill health and died in December 2000. In 2007, his former business partner Joe Brandstetter acquired the rights to the name and re-formed Rhodes Music Corporation. The company introduced a reproduction of the original electric piano, the Rhodes Mark 7, housed in a molded plexiglass enclosure. 

In 2021, a new company, Rhodes Music Group Ltd, was formed by the audio company Loopmasters who licensed the trademark rights from Brandstetter. They announced a new model, the MK8, in development. The MK8 was made available for pre-order in November with 500 units planned for production in 2022. The MK8&#x27;s case was designed by Axel Hartmann and its electronics were designed by former Moog Music technician Cyril Lance. At , it is significantly lighter than earlier models.

==Notable users==
Doors keyboardist Ray Manzarek began using Rhodes instruments when the group formed in 1965. He played basslines on a Piano Bass with his left hand, while playing organ with his right. He also played a full-sized Rhodes in the studio, such as a Mark I Stage 73 on &quot;Riders on the Storm&quot;. According to Manzarek, &quot;If Mr. Rhodes hadn&#x27;t created the keyboard bass, the Doors would never have existed.&quot;

The Rhodes piano became a popular instrument in jazz in the late 1960s, particularly for several sidemen who played with Miles Davis. Herbie Hancock first encountered the Rhodes in 1968 while booked for a session with Davis. He immediately became an enthusiast, noting that the amplification made him much more audible in groups when compared to the piano. Hancock continued to experiment with the Rhodes over the following years, including playing it through a wah-wah. Other former Davis sidemen, Chick Corea and Joe Zawinul, started using the Rhodes prominently during the 1970s. Beginning with &quot;In a Silent Way&quot; (1969), the Rhodes became the most prominent keyboard on Davis&#x27;s recordings until the mid-1970s. Vince Guaraldi started using a Rhodes in 1968, and toured with both an acoustic piano and a Rhodes. He achieved particular prominence with his soundtrack music for &quot;A Charlie Brown Christmas&quot; and other &quot;Peanuts&quot;/&quot;Charlie Brown&quot; films.

Billy Preston was described as the &quot;Ruler of the Rhodes&quot; by &quot;Music Radar&quot;; he played Rhodes during the Beatles&#x27; rooftop concert in 1969, and on the Beatles&#x27; hit single &quot;Get Back&quot;. Many of Stevie Wonder&#x27;s recordings from the 1970s, such as &quot;You Are the Sunshine of My Life&quot; feature him playing the Rhodes. He often used one alongside the Hohner Clavinet. Donny Hathaway regularly used the Rhodes; his hit single, &quot;This Christmas&quot;, which receives seasonal radio play on African American stations, makes a prominent use of the instrument. Although better known for playing the Wurlitzer, Ray Charles played a Rhodes on his performance of &quot;Shake a Tailfeather&quot; in the film &quot;The Blues Brothers&quot;.

Donald Fagen of Steely Dan has regularly used the Rhodes. He has also used the Rhodes in all his solo albums and has played it at every one of his touring performances since 1994. The Rhodes features in &quot;Angela&quot;, the 1978 instrumental theme from the sitcom &quot;Taxi&quot; by Bob James. The French band Air make regular use of the Rhodes piano in their recordings. German pianist and composer Nils Frahm uses a Rhodes piano extensively in his studio and live performances. Film composer Angelo Badalamenti composed and recorded the theme song for the TV series &quot;Twin Peaks&quot;, created by David Lynch, using the Rhodes.

== References ==

; Bibliography
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* Rhodes Music Corporation – Company that manufactures the instrument</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q743659" start="4" end="16" title="Rhodes piano" label="Rhodes piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q743659" start="36" end="55" title="Rhodes piano" label="Fender Rhodes piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136507" start="63" end="77" title="electric piano" label="electric piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q708613" start="90" end="103" title="Harold Rhodes (inventor)" label="Harold Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="160" end="165" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q201898" start="271" end="276" title="tuning fork" label="tines"/>
<link wikidata="Q572648" start="319" end="325" title="Pickup (music technology)" label="pickup"/>
<link wikidata="Q17093031" start="382" end="412" title="keyboard amplifier and speaker" label="keyboard amplifier and speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="529" end="541" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q175391" start="619" end="625" title="Fender Musical Instruments Corporation" label="Fender"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="752" end="755" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="891" end="895" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="897" end="900" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="906" end="916" title="soul music" label="soul music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="934" end="938" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466256" start="1006" end="1016" title="Polyphony and monophony in instruments" label="polyphonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="1029" end="1040" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q139300" start="1054" end="1064" title="Yamaha DX7" label="Yamaha DX7"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454688" start="1111" end="1123" title="cost reduction" label="cost-cutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q848490" start="1159" end="1165" title="Roland Corporation" label="Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q201898" start="1923" end="1934" title="tuning fork" label="tuning fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q572648" start="2004" end="2010" title="Pickup (music technology)" label="pickup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="2047" end="2063" title="electric current" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q204157" start="2156" end="2168" title="power supply" label="power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="2229" end="2238" title="amplifier" label="amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064632" start="2397" end="2404" title="tremolo" label="tremolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q377435" start="2523" end="2530" title="vibrato" label="vibrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447428" start="2623" end="2640" title="Fender Amplifiers" label="Fender amplifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759986" start="2968" end="2994" title="Wurlitzer electronic piano" label="Wurlitzer electronic piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148098" start="3146" end="3154" title="harmonic" label="harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104531076" start="3265" end="3295" title="Equalization (audio)" label="equalization spectrum analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q708613" start="3559" end="3572" title="Harold Rhodes (inventor)" label="Harold Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="3634" end="3667" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="3710" end="3726" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="3785" end="3794" title="classical music" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="3799" end="3809" title="Jazz" label="jazz music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140008" start="4128" end="4142" title="United States Army Air Corps" label="Army Air Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q49244" start="4915" end="4924" title="Santa Ana, California" label="Santa Ana"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="4926" end="4936" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471535" start="5117" end="5127" title="Fort Logan, Colorado" label="Fort Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="5129" end="5137" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274577" start="5387" end="5404" title="Popular Mechanics" label="Popular Mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998331" start="5540" end="5551" title="Fort Thomas, Kentucky" label="Fort Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="5553" end="5561" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283031" start="6088" end="6100" title="Jimmy McHugh" label="Jimmy McHugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q297469" start="7317" end="7327" title="Leo Fender" label="Leo Fender"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398221" start="7395" end="7408" title="keyboard bass" label="keyboard bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814235" start="7591" end="7596" title="Tolex" label="Tolex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="7629" end="7639" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="8254" end="8257" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027843" start="9206" end="9219" title="backing track" label="backing track"/>
<link wikidata="Q963334" start="9585" end="9591" title="hi-hat" label="hi-hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443281" start="9711" end="9729" title="Fender Twin Reverb" label="Fender Twin Reverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="10760" end="10771" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q296878" start="10810" end="10825" title="ARP Instruments" label="ARP Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q852341" start="10843" end="10861" title="Voltage-controlled oscillator" label="analog oscillators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638353" start="10866" end="10873" title="Voltage-controlled filter" label="filters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466256" start="11203" end="11225" title="polyphonic synthesizer" label="polyphonic synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q139300" start="12057" end="12067" title="Yamaha DX7" label="Yamaha DX7"/>
<link wikidata="Q848490" start="12367" end="12373" title="Roland Corporation" label="Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508837" start="12401" end="12414" title="digital piano" label="digital piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q98078419" start="12524" end="12531" title="Roland MKS-20" label="RD-1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675890" start="13110" end="13121" title="Loopmasters" label="Loopmasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q11695463" start="13364" end="13377" title="Axel Hartmann" label="Axel Hartmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650528" start="13422" end="13432" title="Moog Music" label="Moog Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q45354" start="13530" end="13535" title="The Doors" label="Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q108912" start="13548" end="13560" title="Ray Manzarek" label="Ray Manzarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q510066" start="13800" end="13819" title="Riders on the Storm" label="Riders on the Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="14000" end="14004" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="14073" end="14084" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105875" start="14086" end="14100" title="Herbie Hancock" label="Herbie Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q264300" start="14414" end="14421" title="Wah-wah pedal" label="wah-wah"/>
<link wikidata="Q192465" start="14451" end="14462" title="Chick Corea" label="Chick Corea"/>
<link wikidata="Q44767" start="14467" end="14478" title="Joe Zawinul" label="Joe Zawinul"/>
<link wikidata="Q917685" start="14556" end="14571" title="In a Silent Way" label="In a Silent Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q706953" start="14680" end="14694" title="Vince Guaraldi" label="Vince Guaraldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393337" start="14850" end="14875" title="A Charlie Brown Christmas" label="A Charlie Brown Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115636" start="14898" end="14905" title="Peanuts" label="Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168491" start="14918" end="14931" title="Charlie Brown" label="Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q311450" start="14946" end="14959" title="Billy Preston" label="Billy Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q685018" start="15022" end="15033" title="Future plc" label="Music Radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11349248" start="15065" end="15098" title="the Beatles&amp;#x27; rooftop concert" label="the Beatles&amp;#x27; rooftop concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426279" start="15150" end="15158" title="Get Back" label="Get Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="15174" end="15187" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517449" start="15236" end="15267" title="You Are the Sunshine of My Life" label="You Are the Sunshine of My Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099153" start="15338" end="15353" title="Clavinet" label="Hohner Clavinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q507864" start="15355" end="15369" title="Donny Hathaway" label="Donny Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785641" start="15419" end="15433" title="This Christmas (Donny Hathaway song)" label="This Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759986" start="15585" end="15594" title="Wurlitzer electric piano" label="Wurlitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q544387" start="15596" end="15607" title="Ray Charles" label="Ray Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268248" start="15652" end="15671" title="Shake a Tail Feather" label="Shake a Tailfeather"/>
<link wikidata="Q109767" start="15696" end="15714" title="The Blues Brothers (film)" label="The Blues Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q506554" start="15723" end="15735" title="Donald Fagen" label="Donald Fagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q852435" start="15739" end="15749" title="Steely Dan" label="Steely Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q427529" start="15996" end="16000" title="Taxi (TV series)" label="Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q888012" start="16010" end="16019" title="Bob James (musician)" label="Bob James"/>
<link wikidata="Q318452" start="16037" end="16040" title="Air (French band)" label="Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493073" start="16127" end="16137" title="Nils Frahm" label="Nils Frahm"/>
<link wikidata="Q357014" start="16221" end="16239" title="Angelo Badalamenti" label="Angelo Badalamenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085" start="16301" end="16311" title="Twin Peaks" label="Twin Peaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071" start="16330" end="16341" title="David Lynch" label="David Lynch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43516" wikidata="Q3915760" url="?curid=43516" title="Sywell Aerodrome">
<text>Sywell Aerodrome is the local aerodrome serving the towns of Northampton, Wellingborough, Kettering and Rushden, as well as wider Northamptonshire. The aerodrome is located northeast of Northampton and was originally opened in 1928 on the edge of Sywell village.

The aerodrome caters for private flying, flight training and corporate flights. There is a fixed-wing flying school, a microlight school and a helicopter school. The 1930s Art Deco hotel (built in 1934 as the Northamptonshire Aero Club clubhouse) has bar and restaurant facilities. Aviation related industries and businesses are also located at the aerodrome. A viewing area is provided for aircraft spotters where the airfield memorial is located. The Pilots&#x27; Mess cafe is also located on site and the large Hangar One venue hosts many events throughout the year.

Northampton (Sywell) Aerodrome has a CAA Ordinary Licence (Number P496) that allows flights for the public transport of passengers or for flying instruction as authorised by the licensee (Sywell Aerodrome Limited).

==Second World War==
The aerodrome opened in 1928 and during the Second World War the aerodrome, as RAF Sywell, was used as a training facility (de Havilland Tiger Moths) and later an important centre for the repair of Vickers Wellington bombers; extensive sheds from this time still remain on the site. Sywell also produced nearly 100 Avro Lancasters from 1942 to 1943. Among the Second World War pilots who underwent training at Sywell were Pierre Clostermann and Paddy Finucane, who soloed here.

The following units were here at some point:
* No. 4 Basic Flying Training School RAF (1951-53) using Chipmunk T.10s
* No. 6 Elementary and Reserve Flying Training School RAF
* No. 6 Elementary Flying Training School RAF
* No. 6 Reserve Flying School RAF
* No. 8 Air Observer &amp; Navigator School RAF
* No. 8 Civil Air Navigation School RAF

Aerial shots for the film &quot;Battle of Britain&quot; were taken over the airport and nearby area.

==Expansion==
In 1999, the aerodrome sought planning permission for a hard runway, which was intended to allow operations to continue over the winter, when the grass runways often become waterlogged. The organisations STARE (Stop The Aerodrome Runway Expansion) and CPRE (Campaign to Protect Rural England) campaigned against this change, arguing that it would lead to more and larger aircraft flying over the area and disturb its &quot;rural tranquility&quot;.

Permission was granted for the runway on 22 November 2007 by the Department for Transport, and though campaigners vowed to fight the decision they were unsuccessful and construction of the runway began in 2008. It opened during summer 2009 and enabled safe operations during the winter of 2009–2010 and onwards. In February 2010, the final inspection of the newly completed all-weather hard runway was carried out by the CAA who confirmed that it could be licensed for use. In recent years airfield lighting and approach aids have been installed to enable night training and operations to be carried out albeit at present this is infrequent.

== Operations ==
Sywell has two all-grass operational runways and a fourth all-weather concrete runway. The aerodrome&#x27;s operational hours are 0900–1700 during winter and 0800-1700 during summer. The aerodrome offers an Aerodrome Flight Information Service to pilots. The tower frequency is 122.705 mhz. Non Sywell-based aircraft are required to PPR (Prior Permission Required). 

The Aerodrome provides fuel ( JET A1, AVGAS 100LL &amp; MOGAS) inside and outside operating hours (the latter self-service) and has a Category 1 (CAT 1) Rescue &amp; Fire Service (RFFS) during operating hours equipped with Land Rover and Dodge Ram appliances. 

===Sywell Aviation Museum===
In 2000, construction began on the Sywell Aviation Museum. It was completed in 2001 and opened by Alex Henshaw who had test-flown Vickers Wellingtons on the site during the Second World War. The Museum contains many artefacts and models telling the story of the site and the airmen who served there. Originally it comprised three Nissen huts, it was expanded from 2010 to 2012. with the addition of two more Nissen huts, and, in the summer of 2012, the museum acquired a Hawker Hunter airframe.

In March 2021 the Museum acquired its second complete aircraft 1969 built Handley Page Jetstream 200 G-RAVL. Jetstream aircraft were built at Sywell Aerodrome from 1971 to 1972 and this machine was not only the parent company (Jetstream Ltd) demonstrator but also won the Daily Express National Air Race Challenge Cup on 12 June 1971 in a race from Sywell to Biggin Hill which was televised on the BBC.

The Museum is a volunteer-run charitable trust and entry is free. It opens between Easter and September on weekends and bank holidays.

=== The Aviator Hotel===

The original 1930s Clubhouse was developed over the years, becoming a &#x27;motel&#x27; in the 1960s. By the late 1990s the building was restored to its Art Deco glory and a further accommodation block added in a similar architectural style. The 3 star hotel now boasts 50 en suite rooms, a bar and restaurant and several function rooms. The Clubhouse, The Cockpit and The Briefing Room are small meeting rooms often used by local clubs and societies. The Cirrus Room is larger and caters for small events and weddings. Hangar One is a large function space with its own bar and dancefloor which caters for larger corporate events, fairs and weddings.

Regular events at the aerodrome include car festivals, the &#x27;Pistons and Props&#x27; show in September (AKA &#x27;The Sywell Classic&#x27;), craft fairs, balls, weddings, rallies, fly ins, and &#x27;car experience&#x27; days by &#x27;Car Chase Heroes&#x27;.

The Pilots&#x27; Mess Cafe 

Located adjacent to the control tower the cafe provides food and drink to visitors.

===Brooklands Flying Club===
Brooklands Flying Club was based at Sywell, with a fleet of four Aero AT-3 aircraft and a Cessna 172. Two of the AT-3s are now operated by Cabaero - see below.

The club opened in 2005 under the same name of the previous company that had been located on the airfield but closed in 2021.

The Northamptonshire School of Flying (NSF) was formerly based at Sywell moved to Sibson, Cambs in the 2000s and rebranded as Peterborough Aero Club.

===Brooklands Engineering===

Brooklands Engineering was formed in October 2005 as an EASA approved Part-145 and PART-ML (Part-CAO) Maintenance organisation. It ceased trading in 2023.

===Brooklands Executive Air Travel===

BEAT operate a Piper PA-31 Chieftain G-SYLL for executive charter from the aerodrome.

===Training &amp; Sales===
Other flight training/maintenance organisations on the airfield include:

*Sloane Helicopters – helicopter training, sales and service of Robinson/Leonardo helicopters
*Flylight Airsports – microlight training plus sales, manufacture, service of microlights
*Cabaero Aviation- fixed wing Group A aircraft training, trial lessons and experiences with 2x AT-3, Robin2 160 &amp; Piper PA28 aircraft
*Cirrus Aircraft (UK) - sales of Cirrus Aircraft and associated services
*Skytech Helicopters - specialising in the maintenance of Hughes/MD Helicopters products and other rotorcraft
*The Thomas Castle Aviation Heritage Trust - formed following the passing of Thomas Castle in 2019, the Trust operates DH Tiger Moth G-ANTE and provides scholarships and flight experiences.

===The Blades===
The Blades aerobatic display team were based at Sywell, where their five Extra EA-300 aircraft were hangared. They performed aerobatic displays at major events around the country, in Europe, and in the Middle East. The team was the only one fully licensed by the CAA to carry paying &#x27;passengers&#x27; in aerobatic displays, out of Sywell, or at many other locations.

In January 2023, the Blades announced that their 2022 season was their last and that they would be disbanding after 17 years of operations. 
2 Excel, the parent company of the Blades, also have subsidiary businesses at the aerodrome and under the 2Excel Broadsword banner operate air charter services with types ranging from a Beech King Air to a Boeing 737. They also undertake work for the UK Government most especially the UK Maritime &amp; Coastguard Agency and Oil Spill Response using a modified Boeing 727 aircraft.

===Air Leasing/Ultimate Warbirds===

In January 2016, Air Leasing Ltd, operators of the famous &#x27;Grace Spitfire&#x27;- Supermarine Spitfire TR.9 ML407 &#x27;OU-V&#x27; moved to Sywell Aerodrome. Initially based in a single new build &#x27;blister&#x27; type hangar named &#x27;The Spitfire Blister&#x27; but known locally as &#x27;Graceland&#x27; – they have now expanded to fill two more. AL specialise in the maintenance and restoration of vintage &#x27;warbird&#x27; type aircraft such as the Spitfire, Hurricane, P-51 Mustang and Sea Fury.

A subsidiary, Ultimate Warbird Flights, operate several two-seat warbirds for trial experience flights in Spitfire, Mustang, and Hispano Buchon aircraft. Four of the resident warbirds operate as the Ultimate Fighters display team – usually displaying Mustang, Spitfire, Hispano Buchon and Thunderbolt aircraft across the UK and Europe.

===Sywell Airshow===

The Aerodrome has hosted many airshows and fly ins over the years. 

From 2004-2014 it hosted a bi-enniel charity airshow in aid of the local Air Ambulance where there were many classic aircraft flying and on display such as the Consolidated Catalina, North American P-51 Mustang, North American Harvards. The airshow is no longer hosted as of 2016, after the Shoreham Airshow crash. On 6 November 2020 flying legends announced its signature airshow, previously held at the IWM Duxford, would now transfer to Sywell Aerodrome. Cancelled in 2020 &amp; 2021 due to COVID, the show was due to take place in 2022 but was subsequently also cancelled,

The Sywell Airshow 2024 took place on the 22 and 23 June.

After the passing of principal organiser Richard Grace in 2024, it was announced that the show would not be returning in 2025 but an airshow &#x27;in another form&#x27; may take place in the future.

===Light Aircraft Association Rally===
The Light Aircraft Association (LAA – formerly the Popular Flying Association), is one of the UK&#x27;s several bodies supporting amateur aircraft construction, and recreational and sport flying. It used to hold its annual rally at Cranfield Airport, and then at Kemble Airport. In 2006, the LAA lost so much money through poor attendances resulting from poor weather that in 2007 and 2008, much smaller (and cheaper) &quot;regional rallies&quot; were held. These were unpopular and in September 2009 a revived LAA Rally was held at Sywell. This proved successful, and further well-attended rallies have taken place at Sywell since.

In recent years the LAA Rally has been held at other locations in the UK.

===Previous events and users===
Music in Flight was held at Sywell in the early 21st century. This combined orchestral music classical music with flying aircraft, hot air balloons, the Red Devils parachute display team and a fireworks display. The event subsequently moved to Biggin Hill.

Previous &#x27;aviation experience&#x27; users of the aerodrome were Virgin Balloons, Warbird Experiences and Delta Aviation.

==Business park==
An industrial area in the complex accommodates firms, agencies and other commercial businesses. Some 138 business were registered as being based at the Aerodrome in 2025.

==References==
*

==External links==
*Sywell Aerodrome – official website
*Sywell Aviation Museum – official website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3915760" start="0" end="16" title="Sywell Aerodrome" label="Sywell Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q192240" start="61" end="72" title="Northampton" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q913499" start="74" end="88" title="Wellingborough" label="Wellingborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q984613" start="90" end="99" title="Kettering" label="Kettering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987237" start="104" end="111" title="Rushden" label="Rushden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2194606" start="247" end="253" title="Sywell" label="Sywell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="289" end="303" title="general aviation" label="private flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q383695" start="305" end="320" title="flight training" label="flight training"/>
<link wikidata="Q678305" start="383" end="393" title="Ultralight aviation" label="microlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="407" end="417" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="436" end="444" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q601641" start="655" end="672" title="Aircraft spotting" label="aircraft spotters"/>
<link wikidata="Q795009" start="872" end="875" title="United Kingdom Civil Aviation Authority" label="CAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1116" end="1132" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q654062" start="1196" end="1219" title="de Havilland Tiger Moth" label="de Havilland Tiger Moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q850244" start="1270" end="1288" title="Vickers Wellington" label="Vickers Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q203622" start="1387" end="1402" title="Avro Lancasters" label="Avro Lancasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q49452" start="1494" end="1512" title="Pierre Clostermann" label="Pierre Clostermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579846" start="1517" end="1531" title="Paddy Finucane" label="Paddy Finucane"/>
<link wikidata="Q96388436" start="1670" end="1725" title="No. 6 Elementary and Reserve Flying Training School RAF" label="No. 6 Elementary and Reserve Flying Training School RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q96388436" start="1728" end="1771" title="No. 6 Elementary Flying Training School RAF" label="No. 6 Elementary Flying Training School RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q96388436" start="1774" end="1805" title="No. 6 Reserve Flying School RAF" label="No. 6 Reserve Flying School RAF"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1808" end="1853" title="No. 8 Air Observer &amp;amp; Navigator School RAF" label="No. 8 Air Observer &amp;amp; Navigator School RAF"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1856" end="1893" title="No. 8 Civil Air Navigation School RAF" label="No. 8 Civil Air Navigation School RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q714989" start="1921" end="1950" title="Battle of Britain (film)" label="&amp;quot;Battle of Britain&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027853" start="2269" end="2302" title="Campaign to Protect Rural England" label="Campaign to Protect Rural England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="2525" end="2549" title="Department for Transport" label="Department for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433393" start="3327" end="3363" title="Flight Information Service" label="Aerodrome Flight Information Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162631" start="3814" end="3836" title="Sywell Aviation Museum" label="Sywell Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717163" start="3877" end="3889" title="Alex Henshaw" label="Alex Henshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q850244" start="3909" end="3927" title="Vickers Wellington" label="Vickers Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3952" end="3968" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395768" start="4109" end="4119" title="Nissen hut" label="Nissen hut"/>
<link wikidata="Q641943" start="4250" end="4263" title="Hawker Hunter" label="Hawker Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358946" start="4349" end="4371" title="Handley Page Jetstream" label="Handley Page Jetstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825597" start="5964" end="5973" title="Aero AT-3" label="Aero AT-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q244479" start="5989" end="5999" title="Cessna 172" label="Cessna 172"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6578" end="6599" title="Piper PA-31 Navajo#Variants" label="Piper PA-31 Chieftain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3986012" start="7464" end="7474" title="The Blades (aerobatic team)" label="The Blades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385143" start="7537" end="7549" title="Extra EA-300" label="Extra EA-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q763256" start="9411" end="9424" title="Air Ambulance" label="Air Ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="Q648864" start="9498" end="9519" title="Consolidated PBY Catalina" label="Consolidated Catalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q192075" start="9521" end="9548" title="North American P-51 Mustang" label="North American P-51 Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q40021" start="9550" end="9573" title="North American T-6 Texan" label="North American Harvards"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857716" start="9629" end="9651" title="2015 Shoreham Airshow crash" label="Shoreham Airshow crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463470" start="9672" end="9686" title="Flying Legends" label="flying legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758240" start="9743" end="9754" title="IWM Duxford" label="IWM Duxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545978" start="10218" end="10244" title="Light Aircraft Association" label="Light Aircraft Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q569168" start="10446" end="10463" title="Cranfield Airport" label="Cranfield Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656466" start="10477" end="10491" title="Kemble Airport" label="Kemble Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="11048" end="11063" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551574" start="11086" end="11101" title="hot air balloon" label="hot air balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304029" start="11108" end="11118" title="Red Devils (Parachute Regiment)" label="Red Devils"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43519" wikidata="Q3543149" url="?curid=43519" title="List of hypothetical Solar System objects">
<text>A hypothetical Solar System object is a planet, natural satellite, subsatellite or similar body in the Solar System whose existence is not known, but has been inferred from observational scientific evidence. Over the years a number of hypothetical planets have been proposed, and many have been disproved. However, even today there is scientific speculation about the possibility of planets yet unknown that may exist beyond the range of our current knowledge.

==Planets==
*Counter-Earth, a planet situated on the other side of the Sun from that of the Earth. 
*Fifth planet (hypothetical), historical speculation about a planet between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter.
**Phaeton, a planet situated between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter whose destruction supposedly led to the formation of the asteroid belt. This hypothesis is now considered unlikely, since the asteroid belt has far too little mass to have resulted from the explosion of a large planet. In 2018, a study from researchers at the University of Florida found the asteroid belt was created from the fragments of at least five or six ancient planetary-sized objects instead of a single planet.
** Krypton, named after the destroyed native world of Superman, theorized by Michael Ovenden to have been a gas giant between Mars and Jupiter nearly as large as Saturn and also attributed for the formation of the asteroid belt
** Planet V, a planet thought by John Chambers and Jack Lissauer to have once existed between Mars and the asteroid belt, based on computer simulations.
*Various planets beyond Neptune:
** Planet Nine, a planet proposed to explain apparent alignments in the orbits of a number of distant trans-Neptunian objects. 
** Planet X, a hypothetical planet beyond Neptune. Initially employed to account for supposed perturbations (systematic deviations) in the orbits of Uranus and Neptune, belief in its existence ultimately inspired the search for Pluto. Though the concept has since been abandoned following more precise measurements of Neptune&#x27;s mass, which accounted for all observed perturbations, it has been re-applied to account for supposed deviations in the motions of Kuiper belt objects. Such explanations are still controversial, however. 
** Hyperion, a large distant 10th planet theorized in 2000 to have had an effect on Kuiper Belt formation.
** Tyche, a hypothetical planet in the Oort Cloud supposedly responsible for producing the statistical excess in long period comets in a band. Results from the WISE telescope survey in 2014 have ruled it out. 
** Up to three planets at 42 (named Oceanus), 56, and 72 AU (both unnamed) from the sun respectively, proposed by Thomas Jefferson Jackson See in 1909.
** Brahma and Vishnu, proposed by Venkatesh P. Ketakar.
** Hades, proposed by Theodor Grigull
** &quot;Planet Ten&quot; as proposed by Volk and Malhotra, a Mars-sized planetoid believed to be responsible for the inclination of Kuiper Belt objects beyond the Kuiper cliff at 50 AU
** &quot;Planet Ten&quot; as proposed by Sverre Aarseth and Carlos and Raúl de la Fuente Marcos, which they believe stabilizes the orbits of other Kuiper Belt objects
** Planets O, P, Q, R, S, T, and U, proposed by William Henry Pickering
** A Trans-Plutonian planet proposed by Tadashi Mukai and Patryk Sofia Lykawka, roughly the size of Earth or Mars with an eccentric orbit between 100 and 200 AU
** Another Trans-Neptunian planet at 1,500 AU away from the Sun, proposed by Rodney Gomes in 2012
* Theia or Orpheus, a Mars-sized impactor believed to have collided with the Earth roughly 4.5 billion years ago; an event which created the Moon. Evidence from 2019 suggests that it may have originated in the outer Solar System.
* Vulcan, a hypothetical planet once believed to exist inside the orbit of Mercury. Initially proposed as the cause for the perturbations in the orbit of Mercury, some astronomers spent many years searching for it, with many instances of people claiming to have found it. The perturbations in Mercury&#x27;s orbit were later accounted for via Einstein&#x27;s General Theory of Relativity. 
** Vulcanoids, asteroids that may exist within a gravitationally stable region inside Mercury&#x27;s orbit. They may have originated as debris resulting from a collision between Mercury and another protoplanet, stripping away much of Mercury&#x27;s inner crust and mantle. None have been detected by STEREO or SOHO.
*** The lack of vulcanoids led to a suggestion in 2016 that a super-Earth planet that once orbited the Sun closer to Mercury was able to clear its neighborhood before spiraling down into the Sun.
*The Fifth Giant is a hypothetical fifth giant planet originally in an orbit between Saturn and Uranus but was ejected from the Solar System into interstellar space after a close encounter with Jupiter, resulting in a rapid divergence of Jupiter&#x27;s and Saturn&#x27;s orbit which may have ensured the orbital stability of the terrestrial planets in the inner Solar System. It may have also precipitated the Late Heavy Bombardment of the inner Solar System. The Fifth Giant may be the hypothetical Planet Nine, remaining captured due to either the gravity of a nearby star or drag from the gaseous remnants of the Solar nebula which reduced the eccentricity of its orbit. 
*A and B, two super-Earth (or even supergiant) planets theorized by Michael Woolfson as part of his Capture theory on Solar System formation. Originally the Solar System&#x27;s two innermost planets, these two collided, ejecting A (save its moons Mars, the Moon, Pluto, and the other dwarf planets) out of the Solar System and shattering B to form the Earth, Venus, Mercury, asteroid belt, and comets. 
* A captured planet from another solar system was proposed to exist in the Oort cloud much further than the hypothetical Planet Nine.

==Moons==
* Chiron, a moon of Saturn supposedly sighted by Hermann Goldschmidt in 1861 but never observed by anyone else.
* Chrysalis, a hypothetical moon of Saturn, named in 2022 by scientists of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology using data from the Cassini–Huygens mission, thought to have been torn apart by Saturn&#x27;s tidal forces, somewhere between 200 and 100 million years ago, with up to 99% of its mass being swallowed by Saturn, and the remaining 1% forming the rings of Saturn.
* Other moons of Earth, such as Petit&#x27;s moon, Lilith, Waltemath&#x27;s moons and Bagby&#x27;s moons. 
* Mercury&#x27;s moon, hypothesised to account for an unusual pattern of radiation detected by &quot;Mariner 10&quot; in the vicinity of Mercury. Subsequent data from the mission revealed the actual source to be the star 31 Crateris.
* Neith, a purported moon of Venus, falsely detected by a number of telescopic observers in the 17th and 18th centuries. Now known not to exist, the object has been explained as a series of misidentified stars and internal reflections inside the optics of particular telescope designs. It was also alternatively proposed by Jean-Charles Houzeau to be a heliocentric planet that orbited the Sun every 283 days and be in conjunction with Venus every 1080 days.
* Themis, a moon of Saturn which astronomer William Pickering claimed to have discovered in 1905, but which was never observed again.

==Stars==
* Nemesis, a brown or red dwarf whose existence was suggested in 1984 by physicist Richard A. Muller, based on purported periodicities in mass extinctions within Earth&#x27;s fossil record. Its regular passage through the Solar System&#x27;s Oort cloud would send large numbers of comets towards Earth, massively increasing the chances of an impact. Also believed to be the cause of minor planet Sedna&#x27;s unusual elongated orbit. The existence of the Nemesis in the modern Solar system was ruled out in 2014 after the infrared survey performed by WISE spacecraft found no brown dwarf up to from Sun.
* Raymond Arthur Lyttleton&#x27;s model on the formation of the Solar System had a former binary star system by the Sun, which merged and broke into two due to rotational instability forming Jupiter and Saturn.
* Fred Hoyle&#x27;s model on Solar System formation had a former and more massive binary companion to the Sun that exploded in a supernova due to nuclear fusion failing within its interior and it collapsing as a result (which had not yet been verified at the time). The star&#x27;s supernova remnant would be captured by the Sun and shaped into a protoplanetary disk, from which the planets formed.
* One assumption suggests that the hypothetical Planet Nine is actually a primordial black hole.

== See also ==

* Subsatellite
* Oort cloud
* Planets beyond Neptune
* Nebular hypothesis
* Tenth planet (disambiguation)
* Theoretical planetology
* Trans-Neptunian object
* Trans-Neptunian objects in fiction
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3543149" start="2" end="34" title="List of hypothetical Solar System objects" label="hypothetical Solar System object"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="40" end="46" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="48" end="65" title="natural satellite" label="natural satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274946" start="67" end="79" title="subsatellite" label="subsatellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="103" end="115" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140990" start="475" end="488" title="Counter-Earth" label="Counter-Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105734" start="563" end="590" title="Fifth planet (hypothetical)" label="Fifth planet (hypothetical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q114202" start="672" end="679" title="Phaeton (hypothetical planet)" label="Phaeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="721" end="725" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="730" end="737" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="795" end="808" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q623138" start="1183" end="1209" title="Krypton (comics)" label="the destroyed native world"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="1213" end="1221" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q43270746" start="1236" end="1251" title="Michael Ovenden" label="Michael Ovenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532742" start="1390" end="1398" title="Planet V" label="Planet V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130772" start="1438" end="1451" title="Jack Lissauer" label="Jack Lissauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="1481" end="1485" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="1494" end="1507" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803875" start="1549" end="1571" title="planets beyond Neptune" label="planets beyond Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q22133699" start="1576" end="1587" title="Planet Nine" label="Planet Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592" start="1675" end="1697" title="trans-Neptunian object" label="trans-Neptunian object"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803875" start="1704" end="1712" title="Planet X" label="Planet X"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="1743" end="1750" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q803623" start="1795" end="1808" title="perturbation (astronomy)" label="perturbations"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="1850" end="1856" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="1929" end="1934" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q427" start="2164" end="2175" title="Kuiper Belt" label="Kuiper belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q131919737" start="2241" end="2249" title="Hyperion (hypothetical planet)" label="Hyperion"/>
<link wikidata="Q427" start="2322" end="2333" title="Kuiper Belt" label="Kuiper Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q203019" start="2348" end="2353" title="Tyche (hypothetical planet)" label="Tyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q40864" start="2384" end="2394" title="Oort Cloud" label="Oort Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="2470" end="2475" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q693552" start="2505" end="2519" title="Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer" label="WISE telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349686" start="2669" end="2697" title="Thomas Jefferson Jackson See" label="Thomas Jefferson Jackson See"/>
<link wikidata="Q5996859" start="3028" end="3042" title="Sverre Aarseth" label="Sverre Aarseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q310222" start="3202" end="3225" title="William Henry Pickering" label="William Henry Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053432" start="3487" end="3492" title="Theia (planet)" label="Theia"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="3626" end="3630" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q213636" start="3717" end="3723" title="Vulcan (hypothetical planet)" label="Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="3790" end="3797" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="4074" end="4102" title="General Theory of Relativity" label="General Theory of Relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q830162" start="4108" end="4117" title="Vulcanoid" label="Vulcanoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q182766" start="4405" end="4411" title="STEREO" label="STEREO"/>
<link wikidata="Q320638" start="4415" end="4419" title="Solar and Heliospheric Observatory" label="SOHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q327757" start="4483" end="4494" title="super-Earth" label="super-Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q681824" start="4558" end="4580" title="Clearing the neighbourhood" label="clear its neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q131394455" start="4622" end="4633" title="Fifth Giant" label="Fifth Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="4702" end="4708" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="4713" end="4719" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="4811" end="4818" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q128207" start="4946" end="4964" title="terrestrial planet" label="terrestrial planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q591571" start="5027" end="5049" title="Late Heavy Bombardment" label="Late Heavy Bombardment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4021955" start="5327" end="5337" title="supergiant planet" label="supergiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q562886" start="5360" end="5376" title="Michael Woolfson" label="Michael Woolfson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5392" end="5406" title="History of Solar System formation and evolution hypotheses#Capture theory" label="Capture theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q657887" start="5842" end="5848" title="Chiron (hypothetical moon)" label="Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="5860" end="5866" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q77022" start="5889" end="5908" title="Hermann Goldschmidt" label="Hermann Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q113995807" start="5954" end="5963" title="Chrysalis (hypothetical moon)" label="Chrysalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="6031" end="6068" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q165585" start="6089" end="6104" title="Cassini–Huygens" label="Cassini–Huygens"/>
<link wikidata="Q194" start="6313" end="6328" title="rings of Saturn" label="rings of Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11176" start="6332" end="6346" title="Claimed moons of Earth" label="Other moons of"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="6347" end="6352" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6362" end="6379" title="Claimed moons of Earth#Petit&amp;#x27;s moon" label="Petit&amp;#x27;s moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q367831" start="6381" end="6387" title="Lilith (moon)" label="Lilith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6389" end="6411" title="Claimed moons of Earth#Waltemath.27s moons" label="Waltemath&amp;#x27;s moons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6416" end="6434" title="Claimed moons of Earth#Other claims" label="Bagby&amp;#x27;s moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349809" start="6439" end="6458" title="Mercury&amp;#x27;s moon" label="Mercury&amp;#x27;s moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q59131" start="6538" end="6548" title="Mariner 10" label="Mariner 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="6574" end="6581" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3598850" start="6658" end="6669" title="31 Crateris" label="31 Crateris"/>
<link wikidata="Q248795" start="6673" end="6678" title="Neith (hypothetical moon)" label="Neith"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="6700" end="6705" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q768943" start="6995" end="7015" title="Jean-Charles Houzeau" label="Jean-Charles Houzeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753556" start="7132" end="7138" title="Themis (hypothetical moon)" label="Themis"/>
<link wikidata="Q310222" start="7174" end="7191" title="William Henry Pickering" label="William Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q308803" start="7277" end="7284" title="Nemesis (hypothetical star)" label="Nemesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101600" start="7288" end="7293" title="brown dwarf" label="brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="7297" end="7306" title="red dwarf" label="red dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q513559" start="7358" end="7375" title="Richard A. Muller" label="Richard A. Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q55814" start="7413" end="7428" title="mass extinction" label="mass extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q40864" start="7517" end="7527" title="Oort cloud" label="Oort cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q15610" start="7671" end="7683" title="90377 Sedna" label="Sedna&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q308803" start="7730" end="7737" title="Nemesis (hypothetical star)" label="Nemesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q693552" start="7826" end="7830" title="Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer" label="WISE"/>
<link wikidata="Q101600" start="7851" end="7862" title="brown dwarf" label="brown dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575489" start="7881" end="7905" title="Raymond Arthur Lyttleton" label="Raymond Arthur Lyttleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q183397" start="8092" end="8102" title="Fred Hoyle" label="Fred Hoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22133699" start="8537" end="8548" title="Planet Nine" label="Planet Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155939" start="8563" end="8584" title="primordial black hole" label="primordial black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274946" start="8605" end="8617" title="Subsatellite" label="Subsatellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q40864" start="8620" end="8630" title="Oort cloud" label="Oort cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803875" start="8633" end="8655" title="Planets beyond Neptune" label="Planets beyond Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q13599969" start="8658" end="8676" title="Nebular hypothesis" label="Nebular hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700896" start="8679" end="8708" title="Tenth planet (disambiguation)" label="Tenth planet (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782370" start="8711" end="8734" title="Theoretical planetology" label="Theoretical planetology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592" start="8737" end="8759" title="Trans-Neptunian object" label="Trans-Neptunian object"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446575" start="8762" end="8796" title="Trans-Neptunian objects in fiction" label="Trans-Neptunian objects in fiction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43521" wikidata="Q651532" url="?curid=43521" title="The Three Little Pigs">
<text>&quot;The Three Little Pigs&quot; is a fable about three pigs who build their houses of different materials. A Big Bad Wolf blows down the first two pigs&#x27; houses which are made of straw and sticks respectively, but is unable to destroy the third pig&#x27;s house that is made of bricks. The printed versions of this fable date back to the 1840s, but the story is thought to be much older. The earliest version takes place in Dartmoor with three pixies and a fox before its best known version appears in &quot;English Fairy Tales&quot; by Joseph Jacobs in 1890, with Jacobs crediting James Halliwell-Phillipps as the source. In 1886, Halliwell-Phillipps had published his version of the story, in the fifth edition of his &quot;Nursery Rhymes of England&quot;, and it included, for the first time in print, the now-standard phrases &quot;not by the hair of my chiny chin chin&quot; and &quot;I&#x27;ll huff, and I&#x27;ll puff, and I&#x27;ll blow your house in&quot;.

The phrases used in the story, and the various morals drawn from it, have become embedded in Western culture. Many versions of &quot;The Three Little Pigs&quot; have been recreated and modified over the years, sometimes making the wolf a kind character. It is a type B124 folktale in the Thompson Motif Index.

==Traditional versions==
&quot;The Three Little Pigs&quot; was included in &quot;The Nursery Rhymes of England&quot; (London and New York, c.1886), by James Halliwell-Phillipps. The story in its arguably best-known form appeared in &quot;English Fairy Tales&quot; by Joseph Jacobs, first published on June 19, 1890, and crediting Halliwell as his source. The earliest published version of the story is from Dartmoor, Devon, England in 1853, and has three little pixies and a fox in place of the three pigs and a wolf. The first pixy had a wooden house:


The story begins with the title characters being sent out into the world by their mother, to &quot;seek out their fortune&quot;. The first little pig builds a house out of straw, but the wolf blows it down and devours him. The second little pig builds a house out of sticks, but the result is the same. Each exchange between wolf and pig features ringing proverbial phrases, namely:

The third little pig builds a house out of bricks, which the wolf fails to blow down. The wolf then attempts to meet the pig at a turnip field, an apple orchard, and a fair, but the pig always arrives early and avoids the wolf. Finally, the infuriated wolf resolves to come down the chimney, whereupon the pig lights a fire under a pot of water on the fireplace. The wolf falls in and is fatally boiled, avenging the death of his brothers. After cooking the wolf, the pig proceeds to eat him for dinner.

==Other versions==
In some versions, the first two pigs escape to their brother&#x27;s brick house. Most such versions omit any attempts by the wolf to meet the third pig after his failed attempt to blow the house in. Sometimes, the wolf simply burns his tail and runs away.

The story uses the literary rule of three, expressed in this case as a &quot;contrasting three&quot;, as the third pig&#x27;s brick house turns out to be the only one which is adequate to withstand the wolf.
Variations of the tale appeared in &quot;Uncle Remus: His Songs and His Sayings&quot; in 1881, in which the pigs were replaced by Br&#x27;er Rabbit. The story also made an appearance in &quot;Nights with Uncle Remus&quot; in 1883, both by Joel Chandler Harris. Andrew Lang included it in &quot;The Green Fairy Book&quot;, published in 1892, but did not cite his source. In contrast to Jacobs&#x27;s version, which left the pigs nameless, Lang&#x27;s retelling cast the pigs as Browny, Whitey, and Blacky. It also set itself apart by exploring each pig&#x27;s character and detailing the interaction between them. The antagonist of this version is a fox, not a wolf. The pigs&#x27; houses are made either of mud, cabbage, or brick. Blacky, the third pig, rescues his brother and sister from the fox&#x27;s den after the fox has been defeated.

==Analysis==
Writer Bruno Bettelheim, in his book &quot;The Uses of Enchantment&quot;, interprets the tale as a showcase of the capacity for anticipation and courage in the face of adversity, symbolized by the wolf. According to him, the individual who is content to prepare themself as the first two pigs will be destroyed by the vicissitudes of life, and only a person who builds a solid base can face such hazards. He viewed the tale as a means of telling children that one cannot always act according to the pleasure principle, and must submit to the reality principle when life demands it. He exemplified this point by observing that the first two pigs valued gratification rather than planning and foresight as the third pig had.

==Later adaptations==
===Animated shorts===
*&quot;Three Little Pigs&quot;, a 1933 &quot;Silly Symphony&quot; cartoon, was produced by Walt Disney. The production cast the title characters as &quot;Fifer Pig&quot;, &quot;Fiddler Pig&quot;, and &quot;Practical Pig&quot;. The first two are depicted as both frivolous and arrogant. The story has been somewhat softened. The first two pigs still get their houses blown down, but escape from the wolf. Also, the wolf is not boiled to death but simply burns his own behind and runs away. Three sequels soon followed respectively as a result of the short film&#x27;s popularity:
**The first of them was &quot;The Big Bad Wolf&quot;, also directed by Burt Gillett and first released on April 14, 1934. 
**In 1936, a second cartoon starring the Three Little Pigs and the Big Bad Wolf followed, with a story based on &quot;The Boy Who Cried Wolf&quot;. This short was entitled &quot;Three Little Wolves&quot; and introduced the Big Bad Wolf&#x27;s three pup sons, all of whom just as eager for a taste of the pigs as their father.
**A third cartoon &quot;The Practical Pig&quot;, was released in 1939, right at the end of the Silly Symphonies&#x27; run. In this, Fifer and Piper, again despite Practical&#x27;s warning, go swimming but are captured by the Wolf, who then goes after Practical only to be caught in Practical&#x27;s newly built Lie Detector machine.
**In 1941, a fourth cartoon much of the film was edited into &quot;The Thrifty Pig&quot;, which was distributed by the National Film Board of Canada. Here, Practical Pig builds his house out of Canadian war bonds, and the Big Bad Wolf representing Nazi Germany is unable to blow his house down.
**Fiddler Pig, Fifer Pig, and Big Bad Wolf appeared in the film &quot;Who Framed Roger Rabbit&quot;.
*In 1942, there was a Walter Lantz musical version, &quot;The Hams That Couldn&#x27;t Be Cured.&quot; The wolf (claiming he is a musical instructor) explains to the court how the three little pigs harassed him through their instrument playing which ends up destroying the wolf&#x27;s house.
*In 1942, there was also a wartime version called &quot;Blitz Wolf&quot; with the Wolf as Adolf Hitler. It was produced by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer cartoon studio and directed by Tex Avery.
*Four cartoons inspired by the Disney version were produced by Warner Bros.
**The first was &quot;Pigs in a Polka&quot; (1943) which tells the story to the accompaniment of Johannes Brahms&#x27; Hungarian Dances, which was a serious musical treatment, directed by Friz Freleng.
**The second was &quot;The Windblown Hare&quot; (1949), featuring Bugs Bunny, and directed by Robert McKimson. In &quot;Windblown&quot;, Bugs is conned into first buying the straw house, which the wolf blows down, and then the sticks house, which the wolf also blows down. After these incidents, Bugs decides to help the wolf and get revenge on all three pigs, who are now at the brick house.
**The third was &quot;The Turn-Tale Wolf&quot; (1952), directed by Robert McKimson. This cartoon tells the story from the wolf&#x27;s point of view and makes the pigs out to be the villains. 
**The fourth was &quot;The Three Little Bops&quot; (1957), featuring the pigs as a jazz band, who refused to let the inept trumpet-playing wolf join until after he died and went to Hell, whereupon his playing markedly improved, directed by Friz Freleng.
*In 1953, Tex Avery directed a Droopy cartoon, &quot;The Three Little Pups&quot;. In it, the pigs are replaced with dogs and the wolf is a Southern-accented dog catcher trying to catch Droopy and his brothers, Snoopy and Loopy, to put in the dog pound. It was produced by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer cartoon studio.
*In 1980, the book with Erik Blegvad illustrations was made. In 1988, Weston Woods Studios created a short film based on the book.
*In 2023, the winner of the Doric Film Festival, &quot;Spirit of the Festival Award&quot; was Aaron Gayle (note: misspelled in citation) for his animated version of the Three Wee Grumphie (Doric for three little pigs) with all characters speaking the North-east Scotland dialect, and amusing twist in the tale, which features the wolf&#x27;s mother.
*&quot;Home on the Range&quot; features a short called &quot;A Dairy Tale&quot;, where the character Mrs. Caloway tries to tell the story itself, but is constantly interrupted by other characters, who tell the story in their own ways.

===Animated features===
*&quot;3 Pigs and a Baby&quot; is the first animated film in the series based on &quot;Three Little Pigs&quot;. The direct-to-DVD film was released on March 4, 2008, and stars Jon Cryer, Brad Garrett, Steve Zahn and Jesse McCartney.
*The three pigs and the wolf appear in the four &quot;Shrek&quot; films.

===Television===
*In 1985, the story was re-told as the first episode of Season Four of &quot;Shelley Duvall&#x27;s Faerie Tale Theatre&quot;, with Billy Crystal as artistic &quot;Larry Pig&quot; (the smart third pig), Jeff Goldblum as henpecked &quot;Buck Wolf&quot;, Stephen Furst as capitalistic &quot;Peter Pig&quot; (the first pig), Fred Willard as narcissistic &quot;Paul Pig&quot; (the second pig), Doris Roberts as &quot;Mother Pig&quot; and Valerie Perrine as love interest &quot;Tina Pig&quot;. In this version, all three pigs buy their building materials from the same junk salesman (Larry Hankin).
*In &quot;Rabbit Ears Productions&quot;″s &quot;Storybook Classics&quot; adaptation, the pigs appear to be female.
*The 1992 Green Jellö song, &quot;Three Little Pigs&quot; was adapted to a claymation music video.
*In the &quot;Shining Time Station&quot; episode, &quot;Schemer&#x27;s Alone&quot;, Midge Smoot reads a version of this story to Schemer who paid her an IOU instead of real money, despite the fact that he&#x27;s tricking his friends.
*The characters from the 1933 film adaptation of &quot;The Three Little Pigs&quot; appeared in the 2001 television series &quot;House of Mouse&quot; in many episodes, and again in the direct-to-video film &quot;Mickey&#x27;s Magical Christmas: Snowed in at the House of Mouse&quot;.
*In 1996, from What a Cartoon! shorts program, in William Hanna&#x27;s final cartoon short &quot;Wind-Up Wolf&quot;, The Big Bad Wolf creates a robot minion wolf to attempt to finally get the Three Little Pigs.
*The three pigs and the wolf appear in the four &quot;Shrek&quot; films, and the TV specials &quot;Shrek the Halls&quot; and &quot;Scared Shrekless&quot;.
*In the PBS Kids series &quot;Super Why!&quot;, Pig (Littlest Pig) is one of the main characters of the show. In the episode &quot;The Three Little Pigs: Return of The Wolf,&quot; it is revealed that he is the youngest of the three little pigs. He transforms into Alpha Pig with Alphabet Power.
*In 2018, the story was told in the first season of &quot;Tell Me a Story&quot;, a serialized drama that interweaves The Three Little Pigs, Little Red Riding Hood and Hansel and Gretel &quot;into an epic and subversive tale of love, loss, greed, revenge, and murder.
*Episode 1 of &quot;Dino Babies&quot;, &quot;These Doors Are Made for Knocking&quot;, is based on this story.
*In the series &quot;Between the Lions&quot;, the story itself is featured in the episode &quot;Huff and Puff&quot;; however, two different sequels were written by two of the main characters: Leona&#x27;s sequel shows the Big Bad Wolf becoming friends with the pigs after getting his tail burned while Lionel&#x27;s depicts him being brought back to life by a mad scientist and renamed &quot;the Wolf-inator&quot;, who is able to blow the brick house down, but gets chased away by the pigs as robots.
*In &quot;The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh&quot; episode &quot;Three Little Piglets&quot;, an alternate version of the story is told with the pigs replaced with three Piglets, the wolf replaced by a big bad bunny (played by Rabbit), the house of sticks replaced by Eeyore&#x27;s house and then a house of playing cards, and the brick house replaced with Piglet&#x27;s house.
*The &quot;Little Einsteins&quot; episode &quot;Build It, Rocket!” is based on the story itself, but the plot also involves the main characters finding materials needed to build the brick house and the wolf being blown away by the pigs after failing to blow down the brick house.
*The &quot;Very Important People&quot; episode &quot;Pig #2&quot; features Ally Beardsley portraying one of the Three Little Pigs, who is coping with trauma caused by the death of their mother to the Big Bad Wolf, later revealed to actually be a miniature dachshund.

===Literature===
*One of Uncle Remus&#x27; stories, &quot;The Story of the Pigs&quot; (alt. title: &quot;Brer Wolf and the Pigs&quot;), found in &quot;Nights with Uncle Remus&quot; (1883), is a re-telling of the story, with the following differences:
**There are five pigs in this version: Big Pig, Little Pig, Speckle Pig, Blunt and Runt.
**Blunt is the only male; all the rest are females.
**Big Pig builds a brush house, Little Pig builds a stick house, Speckle Pig builds a mud house, Blunt builds a plank house and Runt builds a stone house. 
**The Wolf&#x27;s verse goes: &quot;If you&#x27;ll open the door and let me in, I&#x27;ll warm my hands and go home again.&quot;
*The 1989 parody &quot;The True Story of the 3 Little Pigs!&quot; is presented as a first-person narrative by the wolf (here called Alexander T. Wolf), who portrays the entire incident as a misunderstanding; he had gone to the pigs to borrow some sugar to bake a cake, had destroyed their houses in a sneezing fit, ate the first two pigs not to waste food (since they had died in the house collapse anyway), and was caught attacking the third pig&#x27;s house after the pig had continually insulted him.
*The 1993 children&#x27;s book &quot;The Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig&quot; inverts the cast and makes a few changes to the plot: the wolves build a brick house, then a concrete house, then a steel house, and finally a house of flowers. The pig is unable to blow the houses down, destroying them by other means, but eventually gives up his wicked ways when he smells the scent of the flower house, and becomes friends with the wolves.
*The 2008 children&#x27;s book &quot;The Three Horrid Pigs and the Big Friendly Wolf&quot; changes the story: the pigs and the wolf are depicted as friends.
*The Three Little Pigs are often parodied or referenced in Monica and Friends comics, usually in Smudge-related stories due to his strong interest in pigs.

===Music===
*In 1953, Al &quot;Jazzbo&quot; Collins narrated a jazz version of The Three Little Pigs on a Brunswick Records 78 r.p.m. record album titled &quot;steve allen&#x27;s grimm fairy tales for hip kids&quot; with piano blues accompaniment by Lou Stein.
*The 1989 Mucky Pup song &quot;Little Pigs&quot; from the album &quot;A Boy in a Man&#x27;s World&quot; is a rap/metal version of the story featuring the dialogue between the wolf and pigs.
*The 1992 Green Jellö song, &quot;Three Little Pigs&quot; sets the story in Los Angeles. The wolf drives a Harley Davidson motorcycle, the first little pig is an aspiring guitarist, the second is a cannabis smoking, dumpster diving evangelist and the third holds a Master of Architecture degree from Harvard University. In the end, with all three pigs barricaded in the brick house, the third pig calls 9-1-1. John Rambo is dispatched to the scene, and kills the wolf with a machine gun.
*In 2003, the Flemish company Studio 100 created a musical called &quot;Three Little Pigs&quot; (), which follows the three daughters of the pig with the house of stone with new original songs, introducing a completely new story loosely based on the original story. The musical was specially written for the band K3, who play the three little pigs, Pirky, Parky and Porky ().
*Elton John&#x27;s song &quot;And the House Fell Down&quot; (from &quot;The Captain &amp; the Kid&quot;) is based (metaphorically) on the story.
*Barbadian singer Rihanna referenced a line from the story in her 2007 song &quot;Breakin&#x27; Dishes&quot; (from &quot;Good Girl Gone Bad&quot;).
*In 2014, Peter Lund let the three little pigs live together in a village in the musical &quot;Grimm&quot; with Little Red Riding Hood and other fairy tale characters.
*The second single from metal band In This Moment&#x27;s 2014 album &quot;Black Widow&quot;, &quot;Big Bad Wolf,&quot; references a little pig as well as the big bad wolf.

===Other===
*The Disney version of the three pigs can be seen in Walt Disney Parks and Resorts as meet-and-greet characters.
*The direct-to-video film &quot;Muppet Classic Theater&quot; includes &quot;The Three Little Pigs&quot; as one of the stories, featuring Miss Piggy, Andy and Randy Pig as the titular characters.
*In &quot;The Shining&quot;, Jack Nicholson&#x27;s rampaging character, Jack Torrance, recites part of the tale (&quot;Little pigs, little pigs let me come in...&quot;) before attempting to break-in to the bathroom in which his wife, Wendy (Shelley Duvall), is hiding.
*In the Japanese live action series, Kamen Rider Saber, this story is adapted into a &quot;Wonder Ride Book&quot;, named &quot;Kobuta 3Kyoudai (The 3 Little Sibling Pigs)&quot;, which was used by Kamen Rider Saber, the main character, for a while, but later becomes commonly used by Kamen Rider Kenzan.

==References==
==External links==
*
*The nursery rhymes of England By James Orchard Halliwell-Phillipps, pp. 37–41 on books.google.com
*The Story of the Three Little Pigs in The nursery rhymes of England, by Halliwell, pp. 37–41 on Archive.org
*19th century versions of the Three Little Pigs story</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q651532" start="6" end="27" title="The Three Little Pigs" label="The Three Little Pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q693" start="39" end="44" title="fable" label="fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="57" end="61" title="domestic pig" label="pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3947" start="78" end="83" title="house" label="house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367867" start="111" end="123" title="Big Bad Wolf" label="Big Bad Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="185" end="190" title="straw" label="straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923673" start="195" end="201" title="Branch" label="sticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q40089" start="284" end="289" title="brick" label="brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q214823" start="430" end="438" title="Dartmoor" label="Dartmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144339" start="450" end="455" title="pixie" label="pixie"/>
<link wikidata="Q981949" start="543" end="556" title="Joseph Jacobs" label="Joseph Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q321691" start="588" end="613" title="James Halliwell-Phillipps" label="James Halliwell-Phillipps"/>
<link wikidata="Q235282" start="1020" end="1025" title="moral" label="moral"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="1066" end="1081" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q19062048" start="1261" end="1281" title="Motif-Index of Folk-Literature" label="Thompson Motif Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q321691" start="1435" end="1460" title="James Halliwell-Phillipps" label="James Halliwell-Phillipps"/>
<link wikidata="Q981949" start="1551" end="1564" title="Joseph Jacobs" label="Joseph Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q214823" start="1691" end="1699" title="Dartmoor" label="Dartmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="1701" end="1706" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144339" start="1746" end="1751" title="pixie" label="pixie"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="2011" end="2016" title="straw" label="straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923673" start="2106" end="2112" title="Branch" label="sticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q40089" start="2266" end="2271" title="brick" label="brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q170477" start="2506" end="2513" title="chimney" label="chimney"/>
<link wikidata="Q890687" start="2611" end="2625" title="Death by boiling" label="fatally boiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378982" start="3032" end="3045" title="Rule of three (writing)" label="rule of three"/>
<link wikidata="Q719143" start="3253" end="3264" title="Uncle Remus" label="Uncle Remus"/>
<link wikidata="Q925172" start="3342" end="3359" title="Br&amp;#x27;er Rabbit" label="Br&amp;#x27;er Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q554269" start="3451" end="3471" title="Joel Chandler Harris" label="Joel Chandler Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q505827" start="3473" end="3484" title="Andrew Lang" label="Andrew Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757700" start="3506" end="3526" title="The Green Fairy Book" label="The Green Fairy Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q84386" start="4075" end="4091" title="Bruno Bettelheim" label="Bruno Bettelheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410027" start="4111" end="4134" title="The Uses of Enchantment" label="The Uses of Enchantment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054581" start="4720" end="4733" title="gratification" label="gratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q309100" start="4746" end="4754" title="planning" label="planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073839" start="4759" end="4768" title="Foresight (psychology)" label="foresight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218152" start="4843" end="4860" title="Three Little Pigs (film)" label="Three Little Pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q909166" start="4881" end="4895" title="Silly Symphonies" label="Silly Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="4927" end="4938" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223279" start="5445" end="5461" title="The Big Bad Wolf (1934 film)" label="The Big Bad Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q630819" start="5486" end="5498" title="Burt Gillett" label="Burt Gillett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190945" start="5656" end="5678" title="The Boy Who Cried Wolf" label="The Boy Who Cried Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235899" start="5716" end="5735" title="Three Little Wolves (film)" label="Three Little Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221530" start="5888" end="5905" title="The Practical Pig" label="The Practical Pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523009" start="6264" end="6279" title="The Thrifty Pig" label="The Thrifty Pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530721" start="6316" end="6345" title="National Film Board of Canada" label="National Film Board of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q617663" start="6400" end="6409" title="war bonds" label="war bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="6445" end="6457" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q379873" start="6562" end="6585" title="Who Framed Roger Rabbit" label="Who Framed Roger Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q703759" start="6615" end="6627" title="Walter Lantz" label="Walter Lantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q884466" start="6940" end="6950" title="Blitz Wolf" label="Blitz Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="6974" end="6986" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567087" start="7007" end="7041" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer cartoon studio" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer cartoon studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q319723" start="7058" end="7067" title="Tex Avery" label="Tex Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="7132" end="7144" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q1789631" start="7167" end="7182" title="Pigs in a Polka" label="Pigs in a Polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="7242" end="7257" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065126" start="7264" end="7280" title="Hungarian Dances" label="Hungarian Dances"/>
<link wikidata="Q457864" start="7333" end="7345" title="Friz Freleng" label="Friz Freleng"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523388" start="7370" end="7388" title="The Windblown Hare" label="The Windblown Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q183102" start="7413" end="7423" title="Bugs Bunny" label="Bugs Bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675739" start="7762" end="7780" title="The Turn-Tale Wolf" label="The Turn-Tale Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797580" start="7955" end="7976" title="Three Little Bops" label="The Three Little Bops"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="8113" end="8117" title="Hell" label="Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q457864" start="8172" end="8184" title="Friz Freleng" label="Friz Freleng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260264" start="8217" end="8223" title="Droopy" label="Droopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144345" start="8325" end="8342" title="Southern American English" label="Southern-accented"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567087" start="8458" end="8492" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer cartoon studio" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer cartoon studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q46151984" start="8518" end="8530" title="Erik Blegvad" label="Erik Blegvad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989485" start="8564" end="8584" title="Weston Woods Studios" label="Weston Woods Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245019" start="8814" end="8819" title="Doric dialect (Scotland)" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q936194" start="8982" end="8999" title="Home on the Range (2004 film)" label="Home on the Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q125887112" start="9242" end="9259" title="3 Pigs and a Baby" label="3 Pigs and a Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q651532" start="9322" end="9339" title="Three Little Pigs" label="Three Little Pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q310367" start="9411" end="9420" title="Jon Cryer" label="Jon Cryer"/>
<link wikidata="Q331720" start="9422" end="9434" title="Brad Garrett" label="Brad Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q491775" start="9436" end="9446" title="Steve Zahn" label="Steve Zahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q191842" start="9451" end="9466" title="Jesse McCartney" label="Jesse McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9469" end="9483" title="List of Shrek characters#Three Little Pigs" label="The three pigs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9492" end="9496" title="List of Shrek characters#The Big Bad Wolf" label="wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203222" start="9516" end="9539" title="Shrek (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Shrek&amp;quot; films"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557470" start="9636" end="9677" title="Shelley Duvall&amp;#x27;s Faerie Tale Theatre" label="Shelley Duvall&amp;#x27;s Faerie Tale Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q186485" start="9690" end="9703" title="Billy Crystal" label="Billy Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q106706" start="9761" end="9774" title="Jeff Goldblum" label="Jeff Goldblum"/>
<link wikidata="Q936987" start="9811" end="9824" title="Stephen Furst" label="Stephen Furst"/>
<link wikidata="Q449521" start="9880" end="9892" title="Fred Willard" label="Fred Willard"/>
<link wikidata="Q186529" start="9896" end="9908" title="Narcissism" label="narcissistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q232959" start="9948" end="9961" title="Doris Roberts" label="Doris Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q259461" start="9992" end="10007" title="Valerie Perrine" label="Valerie Perrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652939" start="10137" end="10149" title="Larry Hankin" label="Larry Hankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415889" start="10162" end="10185" title="Rabbit Ears Productions" label="Rabbit Ears Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478949" start="10277" end="10288" title="Green Jellö" label="Green Jellö"/>
<link wikidata="Q17033174" start="10301" end="10318" title="Three Little Pigs (song)" label="Three Little Pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q870889" start="10342" end="10352" title="claymation" label="claymation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497567" start="10380" end="10400" title="Shining Time Station" label="Shining Time Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q534910" start="10519" end="10522" title="IOU" label="IOU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218152" start="10655" end="10676" title="Three Little Pigs (film)" label="The Three Little Pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q693268" start="10728" end="10742" title="House of Mouse" label="House of Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10811" end="10875" title="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Magical Christmas: Snowed in at the House of Mouse" label="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Magical Christmas: Snowed in at the House of Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q406641" start="10898" end="10913" title="What a Cartoon!" label="What a Cartoon!"/>
<link wikidata="Q263324" start="10933" end="10946" title="William Hanna" label="William Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11095" end="11109" title="List of Shrek characters#Three Little Pigs" label="The three pigs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11118" end="11122" title="List of Shrek characters#The Big Bad Wolf" label="wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203222" start="11142" end="11165" title="Shrek (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Shrek&amp;quot; films"/>
<link wikidata="Q388517" start="11193" end="11208" title="Shrek the Halls" label="Shrek the Halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659351" start="11225" end="11241" title="Scared Shrekless" label="Scared Shrekless"/>
<link wikidata="Q16547115" start="11279" end="11289" title="Super Why!" label="Super Why!"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074622" start="11602" end="11617" title="Tell Me a Story (TV series)" label="Tell Me a Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915486" start="11831" end="11842" title="Dino Babies" label="Dino Babies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899195" start="11942" end="11959" title="Between the Lions" label="Between the Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470724" start="12432" end="12469" title="The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh" label="The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466644" start="12813" end="12829" title="Little Einsteins" label="Little Einsteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q131314347" start="13093" end="13114" title="Very Important People (2023 TV series)" label="Very Important People"/>
<link wikidata="Q115121354" start="13157" end="13171" title="Ally Beardsley" label="Ally Beardsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q29099" start="13328" end="13347" title="miniature dachshund" label="miniature dachshund"/>
<link wikidata="Q719143" start="13375" end="13386" title="Uncle Remus" label="Uncle Remus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770540" start="14050" end="14086" title="The True Story of the 3 Little Pigs!" label="The True Story of the 3 Little Pigs!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769023" start="14568" end="14611" title="The Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig" label="The Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15014" end="15061" title="The Three Horrid Pigs and the Big Friendly Wolf" label="The Three Horrid Pigs and the Big Friendly Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q938975" start="15193" end="15211" title="Monica and Friends" label="Monica and Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546584" start="15231" end="15237" title="Smudge (Monica and Friends)" label="Smudge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684513" start="15313" end="15342" title="Al &amp;quot;Jazzbo&amp;quot; Collins" label="Al &amp;quot;Jazzbo&amp;quot; Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951667" start="15562" end="15571" title="Mucky Pup" label="Mucky Pup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655604" start="15622" end="15649" title="A Boy in a Man&amp;#x27;s World" label="A Boy in a Man&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478949" start="15752" end="15763" title="Green Jellö" label="Green Jellö"/>
<link wikidata="Q17033174" start="15776" end="15793" title="Three Little Pigs (song)" label="Three Little Pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="15818" end="15829" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q192814" start="15849" end="15864" title="Harley Davidson" label="Harley Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q855091" start="15913" end="15922" title="guitarist" label="guitarist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310896" start="15940" end="15956" title="cannabis smoking" label="cannabis smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110145" start="15958" end="15973" title="dumpster diving" label="dumpster diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="15974" end="15984" title="Evangelism" label="evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q611694" start="16007" end="16029" title="Master of Architecture" label="Master of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="16042" end="16060" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q533806" start="16145" end="16150" title="9-1-1" label="9-1-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q951317" start="16152" end="16162" title="John Rambo" label="John Rambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="16217" end="16228" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="16244" end="16251" title="Belgium" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q980704" start="16260" end="16270" title="Studio 100" label="Studio 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568276" start="16543" end="16545" title="K3 (band)" label="K3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="16607" end="16617" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297074" start="16678" end="16703" title="The Captain &amp;amp; the Kid" label="The Captain &amp;amp; the Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q36844" start="16769" end="16776" title="Rihanna" label="Rihanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q153391" start="16872" end="16890" title="Good Girl Gone Bad" label="Good Girl Gone Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q107208" start="16909" end="16919" title="Peter Lund (theatre director)" label="Peter Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q19648427" start="16994" end="16999" title="Grimm (musical)" label="Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838" start="17011" end="17033" title="Little Red Riding Hood" label="Little Red Riding Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468680" start="17102" end="17116" title="In This Moment" label="In This Moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431781" start="17305" end="17334" title="Walt Disney Parks and Resorts" label="Walt Disney Parks and Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918167" start="17397" end="17419" title="Muppet Classic Theater" label="Muppet Classic Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267970" start="17502" end="17512" title="Miss Piggy" label="Miss Piggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137237" start="17514" end="17532" title="Andy and Randy Pig" label="Andy and Randy Pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q186341" start="17570" end="17581" title="The Shining (film)" label="The Shining"/>
<link wikidata="Q39792" start="17589" end="17603" title="Jack Nicholson" label="Jack Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601499" start="17632" end="17645" title="Jack Torrance" label="Jack Torrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q235478" start="17801" end="17815" title="Shelley Duvall" label="Shelley Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q96619762" start="17866" end="17883" title="Kamen Rider Saber" label="Kamen Rider Saber"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="18251" end="18267" title="books.google.com" label="books.google.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="18365" end="18376" title="Archive.org" label="Archive.org"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43523" wikidata="Q138698" url="?curid=43523" title="Khmer">
<text>Khmer may refer to:

==Cambodia==
*&quot;Srok Khmer&quot; (lit. &quot;Khmer land&quot; or &quot;Land of the Khmer(s)&quot;), a colloquial exonym used to refer to Cambodia by Cambodians; see 
*Khmer people, the ethnic group to which the great majority of Cambodians belong
**Khmer Americans, Americans of Khmer (Cambodian) ancestry
**Khmer Krom, Khmer people living in the Mekong Delta and Southeast Vietnam
**Khmer Loeu, the Mon-Khmer highland tribes in Cambodia
**Northern Khmer people, ethnic Khmer people of Northeast Thailand
*Khmer (Unicode block), a block of Unicode characters of the Khmer script
*Khmer architecture, the architecture of Cambodia
*Khmer cuisine, the dominant cuisine in Cambodia
*Khmer Empire, which ruled much of Indochina from the 9th to the 13th centuries 
*Khmer Issarak, anti-French, Khmer nationalist political movement formed in 1945
*Khmer language, the language of the Khmers, also the official and national language of Cambodia
**Khmer Khe dialect, a Khmeric language spoken in Stung Treng Province, Cambodia
**Northern Khmer dialect, a dialect of the Khmer language spoken by the ethnic Khmers in Northeast Thailand
**Western Khmer dialect, a dialect of the Khmer language spoken by the Khmers native to the Cardamom Mountains
*Khmer nationalism, a form of nationalism founded in Cambodia
*Khmer Republic, the official name of Cambodia from 1970 to 1975
*Khmer Sâ (White Khmer), a pro-US force formed by the Khmer Republic&#x27;s defence minister Sak Sutsakhan
*Khmer script, the script used to write the Khmer and Khmer Loeu languages
*Khmer Serei, anti-communist and anti-monarchist guerrilla force founded by Cambodian nationalist Son Ngoc Thanh
*Political terms coined by Norodom Sihanouk based on the word &#x27;Khmer&#x27;:
**Khmer Bleu, Sihanouk&#x27;s domestic opponents on the right
**Khmer Rouge, a Cambodian Communist political group and guerrilla movement
**Khmer Việt Minh, Cambodian communists who lived in exile in North Vietnam after the 1954 Geneva Conference

==Other uses==
*&quot;Khmer&quot; (album), a 1997 jazz album by Nils Petter Molvær
*Khmer (food), traditional dish native to Jizan, Saudi Arabia
*&quot;&quot;, a 1997 nonfiction book by Thierry Zéphir

==See also==
*Khemara (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q138698" start="0" end="5" title="Khmer" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="162" end="170" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201028" start="192" end="204" title="Khmer people" label="Khmer people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025138" start="274" end="289" title="Khmer Americans" label="Khmer Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370078" start="333" end="343" title="Khmer Krom" label="Khmer Krom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292089" start="409" end="419" title="Khmer Loeu" label="Khmer Loeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6676085" start="465" end="486" title="Northern Khmer people" label="Northern Khmer people"/>
<link wikidata="Q25288749" start="531" end="552" title="Khmer (Unicode block)" label="Khmer (Unicode block)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480618" start="605" end="623" title="Khmer architecture" label="Khmer architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q139430" start="655" end="668" title="Khmer cuisine" label="Khmer cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="704" end="716" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638478" start="785" end="798" title="Khmer Issarak" label="Khmer Issarak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="866" end="880" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer language"/>
<link wikidata="Q19572453" start="964" end="981" title="Khmer Khe dialect" label="Khmer Khe dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502234" start="1045" end="1067" title="Northern Khmer dialect" label="Northern Khmer dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988007" start="1153" end="1174" title="Western Khmer dialect" label="Western Khmer dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808093" start="1263" end="1280" title="Khmer nationalism" label="Khmer nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054184" start="1325" end="1339" title="Khmer Republic" label="Khmer Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923943" start="1482" end="1495" title="Sak Sutsakhan" label="Sak Sutsakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054190" start="1497" end="1509" title="Khmer script" label="Khmer script"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922580" start="1572" end="1583" title="Khmer Serei" label="Khmer Serei"/>
<link wikidata="Q367210" start="1669" end="1683" title="Son Ngoc Thanh" label="Son Ngoc Thanh"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="1711" end="1727" title="Norodom Sihanouk" label="Norodom Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401103" start="1767" end="1777" title="Khmer Bleu" label="Khmer Bleu"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="1829" end="1840" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="1905" end="1920" title="Khmer Việt Minh" label="Khmer Việt Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q13641403" start="2029" end="2054" title="Khmer (album)" label="&amp;quot;Khmer&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401859" start="2097" end="2109" title="Khmer (food)" label="Khmer (food)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401261" start="2229" end="2253" title="Khemara (disambiguation)" label="Khemara (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43527" wikidata="Q13349" url="?curid=43527" title="Mon language">
<text>The Mon language (; , ; ; ), formerly known as Peguan and Talaing, is an Austroasiatic language spoken by the Mon people. Mon, like the related Khmer language, but unlike most languages in mainland Southeast Asia, is not tonal. The Mon language is a recognised indigenous language in Myanmar as well as a recognised indigenous language of Thailand.

Mon was classified as a &quot;vulnerable&quot; language in UNESCO&#x27;s 2010 &quot;Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger&quot;. The Mon language has faced assimilative pressures in both Myanmar and Thailand, where many individuals of Mon descent are now monolingual in Burmese or Thai respectively. In 2007, Mon speakers were estimated to number between 1,800,000 and 2 million. In Myanmar, the majority of Mon speakers live in Southern Myanmar, especially Mon State, followed by Tanintharyi Region and Kayin State.

==History==
Mon is an important language in Burmese history. Until the 12th century, it was the lingua franca of the Irrawaddy valley—not only in the Mon kingdoms of the lower Irrawaddy but also of the upriver Pagan Kingdom of the Bamar people. Mon, especially written Mon, continued to be a prestige language even after the fall of the Mon kingdom of Thaton to Pagan in 1057. King Kyansittha of Pagan (r. 1084–1113) admired Mon culture and the Mon language was patronized. 

Kyansittha left many inscriptions in Mon. During this period, the Myazedi inscription, which contains identical inscriptions of a story in Pali, Pyu, Mon and Burmese on the four sides, was carved. However, after Kyansittha&#x27;s death, usage of the Mon language declined among the Bamar and the Burmese language began to replace Mon and Pyu as a lingua franca.

Mon inscriptions from Dvaravati&#x27;s ruins also litter Thailand. However it is not clear if the inhabitants were Mon, a mix of Mon and Malay or Khmer. Later inscriptions and kingdoms like Lavo were subservient to the Khmer Empire.

After the fall of Pagan, Mon again became the lingua franca of the Hanthawaddy Kingdom (1287–1539) in present-day Lower Myanmar, which remained a predominantly Mon-speaking region until the 1800s, by which point, the Burmese language had expanded its reach from its traditional heartland in Upper Burma into Lower Burma.

The region&#x27;s language shift from Mon to Burmese has been ascribed to a combination of population displacement, intermarriage, and voluntary changes in self-identification among increasingly Mon–Burmese bilingual populations in throughout Lower Burma. The shift was certainly accelerated by the fall of the Mon-speaking Restored Hanthawaddy Kingdom in 1757. Following the fall of Pegu (now Bago), many Mon-speaking refugees fled and resettled in what is now modern-day Thailand. By 1830, an estimated 90% of the population in the Lower Burma self-identified as Burmese-speaking Bamars; huge swaths of former Mon-speaking areas, from the Irrawaddy Delta upriver, spanning Bassein (now Pathein) and Rangoon (now Yangon) to Tharrawaddy, Toungoo, Prome (now Pyay) and Henzada (now Hinthada), were now Burmese-speaking. Great Britain&#x27;s gradual annexation of Burma throughout the 19th century, in addition to concomitant economic and political instability in Upper Burma (e.g., increased tax burdens to the Burmese crown, British rice production incentives, etc.) also accelerated the migration of Burmese speakers from Upper Burma into Lower Burma.

The Mon language has influenced subtle grammatical differences between the varieties of Burmese spoken in Lower and Upper Burma. In Lower Burmese varieties, the verb ပေး (&quot;to give&quot;) is colloquially used as a permissive causative marker, like in other Southeast Asian languages, but unlike in other Tibeto-Burman languages. This usage is hardly employed in Upper Burmese varieties, and is considered a sub-standard construct.

In 1972, the New Mon State Party (NMSP) established a Mon national school system, which uses Mon as a medium of instruction, in rebel-controlled areas. The system was expanded throughout Mon State following a ceasefire with the central government in 1995. Mon State now operates a multi-track education system, with schools either using Mon as the primary medium of instruction (called Mon national schools) offering modules on the Mon language in addition to the government curriculum (called &quot;mixed schools&quot;). In 2015, Mon language courses were launched state-wide at the elementary level. This system has been recognized as a model for mother-tongue education in the Burmese national education system, because it enables children taught in the Mon language to integrate into the mainstream Burmese education system at higher education levels.

In 2013, it was announced that the Mawlamyine-based &quot;Thanlwin Times&quot; would begin to carry news in the Mon language, becoming Myanmar&#x27;s first Mon language publication since 1962.

== Geographic distribution ==


Southern Myanmar (comprising Mon State, Kayin State, and Tanintharyi Region), from the Sittaung River in the north to Myeik (Mergui) and Kawthaung in the south, remains a traditional stronghold of the Mon language. However, in this region, Burmese is favored in urban areas, such as Mawlamyine, the capital of Mon State. In recent years, usage of Mon has declined in Myanmar, especially among the younger generation.

While Thailand is home to a sizable Mon population due to historical waves of migration, only a small proportion (estimated to range between 60,000 and 80,000) speak Mon, due to Thaification and the assimilation of Mons into mainstream Thai society. Mon speakers in Thailand are largely concentrated in Ko Kret. The remaining contingent of Thai Mon speakers are located in the provinces of Samut Sakhon, Samut Songkhram, Nakhon Pathom, as well the western provinces bordering Myanmar (Kanchanaburi, Phetchaburi, Prachuap Khiri Khan, and Ratchaburi). A small ethnic group in Thailand speak a language closely related to Mon, called Nyah Kur. They are descendants of the Mon-speaking Dvaravati kingdom.

==Dialects==
Mon has three primary dialects in Burma, coming from the various regions the Mon inhabit. They are the Central (areas surrounding Mottama and Mawlamyine), Bago, and Ye dialects. All are mutually intelligible. &quot;Ethnologue&quot; lists Mon dialects as Martaban-Moulmein (Central Mon, Mon Te), Pegu (Mon Tang, Northern Mon), and Ye (Mon Nya, Southern Mon), with high mutual intelligibility among them.

Thai Mon has some differences from the Burmese dialects of Mon, but they are mutually intelligible. The Thai varieties of Mon are considered &quot;severely endangered.&quot;

== Phonology ==

=== Consonants ===

# is only found in Burmese loans.
# Implosives are lost in many dialects and become explosives instead.

=== Vowels ===
=== Vocalic register ===
Unlike the surrounding Burmese and Thai languages, Mon is not a tonal language. As in many Mon–Khmer languages, Mon uses a vowel-phonation or vowel-register system in which the quality of voice in pronouncing the vowel is phonemic. There are two registers in Mon:

# Clear (modal) voice, analyzed by various linguists as ranging from ordinary to creaky
# Breathy voice, vowels have a distinct breathy quality

One study involving speakers of a Mon dialect in Thailand found that in some syllabic environments, words with a breathy voice vowel are significantly lower in pitch than similar words with a clear vowel counterpart. While difference in pitch in certain environments was found to be significant, there are no minimal pairs that are distinguished solely by pitch. The contrastive mechanism is the vowel phonation.

In the examples below, breathy voice is marked with under-diaeresis.

==Syntax==

===Pronouns===

===Verbs and verb phrases===

Mon verbs do not inflect for person. Tense is shown through particles.

Some verbs have a morphological causative, which is most frequently a /pə-/ prefix (Pan Hla 1989:29):

===Nouns and noun phrases===

====Singular and plural====

Mon nouns do not inflect for number. That is, they do not have separate forms for singular and plural:

====Adjectives====

Adjectives follow the noun (Pan Hla p. 24):

====Demonstratives====

Demonstratives follow the noun:

====Classifiers====

Like many other Southeast Asian languages, Mon has classifiers which are used when a noun appears with a numeral. The choice of classifier depends on the semantics of the noun involved.

===Prepositions and prepositional phrases===

Mon is a prepositional language.

===Sentences===

The ordinary word order for sentences in Mon is subject–verb–object, as in the following examples

===Questions===

Yes–no questions are shown with a final particle &quot;ha&quot;

Wh-questions show a different final particle, &quot;rau&quot;. The interrogative word does not undergo wh-movement. That is, it does not necessarily move to the front of the sentence:

==Notes==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Pan Hla, Nai. 1992. &quot;The Significant Role of the Mon Language and Culture in Southeast Asia&quot;. Tokyo, Japan: Institute for the Study of Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa.
* Shorto, H.L. 1962. &quot;A Dictionary of Modern Spoken Mon&quot;. Oxford University Press.
* Shorto, H.L.; Judith M. Jacob; and E.H.S. Simonds. 1963. &quot;Bibliographies of Mon–Khmer and Tai Linguistics&quot;. Oxford University Press.
* Shorto, H.L. 1966. &quot;Mon vowel systems: a problem in phonological statement&quot;. in Bazell, Catford, Halliday, and Robins, eds. &quot;In memory of J.R. Firth&quot;, pp. 398–409.
* Shorto, H.L. 1971. &quot;A Dictionary of the Mon Inscriptions from the Sixth to the Sixteenth Centuries&quot;. Oxford University Press.

== External links ==

*A hypertext grammar of the Mon language 
*SEAlang Project: Mon–Khmer languages: The Monic Branch
*Old Mon inscriptions database
**The Ananda &quot;Basement&quot; Plaques
*Mon-language Swadesh vocabulary list of basic words (from Wiktionary&#x27;s Swadesh-list appendix)
*Mon Language Project
*Mon Language in Thailand: The endangered heritage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13349" start="4" end="16" title="Mon language" label="Mon language"/>
<link wikidata="Q13349" start="47" end="53" title="Mon language" label="Peguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13349" start="58" end="65" title="Mon language" label="Talaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="73" end="95" title="Austroasiatic languages" label="Austroasiatic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q637909" start="110" end="120" title="Mon people" label="Mon people"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="144" end="158" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer language"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="189" end="212" title="mainland Southeast Asia" label="mainland Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217406" start="327" end="347" title="Languages of Thailand" label="language of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="409" end="415" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q925553" start="434" end="474" title="Red Book of Endangered Languages" label="Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger"/>
<link wikidata="Q818742" start="811" end="820" title="Mon State" label="Mon State"/>
<link wikidata="Q843954" start="834" end="852" title="Tanintharyi Region" label="Tanintharyi Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q495342" start="857" end="868" title="Kayin State" label="Kayin State"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="967" end="980" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q26076" start="988" end="1004" title="Irrawaddy River" label="Irrawaddy valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q888574" start="1081" end="1094" title="Pagan Kingdom" label="Pagan Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q503963" start="1102" end="1114" title="Bamar people" label="Bamar people"/>
<link wikidata="Q919978" start="1163" end="1180" title="prestige language" label="prestige language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651832" start="1212" end="1229" title="Thaton Kingdom" label="kingdom of Thaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q887132" start="1253" end="1263" title="Kyansittha" label="Kyansittha"/>
<link wikidata="Q494132" start="1413" end="1432" title="Myazedi inscription" label="Myazedi inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="1486" end="1490" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q36259" start="1492" end="1495" title="Pyu language (Burma)" label="Pyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9228" start="1643" end="1659" title="Burmese language" label="Burmese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="1694" end="1707" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268307" start="1732" end="1741" title="Dvaravati" label="Dvaravati"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="1767" end="1775" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332305" start="1900" end="1904" title="Lavo Kingdom" label="Lavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="1929" end="1941" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572529" start="2011" end="2030" title="Hanthawaddy Kingdom" label="Hanthawaddy Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937196" start="2058" end="2071" title="Lower Myanmar" label="Lower Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9228" start="2161" end="2177" title="Burmese language" label="Burmese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936648" start="2235" end="2246" title="Upper Myanmar" label="Upper Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937196" start="2252" end="2263" title="Lower Myanmar" label="Lower Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302610" start="2590" end="2618" title="Restored Hanthawaddy Kingdom" label="Restored Hanthawaddy Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705234" start="2907" end="2922" title="Irrawaddy Delta" label="Irrawaddy Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q13073291" start="3869" end="3888" title="New Mon State Party" label="New Mon State Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807178" start="3958" end="3979" title="medium of instruction" label="medium of instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="4505" end="4518" title="mother-tongue" label="mother-tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q685941" start="4748" end="4758" title="Mawlamyine" label="Mawlamyine"/>
<link wikidata="Q818742" start="4968" end="4977" title="Mon State" label="Mon State"/>
<link wikidata="Q495342" start="4979" end="4990" title="Kayin State" label="Kayin State"/>
<link wikidata="Q843954" start="4996" end="5014" title="Tanintharyi Region" label="Tanintharyi Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075555" start="5026" end="5040" title="Sittaung River" label="Sittaung River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018163" start="5057" end="5062" title="Myeik, Myanmar" label="Myeik"/>
<link wikidata="Q978611" start="5076" end="5085" title="Kawthaung" label="Kawthaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q685941" start="5222" end="5232" title="Mawlamyine" label="Mawlamyine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849805" start="5535" end="5547" title="Thaification" label="Thaification"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921050" start="5660" end="5667" title="Ko Kret" label="Ko Kret"/>
<link wikidata="Q334686" start="5747" end="5759" title="Samut Sakhon Province" label="Samut Sakhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q459742" start="5761" end="5776" title="Samut Songkhram Province" label="Samut Songkhram"/>
<link wikidata="Q334841" start="5778" end="5791" title="Nakhon Pathom Province" label="Nakhon Pathom"/>
<link wikidata="Q239121" start="5842" end="5854" title="Kanchanaburi" label="Kanchanaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q641383" start="5856" end="5867" title="Phetchaburi" label="Phetchaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q373340" start="5869" end="5888" title="Prachuap Khiri Khan" label="Prachuap Khiri Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207138" start="5894" end="5904" title="Ratchaburi" label="Ratchaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q116849" start="5988" end="5996" title="Nyah Kur language" label="Nyah Kur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268307" start="6039" end="6048" title="Dvaravati" label="Dvaravati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950091" start="6202" end="6209" title="Mottama" label="Mottama"/>
<link wikidata="Q685941" start="6214" end="6224" title="Mawlamyine" label="Mawlamyine"/>
<link wikidata="Q800122" start="6227" end="6231" title="Bago, Myanmar" label="Bago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528063" start="6237" end="6239" title="Ye, Mon State" label="Ye"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="6868" end="6872" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="6897" end="6911" title="tone (linguistics)" label="tonal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925633" start="6981" end="6989" title="register (phonology)" label="register"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084827" start="7179" end="7185" title="Creaky voice" label="creaky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328163" start="7188" end="7201" title="Breathy voice" label="Breathy voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q815955" start="7552" end="7564" title="minimal pair" label="minimal pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q63153" start="8317" end="8328" title="Classifier (linguistics)" label="classifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658424" start="8834" end="8845" title="wh-movement" label="wh-movement"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43530" wikidata="Q15315" url="?curid=43530" title="Schist">
<text>Schist ( ) is a medium-grained metamorphic rock showing pronounced &quot;schistosity&quot; (named for the rock). This means that the rock is composed of mineral grains easily seen with a low-power hand lens, oriented in such a way that the rock is easily split into thin flakes or plates. This texture reflects a high content of platy minerals, such as mica, talc, chlorite, or graphite. These are often interleaved with more granular minerals, such as feldspar or quartz.

Schist typically forms during regional metamorphism accompanying the process of mountain building (orogeny) and usually reflects a medium grade of metamorphism. Schist can form from many different kinds of rocks, including sedimentary rocks such as mudstones and igneous rocks such as tuffs. Schist metamorphosed from mudstone is particularly common and is often very rich in mica (a &quot;mica schist&quot;). Where the type of the original rock (the protolith) is discernible, the schist is usually given a name reflecting its protolith, such as &quot;schistose metasandstone&quot;. Otherwise, the names of the constituent minerals will be included in the rock name, such as &quot;quartz-felspar-biotite schist&quot;.

Schist bedrock can pose a challenge for civil engineering because of its pronounced planes of weakness.

== Etymology ==
The word &quot;schist&quot; is derived ultimately from the Greek word σχίζειν (&quot;schízein&quot;), meaning &quot;to split&quot;, which refers to the ease with which schists can be split along the plane in which the platy minerals lie.

== Definition ==
Before the mid-19th century, the terms slate, shale and schist were not sharply differentiated by those involved with mining. Geologists define schist as medium-grained metamorphic rock that shows well-developed schistosity. Schistosity is a thin layering of the rock produced by metamorphism (a &quot;foliation&quot;) that permits the rock to easily be split into flakes or slabs less than thick. The mineral grains in a schist are typically from in size and so are easily seen with a 10× hand lens. Typically, over half the mineral grains in a schist show a preferred orientation. Schists make up one of the three divisions of metamorphic rock by texture, with the other two divisions being gneiss, which has poorly developed schistosity and thicker layering, and granofels, which has no discernible schistosity.

Schists are defined by their texture without reference to their composition, and while most are a result of medium-grade metamorphism, they can vary greatly in mineral makeup. However, schistosity normally develops only when the rock contains abundant platy minerals, such as mica or chlorite. Grains of these minerals are strongly oriented in a preferred direction in schist, often also forming very thin parallel layers. The ease with which the rock splits along the aligned grains accounts for the schistosity. Though not a defining characteristic, schists very often contain &quot;porphyroblasts&quot; (individual crystals of unusual size) of distinctive minerals, such as garnet, staurolite, kyanite, sillimanite, or cordierite.
Because schists are a very large class of metamorphic rock, geologists will formally describe a rock as a schist only when the original type of the rock prior to metamorphism (the protolith) is unknown and its mineral content is not yet determined. Otherwise, the modifier &quot;schistose&quot; will be applied to a more precise type name, such as &quot;schistose semipelite&quot; (when the rock is known to contain moderate amounts of mica) or a &quot;schistose metasandstone&quot; (if the protolith is known to have been a sandstone). If all that is known is that the protolith was a sedimentary rock, the schist will be described as a paraschist, while if the protolith was an igneous rock, the schist will be described as an orthoschist. Mineral qualifiers are important when naming a schist. For example, a quartz-feldspar-biotite schist is a schist of uncertain protolith that contains biotite mica, feldspar, and quartz in order of apparent decreasing abundance.

&quot;Lineated schist&quot; has a strong linear fabric in a rock which otherwise has well-developed schistosity.

==Formation==
Schistosity is developed at elevated temperature when the rock is more strongly compressed in one direction than in other directions (&quot;nonhydrostatic stress&quot;). Nonhydrostatic stress is characteristic of regional metamorphism where mountain building is taking place (an orogenic belt). The schistosity develops perpendicular to the direction of greatest compression, also called the shortening direction, as platy minerals are rotated or recrystallized into parallel layers. While platy or elongated minerals are most obviously reoriented, even quartz or calcite may take up preferred orientations. At the microscopic level, schistosity is divided into &quot;internal schistosity&quot;, in which inclusions within porphyroblasts take a preferred orientation, and &quot;external schistosity&quot;, which is the orientation of grains in the surrounding medium-grained rock.

The composition of the rock must permit formation of abundant platy minerals. For example, the clay minerals in mudstone are metamorphosed to mica, producing a mica schist. Early stages of metamorphism convert mudstone to a very fine-grained metamorphic rock called &quot;slate&quot;, which with further metamorphism becomes fine-grained &quot;phyllite&quot;. Further recrystallization produces medium-grained mica schist. If the metamorphism proceeds further, the mica schist experiences dehydration reactions that convert platy minerals to granular minerals such as feldspars, decreasing schistosity and turning the rock into a gneiss.

Other platy minerals found in schists include chlorite, talc, and graphite. Chlorite schist is typically formed by metamorphism of ultramafic igneous rocks, as is talc schist. Talc schist also forms from metamorphosis of talc-bearing carbonate rocks formed by hydrothermal alteration. Graphite schist is uncommon but can form from metamorphosis of sedimentary beds containing abundant organic carbon. This may be of algal origin. Graphite schist is known to have experienced greenschist facies metamorphism, for example in the northern Andes. 

Metamorphosis of felsic volcanic rock, such as tuff, can produce quartz-muscovite schist.

==Engineering considerations==

In geotechnical engineering a schistosity plane often forms a discontinuity that may have a large influence on the mechanical behavior (strength, deformation, etc.) of rock masses in, for example, tunnel, foundation, or slope construction. A hazard may exist even in undisturbed terrain. On August 17, 1959, a magnitude 7.2 earthquake destabilized a mountain slope near Hebgen Lake, Montana, composed of schist. This caused a massive landslide that killed 26 people camping in the area.

==See also==
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==

* Photographs of Manhattan schist.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="0" end="6" title="Schist" label="Schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="31" end="47" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990218" start="73" end="84" title="schistosity" label="schistosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="153" end="160" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q166849" start="197" end="206" title="hand lens" label="hand lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826906" start="294" end="301" title="texture (geology)" label="texture"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="353" end="357" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q134583" start="359" end="363" title="talc" label="talc"/>
<link wikidata="Q427254" start="365" end="373" title="chlorite group" label="chlorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="378" end="386" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="453" end="461" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="465" end="471" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="513" end="525" title="metamorphism" label="metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q184554" start="573" end="580" title="orogeny" label="orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="612" end="617" title="Metamorphism#Metamorphic grades" label="grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="697" end="713" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642424" start="723" end="731" title="mudstone" label="mudstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="737" end="749" title="igneous rock" label="igneous rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q484924" start="759" end="763" title="tuff" label="tuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977029" start="925" end="934" title="protolith" label="protolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q570309" start="1201" end="1208" title="bedrock" label="bedrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="1234" end="1251" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307625" start="1278" end="1296" title="Fracture (geology)" label="planes of weakness"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1374" end="1379" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="1610" end="1615" title="slate" label="slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="1617" end="1622" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="1740" end="1756" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="1851" end="1863" title="metamorphism" label="metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q525802" start="1873" end="1882" title="foliation (geology)" label="foliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q166849" start="2061" end="2070" title="hand lens" label="hand lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826906" start="2220" end="2227" title="Texture (geology)" label="texture"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="2264" end="2270" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q85764320" start="2337" end="2346" title="granofels" label="granofels"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="2663" end="2667" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q427254" start="2671" end="2679" title="Chlorite group" label="chlorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q957083" start="2972" end="2985" title="porphyroblast" label="porphyroblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q105368" start="3064" end="3070" title="garnet" label="garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q413380" start="3072" end="3082" title="staurolite" label="staurolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193450" start="3084" end="3091" title="kyanite" label="kyanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q119632" start="3093" end="3104" title="sillimanite" label="sillimanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q410336" start="3109" end="3119" title="cordierite" label="cordierite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977029" start="3301" end="3310" title="protolith" label="protolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q660019" start="3485" end="3495" title="semipelite" label="semipelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="3646" end="3655" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q105794" start="4013" end="4020" title="biotite" label="biotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="4027" end="4035" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="4041" end="4047" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421924" start="4499" end="4512" title="orogenic belt" label="orogenic belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799034" start="5197" end="5210" title="clay minerals" label="clay minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q731880" start="5446" end="5454" title="phyllite" label="phyllite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183091" start="5591" end="5611" title="dehydration reaction" label="dehydration reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143398" start="5872" end="5882" title="ultramafic" label="ultramafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q777913" start="5975" end="5989" title="carbonate rock" label="carbonate rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q222814" start="6001" end="6024" title="hydrothermal alteration" label="hydrothermal alteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="6134" end="6140" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="6157" end="6162" title="algal" label="algal"/>
<link wikidata="Q917402" start="6216" end="6227" title="greenschist" label="greenschist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925062" start="6228" end="6247" title="Metamorphic facies" label="facies metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="6277" end="6282" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q847257" start="6303" end="6309" title="felsic" label="felsic"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="6310" end="6323" title="volcanic rock" label="volcanic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q106532" start="6358" end="6367" title="muscovite" label="muscovite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349130" start="6412" end="6436" title="geotechnical engineering" label="geotechnical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281656" start="6471" end="6484" title="Discontinuity (geotechnical engineering)" label="discontinuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q44377" start="6606" end="6612" title="tunnel" label="tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191360" start="6614" end="6624" title="Foundation (engineering)" label="foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q961278" start="6629" end="6634" title="Slope stability analysis" label="slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545134" start="6719" end="6743" title="1959 Hebgen Lake earthquake" label="magnitude 7.2 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214923" start="6779" end="6790" title="Hebgen Lake" label="Hebgen Lake"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43532" wikidata="Q206467" url="?curid=43532" title="Uraninite">
<text>Uraninite, also known as pitchblende, is a radioactive, uranium-rich mineral and ore with a chemical composition that is largely UO2 but because of oxidation typically contains variable proportions of U3O8. Radioactive decay of the uranium causes the mineral to contain oxides of lead and trace amounts of helium. It may also contain thorium and rare-earth elements.

==Overview==
Uraninite used to be known as pitchblende (from &quot;pitch&quot;, because of its black color, and &quot;blende&quot;, from &quot;blenden&quot; meaning &quot;to deceive&quot;, a term used by German miners to denote minerals whose density suggested metal content, but whose exploitation, at the time they were named, was either unknown or not economically feasible). The mineral has been known since at least the 15th century, from silver mines in the Ore Mountains, on the German/Czech border. The type locality is the historic mining and spa town known as Joachimsthal, the modern-day Jáchymov, on the Czech side of the mountains, where F. E. Brückmann described the mineral in 1772. Pitchblende from the Johanngeorgenstadt deposit in Germany was used by M. Klaproth in 1789 to discover the element uranium.

All uraninite minerals contain a small amount of radium as a radioactive decay product of uranium. Marie Curie used pitchblende, processing tons of it herself, as the source material for her isolation of pure metallic radium in 1910.

Uraninite also always contains small amounts of the lead isotopes 206Pb and 207Pb, the end products of the decay series of the uranium isotopes 238U and 235U respectively. Small amounts of helium are also present in uraninite as a result of alpha decay. Helium was first found on Earth in cleveite, an impure radioactive variety of uraninite, after having been discovered spectroscopically in the Sun&#x27;s atmosphere. The extremely rare elements technetium and promethium can be found in uraninite in very small quantities (about 200 pg/kg and 4 fg/kg respectively), produced by the spontaneous fission of uranium-238. Francium can also be found in uraninite at 1 francium atom for every 1 × 1018 uranium atoms in the ore as a result from the decay of actinium.

==Occurrence==

Uraninite is a major ore of uranium. Some of the highest-grade uranium ores in the world were found in the Shinkolobwe mine in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (the initial source for the Manhattan Project) and in the Athabasca Basin in northern Saskatchewan, Canada. Another important source of pitchblende is at Great Bear Lake in the Northwest Territories of Canada, where it is found in large quantities associated with silver. It also occurs in Australia, the Czech Republic, Germany, England, Rwanda, Namibia and South Africa. In the United States, it can be found in the states of Arizona, Colorado, Connecticut, Maine, New Hampshire, New Mexico, North Carolina and Wyoming. The geologist Charles Steen made a fortune on the production of uraninite in his Mi Vida mine in Moab, Utah. Uranium ores from the Ore Mountains (today the border between the Czech Republic and Germany) were an important supply of both the wartime German nuclear program (which failed to produce a bomb) and the Soviet nuclear program. Mining for uranium in the Ore Mountains (under the auspices of SDAG Wismut after the war) ceased after the collapse of the German Democratic Republic.

Uranium ore is generally processed close to the mine into yellowcake, which is an intermediate step in the processing of uranium.
==See also==
* List of minerals
* List of uranium mines
* Thorianite
* Uranium ore deposits

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q206467" start="0" end="9" title="Uraninite" label="Uraninite"/>
<link wikidata="Q206467" start="25" end="36" title="Uraninite" label="pitchblende"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="43" end="54" title="Radioactive decay" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="56" end="63" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="69" end="76" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="81" end="84" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263816" start="92" end="112" title="chemical composition" label="chemical composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q378379" start="129" end="132" title="Uranium dioxide" label="UO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="148" end="157" title="oxidation" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65920890" start="201" end="205" title="Triuranium octoxide" label="U3O8"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="207" end="224" title="Radioactive decay" label="Radioactive decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="270" end="275" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="280" end="284" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="306" end="312" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="334" end="341" title="thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q190444" start="346" end="365" title="rare-earth elements" label="rare-earth elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q840692" start="435" end="440" title="Pitch (resin)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198" start="832" end="845" title="Ore Mountains" label="Ore Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973416" start="879" end="892" title="Type locality (geology)" label="type locality"/>
<link wikidata="Q830418" start="967" end="975" title="Jáchymov" label="Jáchymov"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="984" end="989" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q57903" start="1087" end="1105" title="Johanngeorgenstadt" label="Johanngeorgenstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q160196" start="1137" end="1148" title="Martin Heinrich Klaproth" label="M. Klaproth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="1181" end="1188" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="1240" end="1246" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="1252" end="1269" title="radioactive decay" label="radioactive decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="1290" end="1301" title="Marie Curie" label="Marie Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372384" start="1478" end="1491" title="Isotopes of lead" label="lead isotopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="1615" end="1621" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="1667" end="1678" title="alpha decay" label="alpha decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q129611" start="1715" end="1723" title="cleveite" label="cleveite"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="1798" end="1815" title="Spectroscopy" label="spectroscopically"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1823" end="1844" title="Sun#Atmosphere" label="Sun&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054" start="1874" end="1884" title="technetium" label="technetium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809" start="1889" end="1899" title="promethium" label="promethium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1962" end="1964" title="Kilogram#SI multiples" label="pg"/>
<link wikidata="Q846759" start="1974" end="1976" title="Femtogram" label="fg"/>
<link wikidata="Q146682" start="2011" end="2030" title="spontaneous fission" label="spontaneous fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148503" start="2034" end="2045" title="uranium-238" label="uranium-238"/>
<link wikidata="Q671" start="2092" end="2100" title="francium" label="francium"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="2146" end="2149" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121" start="2180" end="2188" title="actinium" label="actinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096071" start="2314" end="2325" title="Shinkolobwe" label="Shinkolobwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="2338" end="2370" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="2399" end="2416" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813168" start="2429" end="2444" title="Athabasca Basin" label="Athabasca Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="2457" end="2469" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525" start="2525" end="2540" title="Great Bear Lake" label="Great Bear Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007" start="2548" end="2569" title="Northwest Territories" label="Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="2635" end="2641" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2661" end="2670" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="2676" end="2690" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2692" end="2699" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="2701" end="2708" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="2710" end="2716" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="2718" end="2725" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="2730" end="2742" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="2799" end="2806" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="2808" end="2816" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="2818" end="2829" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="2831" end="2836" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="2838" end="2851" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="2853" end="2863" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="2865" end="2879" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="2884" end="2891" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082650" start="2907" end="2920" title="Charles Steen" label="Charles Steen"/>
<link wikidata="Q130134" start="2990" end="3000" title="Moab, Utah" label="Moab, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198" start="3024" end="3037" title="Ore Mountains" label="Ore Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q700162" start="3141" end="3163" title="German nuclear program" label="German nuclear program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006230" start="3205" end="3227" title="Soviet nuclear program" label="Soviet nuclear program"/>
<link wikidata="Q314111" start="3292" end="3303" title="SDAG Wismut" label="SDAG Wismut"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="3352" end="3378" title="German Democratic Republic" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q422141" start="3439" end="3449" title="yellowcake" label="yellowcake"/>
<link wikidata="Q243479" start="3526" end="3542" title="List of minerals" label="List of minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644498" start="3545" end="3566" title="List of uranium mines" label="List of uranium mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q425572" start="3569" end="3579" title="Thorianite" label="Thorianite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542864" start="3582" end="3602" title="Uranium ore deposits" label="Uranium ore deposits"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43533" wikidata="Q1057300" url="?curid=43533" title="Hornblende">
<text>Hornblende is a complex inosilicate series of minerals. It is not a recognized mineral in its own right, but the name is used as a general or field term, to refer to a dark amphibole. Hornblende minerals are common in igneous and metamorphic rocks.

The general formula is .

== Physical properties ==
Hornblende has a hardness of 5–6, a specific gravity of 3.0 to 3.6, and is typically an opaque green, dark green, brown, or black color. It tends to form slender prismatic to bladed crystals, diamond-shaped in cross section, or is present as irregular grains or fibrous masses.

Its planes of cleavage intersect at 56° and 124° angles. Hornblende is most often confused with the pyroxene series and biotite mica, which are also dark minerals found in granite and charnockite. Pyroxenes differ in their cleavage planes, which intersect at 87° and 93°.

Hornblende is an inosilicate (chain silicate) mineral, built around double chains of silica tetrahedra. These chains extend the length of the crystal and are bonded to their neighbors by additional metal ions to form the complete crystal structure.

== Compositional variances ==
Hornblende is part of the calcium-amphibole group of amphibole minerals. It is highly variable in composition, and includes at least five solid solution series:

* Magnesiohornblende–ferrohornblende, 
* Tschermakite–ferrotschermakite, 
* Edenite–ferroedenite, 
* Pargasite–ferropargasite, 
* Magnesiohastingstite–hastingsite, 

In addition, titanium, manganese, or chromium can substitute for some of the cations and oxygen, fluorine, or chlorine for some of the hydroxide (OH). The different chemical types are almost impossible to distinguish even by optical or X-ray methods, and detailed chemical analysis using an electron microprobe is required.

There is a solid solution series between hornblende and the closely related amphibole minerals, tremolite–actinolite, at elevated temperature. A miscibility gap exists at lower temperatures, and, as a result, hornblende often contains exsolution lamellae of grunerite.

==Occurrence==

Hornblende is a common constituent of many igneous and metamorphic rocks such as granite, syenite, diorite, gabbro, basalt, andesite, gneiss, and schist. It crystallizes in preference to pyroxene minerals from cooler magma that is richer in silica and water.

It is the principal mineral of amphibolites, which form during medium- to high-grade metamorphism of mafic to intermediate igneous rock (igneous rocks with relative low silica content) in the presence of pore water. Much of the pore water comes from the breakdown of micas or other hydrous minerals. However, hornblende itself breaks down at very high temperatures. Hornblende alters easily to chlorite, biotite, or other mafic minerals.

A rare variety of hornblende contains less than 5% of iron oxide, is gray to white in color, and is named edenite from its locality in Edenville, Orange County, New York.

&quot;Oxyhornblende&quot; is a variety in which most of the iron has been oxidized to the ferric state, . Charge balance is preserved by the substitution of oxygen ions for hydroxide. Oxyhornblende is also typically enriched in titanium. It is found almost exclusively in volcanic rock and is sometimes called &quot;basaltic hornblende&quot;.

==Etymology==
The word &quot;hornblende&quot; is derived from German (&#x27;horn&#x27;) and (&#x27;deceive&#x27;), in allusion to its similar appearance to metal-bearing ore minerals.

== See also ==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1057300" start="0" end="10" title="Hornblende" label="Hornblende"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24" end="35" title="silicate minerals#Inosilicates" label="inosilicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="46" end="53" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q17159" start="173" end="182" title="amphibole" label="amphibole"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="218" end="225" title="Igneous rock" label="igneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="230" end="246" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q41472" start="319" end="327" title="Mohs scale of mineral hardness" label="hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q11027905" start="338" end="354" title="specific gravity" label="specific gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q107400" start="595" end="603" title="cleavage (crystal)" label="cleavage"/>
<link wikidata="Q192880" start="681" end="689" title="pyroxene" label="pyroxene"/>
<link wikidata="Q105794" start="701" end="713" title="biotite" label="biotite mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="753" end="760" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q477421" start="765" end="776" title="charnockite" label="charnockite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070842" start="1337" end="1349" title="Tschermakite" label="Tschermakite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070871" start="1372" end="1379" title="Edenite" label="Edenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056968" start="1397" end="1406" title="Pargasite" label="Pargasite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1447" end="1458" title="hastingsite" label="hastingsite"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="1475" end="1483" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="1485" end="1494" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="1499" end="1507" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q650" start="1559" end="1567" title="fluorine" label="fluorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="1572" end="1580" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q425597" start="1597" end="1606" title="hydroxide" label="hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q423051" start="1883" end="1892" title="tremolite" label="tremolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q104692" start="1893" end="1903" title="actinolite" label="actinolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938712" start="1932" end="1947" title="miscibility gap" label="miscibility gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q420442" start="2045" end="2054" title="grunerite" label="grunerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="2116" end="2123" title="igneous rock" label="igneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="2128" end="2145" title="metamorphic rocks" label="metamorphic rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="2154" end="2161" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q329118" start="2163" end="2170" title="syenite" label="syenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q187408" start="2172" end="2179" title="diorite" label="diorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q46947" start="2181" end="2187" title="gabbro" label="gabbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="2189" end="2195" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q181908" start="2197" end="2205" title="andesite" label="andesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="2207" end="2213" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="2219" end="2225" title="schist" label="schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q335239" start="2364" end="2375" title="amphibolite" label="amphibolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="2418" end="2430" title="metamorphism" label="metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q764372" start="2434" end="2439" title="mafic" label="mafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666229" start="2443" end="2455" title="intermediate composition" label="intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="2600" end="2604" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q427254" start="2727" end="2735" title="chlorite group" label="chlorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q105794" start="2737" end="2744" title="biotite" label="biotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q721849" start="2826" end="2836" title="iron oxide" label="iron oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070871" start="2878" end="2885" title="edenite" label="edenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q108618" start="2918" end="2941" title="Orange County, New York" label="Orange County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233795" start="3034" end="3040" title="ferric" label="ferric"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="3350" end="3356" title="German language" label="German"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43534" wikidata="Q43338" url="?curid=43534" title="Basalt">
<text>Basalt (; ) is an aphanitic (fine-grained) extrusive igneous rock formed from the rapid cooling of low-viscosity lava rich in magnesium and iron (mafic lava) exposed at or very near the surface of a rocky planet or moon. More than 90% of all volcanic rock on Earth is basalt. Rapid-cooling, fine-grained basalt is chemically equivalent to slow-cooling, coarse-grained gabbro. The eruption of basalt lava is observed by geologists at about 20 volcanoes per year. Basalt is also an important rock type on other planetary bodies in the Solar System. For example, the bulk of the plains of Venus, which cover ~80% of the surface, are basaltic; the lunar maria are plains of flood-basaltic lava flows; and basalt is a common rock on the surface of Mars.

Molten basalt lava has a low viscosity due to its relatively low silica content (between 45% and 52%), resulting in rapidly moving lava flows that can spread over great areas before cooling and solidifying. Flood basalts are thick sequences of many such flows that can cover hundreds of thousands of square kilometres and constitute the most voluminous of all volcanic formations.

Basaltic magmas within Earth are thought to originate from the upper mantle. The chemistry of basalts thus provides clues to processes deep in Earth&#x27;s interior.
== Definition and characteristics ==


Basalt is composed mostly of oxides of silicon, iron, magnesium, potassium, aluminum, titanium, and calcium. Geologists classify igneous rock by its mineral content whenever possible; the relative volume percentages of quartz (crystalline silica (SiO2)), alkali feldspar, plagioclase, and feldspathoid (QAPF) are particularly important. An aphanitic (fine-grained) igneous rock is classified as basalt when its QAPF fraction is composed of less than 10% feldspathoid and less than 20% quartz, and plagioclase makes up at least 65% of its feldspar content. This places basalt in the basalt/andesite field of the QAPF diagram. Basalt is further distinguished from andesite by its silica content of under 52%.

It is often not practical to determine the mineral composition of volcanic rocks, due to their very small grain size, in which case geologists instead classify the rocks chemically, with particular emphasis on the total content of alkali metal oxides and silica (TAS); in that context, basalt is defined as volcanic rock with a content of between 45% and 52% silica and no more than 5% alkali metal oxides. This places basalt in the B field of the TAS diagram. Such a composition is described as mafic.

Basalt is usually dark grey to black in colour, due to a high content of augite or other dark-coloured pyroxene minerals, but can exhibit a wide range of shading. Some basalts are quite light-coloured due to a high content of plagioclase; these are sometimes described as &quot;leucobasalts&quot;. It can be difficult to distinguish between lighter-colored basalt and andesite, so field researchers commonly use a for this purpose, classifying it as basalt if it has a color index of 35 or greater.

The physical properties of basalt result from its relatively low silica content and typically high iron and magnesium content. The average density of basalt is 2.9 g/cm3, compared, for example, to granite’s typical density of 2.7 g/cm3. The viscosity of basaltic magma is relatively low—around 104 to 105 cP—similar to the viscosity of ketchup, but that is still several orders of magnitude higher than the viscosity of water, which is about 1 cP).

Basalt is often porphyritic, containing larger crystals (phenocrysts) that formed before the extrusion event that brought the magma to the surface, embedded in a finer-grained matrix. These phenocrysts are usually made of augite, olivine, or a calcium-rich plagioclase, which have the highest melting temperatures of any of the minerals that can typically crystallize from the melt, and which are therefore the first to form solid crystals.

Basalt often contains vesicles; they are formed when dissolved gases bubble out of the magma as it decompresses during its approach to the surface; the erupted lava then solidifies before the gases can escape. When vesicles make up a substantial fraction of the volume of the rock, the rock is described as scoria.

The term &quot;basalt&quot; is at times applied to shallow intrusive rocks with a composition typical of basalt, but rocks of this composition with a phaneritic (coarser) groundmass are more properly referred to either as diabase (also called dolerite) or—when they are more coarse-grained (having crystals over 2 mm across)—as gabbro. Diabase and gabbro are thus the hypabyssal and plutonic equivalents of basalt.

During the Hadean, Archean, and early Proterozoic eons of Earth&#x27;s history, the chemistry of erupted magmas was significantly different from what it is today, due to immature crustal and asthenosphere differentiation. The resulting ultramafic volcanic rocks, with silica (SiO2) contents below 45% and high magnesium oxide (MgO) content, are usually classified as komatiites.

=== Etymology ===
The word &quot;basalt&quot; is ultimately derived from Late Latin , a misspelling of Latin &quot;very hard stone&quot;, which was imported from Ancient Greek (), from (&quot;&quot;, &quot;touchstone&quot;). The modern petrological term &quot;basalt&quot;, describing a particular composition of lava-derived rock, became standard because of its use by Georgius Agricola in 1546, in his work &quot;De Natura Fossilium&quot;. Agricola applied the term &quot;basalt&quot; to the volcanic black rock beneath the Bishop of Meissen&#x27;s Stolpen castle, believing it to be the same as the &quot;basaniten&quot; described by Pliny the Elder in AD 77 in .

=== Types ===

On Earth, most basalt is formed by decompression melting of the mantle. The high pressure in the upper mantle (due to the weight of the overlying rock) raises the melting point of mantle rock, so that almost all of the upper mantle is solid. However, mantle rock is ductile (the solid rock slowly deforms under high stress). When tectonic forces cause hot mantle rock to creep upwards, pressure on the ascending rock decreases, and this can lower its melting point enough for the rock to partially melt, producing basaltic magma.

Decompression melting can occur in a variety of tectonic settings, including in continental rift zones, at mid-ocean ridges, above geological hotspots, and in back-arc basins. Basalt also forms in subduction zones, where mantle rock rises into a mantle wedge above the descending slab. The slab releases water vapor and other volatiles as it descends, which further lowers the melting point, further increasing the amount of decompression melting. Each tectonic setting produces basalt with its own distinctive characteristics. 

* Tholeiitic basalt, which is relatively rich in iron and poor in alkali metals and aluminium, include most basalts of the ocean floor, most large oceanic islands, and continental flood basalts such as the Columbia River Plateau.
**High- and low-titanium basalt rocks, which are sometimes classified based on their titanium (Ti) content in High-Ti and Low-Ti varieties. High-Ti and Low-Ti basalt have been distinguished from each other in the Paraná and Etendeka traps and the Emeishan Traps.
** Mid-ocean ridge basalt (MORB) is a tholeiitic basalt that has almost exclusively erupted at ocean ridges; it is characteristically low in incompatible elements. Although all MORBs are chemically similar, geologists recognize that they vary significantly in how depleted they are in incompatible elements. When they are present in close proximity along mid-ocean ridges, that is seen as evidence for mantle inhomogeneity.
***Enriched MORB (E-MORB) is defined as MORB that is relatively undepleted in incompatible elements. It was once thought to be mostly located in hot spots along mid-ocean ridges, such as Iceland, but it is now known to be located in many other places along those ridges.
***Normal MORB (N-MORB) is defined as MORB that has an average amount of incompatible elements.
***D-MORB, depleted MORB, is defined as MORB that is highly depleted in incompatible elements.
* Alkali basalt is relatively rich in alkali metals. It is silica-undersaturated and may contain feldspathoids, alkali feldspar, phlogopite, and kaersutite. Augite in alkali basalts is titanium-enriched augite; low-calcium pyroxenes are never present. They are characteristic of continental rifting and hotspot volcanism.
* High-alumina basalt has greater than 17% alumina (Al2O3) and is intermediate in composition between tholeiitic basalt and alkali basalt. Its relatively alumina-rich composition is based on rocks without phenocrysts of plagioclase. These represent the low-silica end of the calc-alkaline magma series and are characteristic of volcanic arcs above subduction zones.
* Boninite is a high-magnesium form of basalt that is erupted generally in back-arc basins; it is distinguished by its low titanium content and trace-element composition.
* Ocean island basalts include both tholeiites and alkali basalts; the tholeiites predominate early in the eruptive history of the island. These basalts are characterized by elevated concentrations of incompatible elements, which suggests that their source mantle rock has produced little magma in the past (it is &quot;undepleted&quot;).

== Petrology ==

The mineralogy of basalt is characterized by a preponderance of calcic plagioclase feldspar and pyroxene. Olivine can also be a significant constituent. Accessory minerals present in relatively minor amounts include iron oxides and iron-titanium oxides, such as magnetite, ulvöspinel, and ilmenite. Because of the presence of such oxide minerals, basalt can acquire strong magnetic signatures as it cools, and paleomagnetic studies have made extensive use of basalt.

In tholeiitic basalt, pyroxene (augite and orthopyroxene or pigeonite) and calcium-rich plagioclase are common phenocryst minerals. Olivine may also be a phenocryst, and when present, may have rims of pigeonite. The groundmass contains interstitial quartz or tridymite or cristobalite. &quot;Olivine tholeiitic basalt&quot; has augite and orthopyroxene or pigeonite with abundant olivine, but olivine may have rims of pyroxene and is unlikely to be present in the groundmass.

Alkali basalts typically have mineral assemblages that lack orthopyroxene but contain olivine. Feldspar phenocrysts typically are labradorite to andesine in composition. Augite is rich in titanium compared to augite in tholeiitic basalt. Minerals such as alkali feldspar, leucite, nepheline, sodalite, phlogopite mica, and apatite may be present in the groundmass.

Basalt has high liquidus and solidus temperatures—values at the Earth&#x27;s surface are near or above 1200 °C (liquidus) and near or below 1000 °C (solidus); these values are higher than those of other common igneous rocks.

The majority of tholeiitic basalts are formed at approximately 50–100 km depth within the mantle. Many alkali basalts may be formed at greater depths, perhaps as deep as 150–200 km. The origin of high-alumina basalt continues to be controversial, with disagreement over whether it is a primary melt or derived from other basalt types by fractionation.

=== Geochemistry ===
Relative to most common igneous rocks, basalt compositions are rich in MgO and CaO and low in SiO2 and the alkali oxides, i.e., Na2O + K2O, consistent with their TAS classification. Basalt contains more silica than picrobasalt and most basanites and tephrites but less than basaltic andesite. Basalt has a lower total content of alkali oxides than trachybasalt and most basanites and tephrites.

Basalt generally has a composition of 45–52 wt% SiO2, 2–5 wt% total alkalis, 0.5–2.0 wt% TiO2, 5–14 wt% FeO and 14 wt% or more Al2O3. Contents of CaO are commonly near 10 wt%, those of MgO commonly in the range 5 to 12 wt%.

High-alumina basalts have aluminium contents of 17–19 wt% Al2O3; boninites have magnesium (MgO) contents of up to 15 percent. Rare feldspathoid-rich mafic rocks, akin to alkali basalts, may have Na2O + K2O contents of 12% or more.

The abundances of the lanthanide or rare-earth elements (REE) can be a useful diagnostic tool to help explain the history of mineral crystallisation as the melt cooled. In particular, the relative abundance of europium compared to the other REE is often markedly higher or lower, and called the europium anomaly. It arises because Eu2+ can substitute for Ca2+ in plagioclase feldspar, unlike any of the other lanthanides, which tend to only form 3+ cations.

Mid-ocean ridge basalts (MORB) and their intrusive equivalents, gabbros, are the characteristic igneous rocks formed at mid-ocean ridges. They are tholeiitic basalts particularly low in total alkalis and in incompatible trace elements, and they have relatively flat REE patterns normalized to mantle or chondrite values. In contrast, alkali basalts have normalized patterns highly enriched in the light REE, and with greater abundances of the REE and of other incompatible elements. Because MORB basalt is considered a key to understanding plate tectonics, its compositions have been much studied. Although MORB compositions are distinctive relative to average compositions of basalts erupted in other environments, they are not uniform. For instance, compositions change with position along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, and the compositions also define different ranges in different ocean basins. Mid-ocean ridge basalts have been subdivided into varieties such as normal (NMORB) and those slightly more enriched in incompatible elements (EMORB).

Isotope ratios of elements such as strontium, neodymium, lead, hafnium, and osmium in basalts have been much studied to learn about the evolution of the Earth&#x27;s mantle. Isotopic ratios of noble gases, such as 3He/4He, are also of great value: for instance, ratios for basalts range from 6 to 10 for mid-ocean ridge tholeiitic basalt (normalized to atmospheric values), but to 15–24 and more for ocean-island basalts thought to be derived from mantle plumes.

Source rocks for the partial melts that produce basaltic magma probably include both peridotite and pyroxenite.

=== Morphology and textures ===

The shape, structure and texture of a basalt is diagnostic of how and where it erupted—for example, whether into the sea, in an explosive cinder eruption or as creeping pāhoehoe lava flows, the classic image of Hawaiian basalt eruptions.

==== Subaerial eruptions ====

Basalt that erupts under open air (that is, subaerially) forms three distinct types of lava or volcanic deposits: scoria; ash or cinder (breccia); and lava flows.

Basalt in the tops of subaerial lava flows and cinder cones will often be highly vesiculated, imparting a lightweight &quot;frothy&quot; texture to the rock. Basaltic cinders are often red, coloured by oxidized iron from weathered iron-rich minerals such as pyroxene.

Aā types of blocky cinder and breccia flows of thick, viscous basaltic lava are common in Hawaii. Pāhoehoe is a highly fluid, hot form of basalt which tends to form thin aprons of molten lava which fill up hollows and sometimes forms lava lakes. Lava tubes are common features of pāhoehoe eruptions.

Basaltic tuff or pyroclastic rocks are less common than basaltic lava flows. Usually basalt is too hot and fluid to build up sufficient pressure to form explosive lava eruptions but occasionally this will happen by trapping of the lava within the volcanic throat and buildup of volcanic gases. Hawaii&#x27;s Mauna Loa volcano erupted in this way in the 19th century, as did Mount Tarawera, New Zealand in its violent 1886 eruption. Maar volcanoes are typical of small basalt tuffs, formed by explosive eruption of basalt through the crust, forming an apron of mixed basalt and wall rock breccia and a fan of basalt tuff further out from the volcano.

Amygdaloidal structure is common in relict vesicles and beautifully crystallized species of zeolites, quartz or calcite are frequently found.

===== Columnar basalt =====

During the cooling of a thick lava flow, contractional joints or fractures form. If a flow cools relatively rapidly, significant contraction forces build up. While a flow can shrink in the vertical dimension without fracturing, it cannot easily accommodate shrinking in the horizontal direction unless cracks form; the extensive fracture network that develops results in the formation of columns. These structures, or basalt prisms, are predominantly hexagonal in cross-section, but polygons with three to twelve or more sides can be observed. The size of the columns depends loosely on the rate of cooling; very rapid cooling may result in very small (&lt;1 cm diameter) columns, while slow cooling is more likely to produce large columns.

==== Submarine eruptions ====

The character of submarine basalt eruptions is largely determined by depth of water, since increased pressure restricts the release of volatile gases and results in effusive eruptions. It has been estimated that at depths greater than , explosive activity associated with basaltic magma is suppressed. Above this depth, submarine eruptions are often explosive, tending to produce pyroclastic rock rather than basalt flows. These eruptions, described as Surtseyan, are characterised by large quantities of steam and gas and the creation of large amounts of pumice. 

===== Pillow basalts =====

When basalt erupts underwater or flows into the sea, contact with the water quenches the surface and the lava forms a distinctive &quot;pillow&quot; shape, through which the hot lava breaks to form another pillow. This &quot;pillow&quot; texture is very common in underwater basaltic flows and is diagnostic of an underwater eruption environment when found in ancient rocks. Pillows typically consist of a fine-grained core with a glassy crust and have radial jointing. The size of individual pillows varies from 10 cm up to several metres.

When &quot;pāhoehoe&quot; lava enters the sea it usually forms pillow basalts. However, when &quot;aā&quot; enters the ocean it forms a littoral cone, a small cone-shaped accumulation of tuffaceous debris formed when the blocky &quot;aā&quot; lava enters the water and explodes from built-up steam.

The island of Surtsey in the Atlantic Ocean is a basalt volcano which breached the ocean surface in 1963. The initial phase of Surtsey&#x27;s eruption was highly explosive, as the magma was quite fluid, causing the rock to be blown apart by the boiling steam to form a tuff and cinder cone. This has subsequently moved to a typical pāhoehoe-type behaviour.

Volcanic glass may be present, particularly as rinds on rapidly chilled surfaces of lava flows, and is commonly (but not exclusively) associated with underwater eruptions.

Pillow basalt is also produced by some subglacial volcanic eruptions.

== Distribution ==

===Earth===
Basalt is the most common volcanic rock type on Earth, making up over 90% of all volcanic rock on the planet. The crustal portions of oceanic tectonic plates are composed predominantly of basalt, produced from upwelling mantle below the ocean ridges. Basalt is also the principal volcanic rock in many oceanic islands, including the islands of Hawaii, the Faroe Islands, and Réunion. The eruption of basalt lava is observed by geologists at about 20 volcanoes per year.
Basalt is the rock most typical of large igneous provinces. These include continental flood basalts, the most voluminous basalts found on land. Examples of continental flood basalts included the Deccan Traps in India, the Chilcotin Group in British Columbia, Canada, the Paraná Traps in Brazil, the Siberian Traps in Russia, the Karoo flood basalt province in South Africa, and the Columbia River Plateau of Washington and Oregon. Basalt is also prevalent across extensive regions of the Eastern Galilee, Golan, and Bashan in Israel and Syria.

Basalt also is common around volcanic arcs, specially those on thin crust.

Ancient Precambrian basalts are usually only found in fold and thrust belts, and are often heavily metamorphosed. These are known as greenstone belts, because low-grade metamorphism of basalt produces chlorite, actinolite, epidote and other green minerals.

===Other bodies in the Solar System===
As well as forming large parts of the Earth&#x27;s crust, basalt also occurs in other parts of the Solar System. Basalt commonly erupts on Io (the third largest moon of Jupiter), and has also formed on the Moon, Mars, Venus, and the asteroid Vesta.

====The Moon====

The dark areas visible on Earth&#x27;s moon, the lunar maria, are plains of flood basaltic lava flows. These rocks were sampled both by the crewed American Apollo program and the robotic Russian Luna program, and are represented among the lunar meteorites.

Lunar basalts differ from their Earth counterparts principally in their high iron contents, which typically range from about 17 to 22 wt% FeO. They also possess a wide range of titanium concentrations (present in the mineral ilmenite), ranging from less than 1 wt% TiO2, to about 13 wt.%. Traditionally, lunar basalts have been classified according to their titanium content, with classes being named high-Ti, low-Ti, and very-low-Ti. Nevertheless, global geochemical maps of titanium obtained from the Clementine mission demonstrate that the lunar maria possess a continuum of titanium concentrations, and that the highest concentrations are the least abundant.

Lunar basalts show exotic textures and mineralogy, particularly shock metamorphism, lack of the oxidation typical of terrestrial basalts, and a complete lack of hydration. Most of the Moon&#x27;s basalts erupted between about 3 and 3.5 billion years ago, but the oldest samples are 4.2 billion years old, and the youngest flows, based on the age dating method of crater counting, are estimated to have erupted only 1.2 billion years ago.

====Venus====
From 1972 to 1985, five Venera and two VEGA landers successfully reached the surface of Venus and carried out geochemical measurements using X-ray fluorescence and gamma-ray analysis. These returned results consistent with the rock at the landing sites being basalts, including both tholeiitic and highly alkaline basalts. The landers are thought to have landed on plains whose radar signature is that of basaltic lava flows. These constitute about 80% of the surface of Venus. Some locations show high reflectivity consistent with unweathered basalt, indicating basaltic volcanism within the last 2.5 million years.

====Mars====
Basalt is also a common rock on the surface of Mars, as determined by data sent back from the planet&#x27;s surface, and by Martian meteorites.

====Vesta====
Analysis of Hubble Space Telescope images of Vesta suggests this asteroid has a basaltic crust covered with a brecciated regolith derived from the crust. Evidence from Earth-based telescopes and the Dawn mission suggest that Vesta is the source of the HED meteorites, which have basaltic characteristics. Vesta is the main contributor to the inventory of basaltic asteroids of the main Asteroid Belt.

====Io====
Lava flows represent a major volcanic terrain on Io. Analysis of the &quot;Voyager&quot; images led scientists to believe that these flows were composed mostly of various compounds of molten sulfur. However, subsequent Earth-based infrared studies and measurements from the &quot;Galileo&quot; spacecraft indicate that these flows are composed of basaltic lava with mafic to ultramafic compositions. This conclusion is based on temperature measurements of Io&#x27;s &quot;hotspots&quot;, or thermal-emission locations, which suggest temperatures of at least 1,300 K and some as high as 1,600 K. Initial estimates suggesting eruption temperatures approaching 2,000 K have since proven to be overestimates because the wrong thermal models were used to model the temperatures.

== Alteration of basalt ==

=== Weathering ===

Compared to granitic rocks exposed at the Earth&#x27;s surface, basalt outcrops weather relatively rapidly. This reflects their content of minerals that crystallized at higher temperatures and in an environment poorer in water vapor than granite. These minerals are less stable in the colder, wetter environment at the Earth&#x27;s surface. The finer grain size of basalt and the volcanic glass sometimes found between the grains also hasten weathering. The high iron content of basalt causes weathered surfaces in humid climates to accumulate a thick crust of hematite or other iron oxides and hydroxides, staining the rock a brown to rust-red colour. Because of the low potassium content of most basalts, weathering converts the basalt to calcium-rich clay (montmorillonite) rather than potassium-rich clay (illite). Further weathering, particularly in tropical climates, converts the montmorillonite to kaolinite or gibbsite. This produces the distinctive tropical soil known as laterite. The ultimate weathering product is bauxite, the principal ore of aluminium.

Chemical weathering also releases readily water-soluble cations such as calcium, sodium and magnesium, which give basaltic areas a strong buffer capacity against acidification. Calcium released by basalts binds CO2 from the atmosphere forming CaCO3 acting thus as a CO2 trap.

=== Metamorphism ===
Intense heat or great pressure transforms basalt into its metamorphic rock equivalents. Depending on the temperature and pressure of metamorphism, these may include greenschist, amphibolite, or eclogite. Basalts are important rocks within metamorphic regions because they can provide vital information on the conditions of metamorphism that have affected the region.

Metamorphosed basalts are important hosts for a variety of hydrothermal ores, including deposits of gold, copper and volcanogenic massive sulfides.

== Life on basaltic rocks ==
The common corrosion features of underwater volcanic basalt suggest that microbial activity may play a significant role in the chemical exchange between basaltic rocks and seawater. The significant amounts of reduced iron, Fe(II), and manganese, Mn(II), present in basaltic rocks provide potential energy sources for bacteria. Some Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria cultured from iron-sulfide surfaces are also able to grow with basaltic rock as a source of Fe(II). Fe- and Mn- oxidizing bacteria have been cultured from weathered submarine basalts of Kamaʻehuakanaloa Seamount (formerly Loihi). The impact of bacteria on altering the chemical composition of basaltic glass (and thus, the oceanic crust) and seawater suggest that these interactions may lead to an application of hydrothermal vents to the origin of life.

== Uses ==

Basalt is used in construction (e.g. as building blocks or in the groundwork), making cobblestones (from columnar basalt) and in making statues. Heating and extruding basalt yields stone wool, which has potential to be an excellent thermal insulator.

Carbon sequestration in basalt has been studied as a means of removing carbon dioxide, produced by human industrialization, from the atmosphere. Underwater basalt deposits, scattered in seas around the globe, have the added benefit of the water serving as a barrier to the re-release of CO2 into the atmosphere.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== References ==
==Sources==
*
*
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==
*
*


== External links ==
* Basalt Columns
* Basalt in Northern Ireland 
* Lava–water interface
* PetDB, the Petrological Database
* Petrology of Lunar Rocks and Mare Basalts
* Pillow lava USGS</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="0" end="6" title="Basalt" label="Basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q618416" start="18" end="27" title="aphanite" label="aphanitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352521" start="43" end="52" title="extrusive" label="extrusive"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="53" end="65" title="igneous rock" label="igneous rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="103" end="112" title="viscosity" label="viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="113" end="117" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="126" end="135" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="140" end="144" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q764372" start="146" end="151" title="mafic" label="mafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201252" start="186" end="193" title="planetary surface" label="surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q128207" start="199" end="211" title="terrestrial planet" label="rocky planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="215" end="219" title="natural satellite" label="moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="242" end="255" title="volcanic rock" label="volcanic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q46947" start="368" end="374" title="gabbro" label="gabbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="533" end="545" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787452" start="586" end="591" title="volcanism on Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180874" start="644" end="655" title="lunar mare" label="lunar maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="685" end="694" title="lava flow" label="lava flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="743" end="747" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="815" end="821" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410264" start="957" end="969" title="Flood basalt" label="Flood basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42278" start="1141" end="1146" title="magma" label="magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009467" start="1195" end="1207" title="upper mantle (Earth)" label="upper mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664027" start="1275" end="1296" title="structure of Earth" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="1446" end="1456" title="Geologists" label="Geologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="1466" end="1478" title="igneous rock" label="igneous rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="1556" end="1562" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="1576" end="1582" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="1592" end="1607" title="alkali feldspar" label="alkali feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q714830" start="1609" end="1620" title="plagioclase" label="plagioclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006122" start="1626" end="1638" title="feldspathoid" label="feldspathoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247570" start="1640" end="1644" title="QAPF diagram" label="QAPF"/>
<link wikidata="Q618416" start="1677" end="1686" title="aphanitic" label="aphanitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753363" start="2308" end="2311" title="TAS classification" label="TAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q764372" start="2541" end="2546" title="mafic" label="mafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192141" start="2622" end="2628" title="augite" label="augite"/>
<link wikidata="Q192880" start="2652" end="2660" title="pyroxene" label="pyroxene"/>
<link wikidata="Q181908" start="2917" end="2925" title="andesite" label="andesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402508" start="2930" end="2944" title="field research" label="field research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396371" start="3018" end="3029" title="color index (geology)" label="color index"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="3246" end="3253" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100949" start="3354" end="3356" title="Centipoise" label="cP"/>
<link wikidata="Q178143" start="3385" end="3392" title="ketchup" label="ketchup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774256" start="3515" end="3526" title="porphyritic" label="porphyritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q383481" start="3556" end="3566" title="phenocryst" label="phenocryst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463013" start="3675" end="3681" title="Matrix (geology)" label="matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="3729" end="3736" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q848628" start="3780" end="3812" title="Bowen&amp;#x27;s reaction series" label="the highest melting temperatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="3827" end="3834" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552055" start="3963" end="3971" title="vesicular texture" label="vesicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642389" start="4248" end="4254" title="scoria" label="scoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q354025" start="4316" end="4330" title="intrusive rock" label="intrusive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754959" start="4407" end="4417" title="phaneritic" label="phaneritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q753016" start="4479" end="4486" title="diabase" label="diabase"/>
<link wikidata="Q46947" start="4585" end="4591" title="gabbro" label="gabbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323389" start="4625" end="4635" title="hypabyssal" label="hypabyssal"/>
<link wikidata="Q354025" start="4640" end="4648" title="plutonic" label="plutonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104460" start="4684" end="4690" title="Hadean" label="Hadean"/>
<link wikidata="Q104168" start="4692" end="4699" title="Archean" label="Archean"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162" start="4711" end="4722" title="Proterozoic" label="Proterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="4723" end="4726" title="Eon (geology)" label="eon"/>
<link wikidata="Q166257" start="4864" end="4877" title="asthenosphere" label="asthenosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143398" start="4909" end="4919" title="Ultramafic rock" label="ultramafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q664329" start="5040" end="5049" title="komatiite" label="komatiite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="5126" end="5136" title="Late Latin" label="Late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236003" start="5173" end="5177" title="Hardness" label="hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="5215" end="5228" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482030" start="5259" end="5269" title="touchstone (assaying tool)" label="touchstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="5366" end="5370" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q76579" start="5423" end="5440" title="Georgius Agricola" label="Georgius Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244649" start="5468" end="5487" title="De Natura Fossilium" label="De Natura Fossilium"/>
<link wikidata="Q883032" start="5579" end="5603" title="Bishop of Dresden-Meissen" label="Bishop of Meissen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5604" end="5618" title="Stolpen#Burg Stolpen" label="Stolpen castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="5690" end="5705" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="5771" end="5792" title="decompression melting" label="decompression melting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="5800" end="5806" title="mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468336" start="5854" end="5886" title="Overburden pressure" label="the weight of the overlying rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="6002" end="6009" title="ductile" label="ductile"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="6066" end="6081" title="Tectonics" label="tectonic forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054924" start="6224" end="6238" title="Partial melting" label="partially melt"/>
<link wikidata="Q473935" start="6359" end="6363" title="rift" label="rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q104698" start="6374" end="6390" title="Mid-ocean ridge" label="mid-ocean ridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q105131" start="6398" end="6417" title="Hotspot (geology)" label="geological hotspots"/>
<link wikidata="Q798367" start="6426" end="6441" title="back-arc basins" label="back-arc basins"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="6464" end="6480" title="subduction zones" label="subduction zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q527560" start="6513" end="6525" title="mantle wedge" label="mantle wedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106459" start="6799" end="6816" title="Tholeiitic basalt" label="Tholeiitic basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="6846" end="6850" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q19557" start="6863" end="6875" title="alkali metal" label="alkali metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="6881" end="6890" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="6920" end="6925" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="6944" end="6958" title="oceanic island" label="oceanic island"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410264" start="6977" end="6989" title="flood basalt" label="flood basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112277" start="7003" end="7025" title="Columbia River Basalt Group" label="Columbia River Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="7112" end="7120" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462200" start="7240" end="7265" title="Paraná and Etendeka traps" label="Paraná and Etendeka traps"/>
<link wikidata="Q844933" start="7274" end="7288" title="Emeishan Traps" label="Emeishan Traps"/>
<link wikidata="Q104698" start="7293" end="7308" title="Mid-ocean ridge" label="Mid-ocean ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663708" start="7431" end="7451" title="incompatible element" label="incompatible element"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727640" start="8178" end="8191" title="Alkali basalt" label="Alkali basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430923" start="8235" end="8256" title="normative mineralogy" label="silica-undersaturated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006122" start="8273" end="8285" title="feldspathoid" label="feldspathoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="8288" end="8303" title="alkali feldspar" label="alkali feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q422977" start="8305" end="8315" title="phlogopite" label="phlogopite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962093" start="8321" end="8331" title="kaersutite" label="kaersutite"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="8541" end="8548" title="alumina" label="alumina"/>
<link wikidata="Q714830" start="8718" end="8729" title="plagioclase" label="plagioclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018669" start="8773" end="8799" title="calc-alkaline magma series" label="calc-alkaline magma series"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426043" start="8826" end="8838" title="volcanic arc" label="volcanic arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q892591" start="8866" end="8874" title="Boninite" label="Boninite"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="8885" end="8894" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q798367" start="8939" end="8953" title="back-arc basin" label="back-arc basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16964299" start="9037" end="9056" title="Ocean island basalt" label="Ocean island basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="9475" end="9483" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192880" start="9488" end="9496" title="pyroxene" label="pyroxene"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="9498" end="9505" title="Olivine" label="Olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="9555" end="9562" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q721849" start="9608" end="9618" title="iron oxide" label="iron oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="9654" end="9663" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4003291" start="9665" end="9675" title="ulvöspinel" label="ulvöspinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q190729" start="9681" end="9689" title="ilmenite" label="ilmenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="9723" end="9728" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="9765" end="9773" title="magnetism" label="magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q853422" start="9802" end="9815" title="paleomagnetism" label="paleomagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106459" start="9863" end="9880" title="tholeiitic basalt" label="tholeiitic basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q192141" start="9892" end="9898" title="augite" label="augite"/>
<link wikidata="Q192880" start="9903" end="9916" title="orthopyroxene" label="orthopyroxene"/>
<link wikidata="Q425175" start="9920" end="9929" title="pigeonite" label="pigeonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="9935" end="9942" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463013" start="10076" end="10086" title="groundmass" label="groundmass"/>
<link wikidata="Q410893" start="10119" end="10128" title="tridymite" label="tridymite"/>
<link wikidata="Q422075" start="10132" end="10144" title="cristobalite" label="cristobalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463013" start="10324" end="10334" title="matrix (geology)" label="groundmass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727640" start="10337" end="10350" title="Alkali basalt" label="Alkali basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q430062" start="10467" end="10478" title="labradorite" label="labradorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q249452" start="10482" end="10490" title="andesine" label="andesine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="10592" end="10607" title="feldspar" label="alkali feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q419201" start="10609" end="10616" title="leucite" label="leucite"/>
<link wikidata="Q407339" start="10618" end="10627" title="nepheline" label="nepheline"/>
<link wikidata="Q410759" start="10629" end="10637" title="sodalite" label="sodalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q422977" start="10639" end="10649" title="phlogopite" label="phlogopite"/>
<link wikidata="Q178397" start="10660" end="10667" title="apatite" label="apatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q122663030" start="10719" end="10727" title="liquidus" label="liquidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122663030" start="10732" end="10739" title="Solidus (chemistry)" label="solidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42278" start="11215" end="11227" title="magma" label="primary melt"/>
<link wikidata="Q214769" start="11374" end="11377" title="magnesium oxide" label="MgO"/>
<link wikidata="Q185006" start="11382" end="11385" title="calcium oxide" label="CaO"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="11397" end="11401" title="silicon dioxide" label="SiO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q407467" start="11431" end="11435" title="sodium oxide" label="Na2O"/>
<link wikidata="Q408880" start="11438" end="11441" title="potassium oxide" label="K2O"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753363" start="11465" end="11483" title="TAS classification" label="TAS classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382545" start="11518" end="11529" title="picrobasalt" label="picrobasalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q32805" start="11539" end="11547" title="basanite" label="basanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q777112" start="11553" end="11561" title="tephrite" label="tephrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q809752" start="11577" end="11594" title="basaltic andesite" label="basaltic andesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q262232" start="11651" end="11663" title="trachybasalt" label="trachybasalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q899138" start="11743" end="11746" title="wt%" label="wt%"/>
<link wikidata="Q193521" start="11788" end="11792" title="titanium dioxide" label="TiO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q196680" start="11803" end="11806" title="iron(II) oxide" label="FeO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="11826" end="11831" title="alumina" label="Al2O3"/>
<link wikidata="Q892591" start="11989" end="11997" title="boninite" label="boninite"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="12004" end="12013" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006122" start="12055" end="12067" title="feldspathoid" label="feldspathoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q764372" start="12073" end="12078" title="mafic" label="mafic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19569" start="12178" end="12188" title="lanthanide" label="lanthanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q190444" start="12192" end="12210" title="rare-earth element" label="rare-earth element"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413748" start="12451" end="12467" title="europium anomaly" label="europium anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="12605" end="12611" title="cation" label="cation"/>
<link wikidata="Q967768" start="12822" end="12834" title="Compatibility (geochemistry)" label="incompatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q48361" start="12918" end="12927" title="chondrite" label="chondrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="13155" end="13170" title="plate tectonics" label="plate tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q207313" start="13411" end="13429" title="Mid-Atlantic Ridge" label="Mid-Atlantic Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="13659" end="13666" title="Isotope" label="Isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="13677" end="13685" title="chemical element" label="elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q938" start="13694" end="13703" title="strontium" label="strontium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388" start="13705" end="13714" title="neodymium" label="neodymium"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="13716" end="13720" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119" start="13722" end="13729" title="hafnium" label="hafnium"/>
<link wikidata="Q751" start="13735" end="13741" title="osmium" label="osmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q101949" start="13812" end="13831" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s mantle" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19609" start="13852" end="13861" title="noble gas" label="noble gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="13874" end="13876" title="Helium" label="He"/>
<link wikidata="Q878045" start="14107" end="14119" title="mantle plume" label="mantle plume"/>
<link wikidata="Q239918" start="14208" end="14218" title="peridotite" label="peridotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q648913" start="14223" end="14233" title="pyroxenite" label="pyroxenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826906" start="14294" end="14301" title="rock microstructure" label="texture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642389" start="14407" end="14413" title="Scoria" label="cinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="14438" end="14446" title="pāhoehoe" label="pāhoehoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="14480" end="14486" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361456" start="14583" end="14592" title="subaerial" label="subaerial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642389" start="14653" end="14659" title="scoria" label="scoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q107099" start="14661" end="14664" title="volcanic ash" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="14676" end="14683" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806785" start="14750" end="14761" title="cinder cone" label="cinder cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552055" start="14784" end="14795" title="Vesicular texture" label="vesiculated"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="14914" end="14918" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q192880" start="14961" end="14969" title="pyroxene" label="pyroxene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14972" end="14974" title="Lava#Aā" label="Aā"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="15043" end="15047" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q119306" start="15206" end="15215" title="lava lake" label="lava lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q27919" start="15218" end="15227" title="Lava tube" label="Lava tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q484924" start="15282" end="15286" title="tuff" label="tuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q512121" start="15290" end="15301" title="Pyroclastic rock" label="pyroclastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q552571" start="15551" end="15563" title="volcanic gas" label="volcanic gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q159762" start="15581" end="15590" title="Mauna Loa" label="Mauna Loa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192560" start="15647" end="15661" title="Mount Tarawera" label="Mount Tarawera"/>
<link wikidata="Q192503" start="15705" end="15709" title="Maar" label="Maar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552055" start="15967" end="15975" title="vesicle (geology)" label="vesicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="15992" end="15999" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q181332" start="16016" end="16023" title="zeolite" label="zeolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="16026" end="16032" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="16036" end="16043" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q862746" start="16151" end="16157" title="Joint (geology)" label="joints"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16225" end="16236" title="Thermal expansion#Contraction effects (negative expansion)" label="contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q15427433" start="16484" end="16490" title="Columnar jointing" label="column"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403932" start="16514" end="16526" title="basalt prism" label="basalt prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q512121" start="17249" end="17265" title="pyroclastic rock" label="pyroclastic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q180044" start="17425" end="17431" title="pumice" label="pumice"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="18016" end="18024" title="pahoehoe" label="pāhoehoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28231909" start="18141" end="18154" title="littoral cone" label="littoral cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q178124" start="18319" end="18326" title="Surtsey" label="Surtsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="18334" end="18348" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q107749" start="18663" end="18677" title="Volcanic glass" label="Volcanic glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q610781" start="18875" end="18885" title="Subglacial eruption" label="subglacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232578" start="19053" end="19060" title="crust (geology)" label="crustal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="19073" end="19078" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="19081" end="19095" title="tectonic plate" label="tectonic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q104698" start="19176" end="19187" title="ocean ridge" label="ocean ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="19241" end="19255" title="oceanic island" label="oceanic island"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="19283" end="19289" title="Hawaii (island)" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="19295" end="19308" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="19314" end="19321" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q792425" start="19444" end="19466" title="large igneous province" label="large igneous province"/>
<link wikidata="Q792425" start="19483" end="19507" title="continental flood basalt" label="continental flood basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q55819" start="19604" end="19616" title="Deccan Traps" label="Deccan Traps"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="19620" end="19625" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097653" start="19631" end="19646" title="Chilcotin Group" label="Chilcotin Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="19650" end="19666" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="19668" end="19674" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462200" start="19680" end="19692" title="Paraná Traps" label="Paraná Traps"/>
<link wikidata="Q58808" start="19708" end="19722" title="Siberian Traps" label="Siberian Traps"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="19726" end="19732" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q916997" start="19738" end="19743" title="Karoo" label="Karoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410264" start="19744" end="19756" title="flood basalt" label="flood basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q401815" start="19791" end="19813" title="Columbia River Plateau" label="Columbia River Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="19817" end="19827" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="19832" end="19838" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910218" start="19905" end="19912" title="Galilee earthquake of 1837" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q83210" start="19914" end="19919" title="Golan Heights" label="Golan"/>
<link wikidata="Q612952" start="19925" end="19931" title="Bashan" label="Bashan"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="19935" end="19941" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="19946" end="19951" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232578" start="20022" end="20027" title="crust (geology)" label="crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="20038" end="20049" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q595991" start="20163" end="20178" title="greenstone belt" label="greenstone belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="20199" end="20211" title="metamorphism" label="metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q427254" start="20231" end="20239" title="Chlorite group" label="chlorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q104692" start="20241" end="20251" title="actinolite" label="actinolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q272844" start="20253" end="20260" title="epidote" label="epidote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123" start="20466" end="20468" title="Io (moon)" label="Io"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="20496" end="20503" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="20533" end="20537" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="20539" end="20543" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="20545" end="20550" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="20569" end="20574" title="4 Vesta" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="20634" end="20638" title="moon" label="moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180874" start="20644" end="20655" title="lunar mare" label="lunar maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410264" start="20671" end="20683" title="flood basalt" label="flood basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="20751" end="20765" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q192372" start="20790" end="20802" title="Luna program" label="Luna program"/>
<link wikidata="Q952474" start="20834" end="20849" title="lunar meteorite" label="lunar meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q190729" start="21078" end="21086" title="ilmenite" label="ilmenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q49055" start="21356" end="21374" title="Clementine mission" label="Clementine mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660224" start="21581" end="21599" title="shock metamorphism" label="shock metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="21613" end="21622" title="redox" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20396016" start="21678" end="21687" title="mineral hydration" label="hydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648514" start="21701" end="21705" title="geology of the Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q930183" start="21880" end="21895" title="crater counting" label="crater counting"/>
<link wikidata="Q192144" start="21994" end="22000" title="Venera" label="Venera"/>
<link wikidata="Q755286" start="22009" end="22013" title="Vega program" label="VEGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="22648" end="22652" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q913970" start="22725" end="22742" title="Martian meteorite" label="Martian meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="22772" end="22794" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="22825" end="22833" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q106551" start="22881" end="22889" title="regolith" label="regolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q48558" start="22959" end="22971" title="Dawn (spacecraft)" label="Dawn mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q536491" start="23012" end="23025" title="HED meteorite" label="HED meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123" start="23222" end="23224" title="Io (moon)" label="Io"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="23404" end="23412" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q531953" start="24067" end="24074" title="outcrop" label="outcrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q107749" start="24376" end="24390" title="volcanic glass" label="volcanic glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="24557" end="24565" title="hematite" label="hematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="24750" end="24754" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q422131" start="24756" end="24771" title="montmorillonite" label="montmorillonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145804" start="24806" end="24812" title="illite" label="illite"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="24902" end="24911" title="kaolinite" label="kaolinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q408516" start="24915" end="24923" title="gibbsite" label="gibbsite"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="24964" end="24968" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q622845" start="24978" end="24986" title="laterite" label="laterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="25023" end="25030" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="25137" end="25144" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="25146" end="25152" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="25157" end="25166" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q208465" start="25203" end="25218" title="buffer capacity" label="buffer capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152039" start="25227" end="25240" title="Soil acidification" label="acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="25276" end="25279" title="carbon dioxide" label="CO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="25308" end="25313" title="Calcium carbonate" label="CaCO3"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="25421" end="25437" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q917402" start="25528" end="25539" title="greenschist" label="greenschist"/>
<link wikidata="Q335239" start="25541" end="25552" title="amphibolite" label="amphibolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q729546" start="25557" end="25565" title="eclogite" label="eclogite"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="25686" end="25698" title="metamorphism" label="metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036221" start="25790" end="25802" title="hydrothermal" label="hydrothermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="25803" end="25806" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940083" start="25848" end="25876" title="volcanogenic massive sulfide ore deposit" label="volcanogenic massive sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="26226" end="26234" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133111" start="26453" end="26478" title="Kamaʻehuakanaloa Seamount" label="Kamaʻehuakanaloa Seamount"/>
<link wikidata="Q238851" start="26590" end="26603" title="oceanic crust" label="oceanic crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q867648" start="26680" end="26698" title="hydrothermal vents" label="hydrothermal vents"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="26706" end="26720" title="origin of life" label="origin of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q191360" start="26801" end="26811" title="Foundation (engineering)" label="groundwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996907" start="26821" end="26832" title="cobblestone" label="cobblestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q179700" start="26871" end="26877" title="statue" label="statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q139143" start="26892" end="26901" title="Extrusion" label="extruding"/>
<link wikidata="Q611617" start="26916" end="26926" title="stone wool" label="stone wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q918306" start="26967" end="26984" title="thermal insulation" label="thermal insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305550" start="26987" end="27007" title="Carbon sequestration" label="Carbon sequestration"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43536" wikidata="Q143739" url="?curid=43536" title="Beeswax">
<text>Beeswax (also known as cera alba) is a natural wax produced by honey bees of the genus &quot;Apis&quot;. The wax is formed into scales by eight wax-producing glands in the abdominal segments of worker bees, which discard it in or at the hive. The hive workers collect and use it to form cells for honey storage and larval and pupal protection within the beehive. Chemically, beeswax consists mainly of esters of fatty acids and various long-chain alcohols.

Beeswax has been used since prehistory as the first plastic, as a lubricant and waterproofing agent, in lost wax casting of metals and glass, as a polish for wood and leather, for making candles, as an ingredient in cosmetics and as an artistic medium in encaustic painting.

Beeswax is edible, having similarly negligible toxicity to plant waxes, and is approved for food use in most countries and in the European Union under the E number E901. However, due to its inability to be broken down by the human digestive system, it has insignificant nutritional value.

==Production==
Beeswax is formed by worker bees, which secrete it from eight wax-producing mirror glands on the inner sides of the sternites (the ventral shield or plate of each segment of the body) on abdominal segments 4 to 7. The sizes of these wax glands depend on the age of the worker, and after many daily flights, these glands gradually begin to atrophy.
The new wax is initially glass-clear and colorless, becoming opaque after chewing and being contaminated with pollen by the hive worker bees, becoming progressively yellower or browner by incorporation of pollen oils and propolis. The wax scales are about across and thick, and about 1100 are needed to make a gram of wax. Worker bees use the beeswax to build honeycomb cells. For the wax-making bees to secrete wax, the ambient temperature in the hive must be .

The book &quot;Beeswax Production, Harvesting, Processing and Products&quot; suggests of beeswax is sufficient to store of honey. Another study estimated that of wax can store of honey.

Sugars from honey are metabolized into beeswax in wax-gland-associated fat cells. The amount of honey used by bees to produce wax has not been accurately determined, but according to Whitcomb&#x27;s 1946 experiment, of honey yields of wax.

==Processing==
Beeswax as a product for human use may come from cappings cut off the cells in the process of extraction, from old comb that is scrapped, or from unwanted burr comb and brace comb removed from a hive. Its color varies from nearly white to brownish, but most often is a shade of yellow, depending on purity, the region, and the type of flowers gathered by the bees. The wax from the brood comb of the honey bee hive tends to be darker than wax from the honeycomb because impurities accumulate more quickly in the brood comb. Due to the impurities, the wax must be rendered before further use. The leftovers are called slumgum, and is derived from old breeding rubbish (pupa casings, cocoons, shed larva skins, etc.), bee droppings, propolis, and general rubbish.

The wax may be clarified further by heating in water. As with petroleum waxes, it may be softened by dilution with mineral oil or vegetable oil to make it more workable at room temperature.

==Physical characteristics==
Beeswax is a fragrant solid at room temperature. The colors are light yellow, medium yellow, or dark brown and white. Beeswax is a tough wax formed from a mixture of several chemical compounds.

Beeswax has a relatively low melting point range of . If beeswax is heated above discoloration occurs. The flash point of beeswax is .

When natural beeswax is cold, it is brittle, and its fracture is dry and granular. At room temperature (conventionally taken as about ), it is tenacious and it softens further at human body temperature ().

== Chemical composition ==
An approximate chemical formula for beeswax is C15H31COOC30H61. Its main constituents are palmitate, palmitoleate, and oleate esters of long-chain (30–32 carbons) aliphatic alcohols, with the ratio of triacontanyl palmitate CH3(CH2)29O-CO-(CH2)14CH3 to cerotic acid CH3(CH2)24COOH, the two principal constituents, being 6:1. Beeswax can be classified generally into European and Oriental types. The saponification value is lower (3–5) for European beeswax, and higher (8–9) for Oriental types. The analytical characterization can be done by high-temperature gas chromatography.

==Adulteration ==
Beeswax faces challenges in the market due to the presence of various suppliers, making it difficult to distinguish authentic from fake variants. Adulterated beeswax often contains paraffin and other toxic additives, posing potential health risks and lacking the genuine honey-scented aroma of pure beeswax.

Pharmaceutical grades of pure beeswax are distributed in the shape of pellets for the cosmetic, phamaceutical and food industries, among other uses.

==Production==

In 2020, world production of beeswax was 62,116 tonnes, led by India with 38% of the total.

==Uses==
Candle-making has long involved the use of beeswax, which burns readily and cleanly, and this material was traditionally prescribed for the making of the Paschal candle or &quot;Easter candle&quot;. Beeswax candles are purported to be superior to other wax candles, because they burn brighter and longer, do not bend, and burn cleaner. It is further recommended for the making of other candles used in the liturgy of the Roman Catholic Church. Beeswax is also the candle constituent of choice in the Eastern Orthodox Church.

Refined beeswax plays a prominent role in art materials both as a binder in encaustic paint and as a stabilizer in oil paint to add body.

Beeswax is an ingredient in surgical bone wax, which is used during surgery to control bleeding from bone surfaces; shoe polish and furniture polish can both use beeswax as a component, dissolved in turpentine or sometimes blended with linseed oil or tung oil; modeling waxes can also use beeswax as a component; pure beeswax can also be used as an organic surfboard wax. Beeswax blended with pine rosin is used for waxing, and can serve as an adhesive to attach reed plates to the structure inside a squeezebox. It can also be used to make Cutler&#x27;s resin, an adhesive used to glue handles onto cutlery knives. It is used in Eastern Europe in egg decoration; it is used for writing, via resist dyeing, on batik eggs (as in &quot;pysanky&quot;) and for making beaded eggs.
Beeswax is used by percussionists to make a surface on tambourines for thumb rolls. It can also be used as a metal injection moulding binder component along with other polymeric binder materials.
Beeswax was formerly used in the manufacture of phonograph cylinders. It may still be used to seal formal legal or royal decree and academic parchments such as placing an awarding stamp imprimatur of the university upon completion of postgraduate degrees.

Purified and bleached beeswax is used in the production of food, cosmetics, and pharmaceuticals. The three main types of beeswax products are yellow, white, and beeswax absolute. Yellow beeswax is the crude product obtained from the honeycomb, white beeswax is bleached or filtered yellow beeswax, and beeswax absolute is yellow beeswax treated with alcohol. In food preparation, it is used as a coating for cheese; by sealing out the air, protection is given against spoilage (mold growth). Beeswax may also be used as a food additive E901, in small quantities acting as a glazing agent, which serves to prevent water loss, or used to provide surface protection for some fruits. Soft gelatin capsules and tablet coatings may also use E901. Beeswax is also a common ingredient of natural chewing gum. The wax monoesters in beeswax are poorly hydrolysed in the guts of humans and other mammals, so they have insignificant nutritional value. Some birds, such as honeyguides, can digest beeswax. Beeswax is the main diet of wax moth larvae.

The use of beeswax in skin care and cosmetics has been increasing. A German study found beeswax to be superior to similar barrier creams (usually mineral oil-based creams such as petroleum jelly), when used according to its protocol.
Beeswax is used in lip balm, lip gloss, hand creams, salves, and moisturizers; and in cosmetics such as eye shadow, blush, and eye liner. Beeswax is also an important ingredient in moustache wax and hair pomades, which make hair look sleek and shiny.

In oil spill control, beeswax is processed to create Petroleum Remediation Product (PRP). It is used to absorb oil or petroleum-based pollutants from water.
==Historical uses==
Beeswax was among the first plastics to be used, alongside other natural polymers such as gutta-percha, horn, tortoiseshell, and shellac. For thousands of years, beeswax has had a wide variety of applications; it has been found in the tombs of Egypt, in wrecked Viking ships, and in Roman ruins. Beeswax never goes bad and can be heated and reused. Historically, it has been used:

* As candles - the oldest intact beeswax candles north of the Alps were found in the Alamannic graveyard of Oberflacht, Germany, dating to 6th/7th century AD
* In the manufacture of cosmetics
* As a modelling material in the lost-wax casting process, or &quot;cire perdue&quot;
* For wax tablets used for a variety of writing purposes
* In encaustic paintings such as the Fayum mummy portraits
* In bow making
* To strengthen and preserve sewing thread, cordage, shoe laces, etc.
* As a component of sealing wax
* To strengthen and to forestall splitting and cracking of wind instrument reeds 
* To form the mouthpieces of a didgeridoo, and the frets on the Philippine &quot;kutiyapi&quot; – a type of boat lute
* As a sealant or lubricant for bullets in cap and ball firearms
* To stabilize the military explosive Torpex – before being replaced by a petroleum-based product
* In producing Javanese &quot;batik&quot;
* As an ancient form of dental tooth filling
* As the joint filler in the slate bed of pool and billiard tables.

== See also ==
* Carnauba wax
* Candelilla wax
* Paraffin wax
* Ozokerite (ceresin)
* Spermaceti

==References==
==External links==
*The chemistry of bees Joel Loveridge, School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, accessed November 2005</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q143739" start="0" end="7" title="Beeswax" label="Beeswax"/>
<link wikidata="Q143739" start="23" end="32" title="Beeswax" label="cera alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695" start="47" end="50" title="wax" label="wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q102857" start="63" end="72" title="honey bee" label="honey bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q627153" start="194" end="204" title="worker bee" label="worker bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q165107" start="354" end="361" title="beehive" label="beehive"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="402" end="407" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="412" end="423" title="fatty acids" label="fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q378871" start="436" end="455" title="fatty alcohol" label="long-chain alcohols"/>
<link wikidata="Q765814" start="562" end="578" title="lost wax casting" label="lost wax casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q119172976" start="605" end="611" title="wood finishing" label="polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12888135" start="645" end="652" title="candles" label="candles"/>
<link wikidata="Q308968" start="713" end="731" title="encaustic painting" label="encaustic painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="781" end="789" title="toxicity" label="toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="864" end="878" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="889" end="897" title="E number" label="E number"/>
<link wikidata="Q627153" start="1060" end="1070" title="worker bee" label="worker bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777684" start="1155" end="1164" title="sternites" label="sternites"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="1170" end="1177" title="Anatomical terms of location" label="ventral"/>
<link wikidata="Q194520" start="1378" end="1385" title="atrophy" label="atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q691914" start="1448" end="1454" title="opaque" label="opaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q827742" start="1461" end="1468" title="chewing" label="chewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="1592" end="1598" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184398" start="1608" end="1616" title="propolis" label="propolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q123339" start="1747" end="1756" title="honeycomb" label="honeycomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q357519" start="2109" end="2118" title="fat cells" label="fat cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="2134" end="2139" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q85749596" start="2449" end="2458" title="burr comb" label="burr comb"/>
<link wikidata="Q85749596" start="2463" end="2473" title="brace comb" label="brace comb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974299" start="2676" end="2686" title="brood comb" label="brood comb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542316" start="2911" end="2918" title="slumgum" label="slumgum"/>
<link wikidata="Q124695" start="3414" end="3417" title="wax" label="wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="3451" end="3468" title="chemical compound" label="chemical compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="3501" end="3514" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q111092" start="3694" end="3710" title="room temperature" label="room temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="3793" end="3809" title="body temperature" label="body temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q496353" start="3857" end="3873" title="structural formula" label="chemical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q209727" start="3932" end="3941" title="palmitate" label="palmitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q412366" start="3943" end="3955" title="palmitoleate" label="palmitoleate"/>
<link wikidata="Q207688" start="3961" end="3967" title="oleate" label="oleate"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="3968" end="3973" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q192596" start="4005" end="4014" title="aliphatic" label="aliphatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q156" start="4015" end="4022" title="Alcohol (chemistry)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q209727" start="4043" end="4065" title="palmitate" label="triacontanyl palmitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q903348" start="4095" end="4107" title="cerotic acid" label="cerotic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q429406" start="4241" end="4261" title="saponification value" label="saponification value"/>
<link wikidata="Q677065" start="4400" end="4418" title="gas chromatography" label="gas chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="4962" end="4967" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q152548" start="5170" end="5184" title="Paschal candle" label="Paschal candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="5422" end="5429" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="5437" end="5458" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="5516" end="5539" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q308968" start="5618" end="5633" title="Encaustic painting" label="encaustic paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q296955" start="5657" end="5666" title="oil paint" label="oil paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974180" start="5718" end="5726" title="bone wax" label="bone wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q913617" start="5797" end="5808" title="shoe polish" label="shoe polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q119172976" start="5813" end="5829" title="furniture polish" label="furniture polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q818405" start="5917" end="5928" title="linseed oil" label="linseed oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094522" start="5932" end="5940" title="tung oil" label="tung oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974181" start="6038" end="6051" title="surfboard wax" label="surfboard wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q138937" start="6079" end="6084" title="rosin" label="rosin"/>
<link wikidata="Q269107" start="6097" end="6103" title="waxing" label="waxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q336767" start="6182" end="6192" title="squeezebox" label="squeezebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196864" start="6222" end="6241" title="Cutler&amp;#x27;s resin" label="Cutler&amp;#x27;s resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q634816" start="6373" end="6386" title="resist dyeing" label="resist dyeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q635427" start="6391" end="6396" title="batik" label="batik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233785" start="6415" end="6422" title="pysanky" label="pysanky"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="6477" end="6490" title="percussionist" label="percussionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q193666" start="6513" end="6523" title="tambourine" label="tambourine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571972" start="6769" end="6781" title="royal decree" label="royal decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q955005" start="6840" end="6850" title="imprimatur" label="imprimatur"/>
<link wikidata="Q332340" start="7221" end="7229" title="Absolute (perfumery)" label="absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="7319" end="7325" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="7447" end="7451" title="E number" label="E901"/>
<link wikidata="Q334582" start="7485" end="7498" title="glazing agent" label="glazing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="7796" end="7803" title="mammals" label="mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q214137" start="7871" end="7881" title="honeyguide" label="honeyguide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071861" start="7932" end="7940" title="Lesser wax moth" label="wax moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q457239" start="8129" end="8144" title="petroleum jelly" label="petroleum jelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518347" start="8203" end="8211" title="lip balm" label="lip balm"/>
<link wikidata="Q747675" start="8213" end="8222" title="lip gloss" label="lip gloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871151" start="8224" end="8234" title="hand cream" label="hand cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q964307" start="8288" end="8298" title="eye shadow" label="eye shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8243409" start="8311" end="8320" title="eye liner" label="eye liner"/>
<link wikidata="Q809607" start="8365" end="8378" title="moustache wax" label="moustache wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434215" start="8383" end="8394" title="hair pomade" label="hair pomade"/>
<link wikidata="Q15840227" start="8489" end="8518" title="Petroleum Remediation Product" label="Petroleum Remediation Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q423261" start="8703" end="8715" title="gutta-percha" label="gutta-percha"/>
<link wikidata="Q65284752" start="8717" end="8721" title="Horn (anatomy)" label="horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141546" start="8723" end="8736" title="tortoiseshell" label="tortoiseshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q429659" start="8742" end="8749" title="shellac" label="shellac"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="9080" end="9089" title="Alamannic" label="Alamannic"/>
<link wikidata="Q628990" start="9103" end="9122" title="Seitingen-Oberflacht" label="Oberflacht, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q765814" start="9220" end="9236" title="lost-wax casting" label="lost-wax casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428312" start="9279" end="9289" title="wax tablet" label="wax tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q308968" start="9335" end="9353" title="encaustic painting" label="encaustic painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q646420" start="9367" end="9388" title="Fayum mummy portraits" label="Fayum mummy portraits"/>
<link wikidata="Q11066261" start="9394" end="9404" title="Bowyer" label="bow making"/>
<link wikidata="Q652122" start="9434" end="9440" title="sewing" label="sewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505624" start="9495" end="9506" title="sealing wax" label="sealing wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q189388" start="9620" end="9630" title="didgeridoo" label="didgeridoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="9653" end="9663" title="Philippine" label="Philippine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485397" start="9670" end="9678" title="kutiyapi" label="kutiyapi"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="9702" end="9706" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q323840" start="9725" end="9734" title="lubricant" label="lubricant"/>
<link wikidata="Q174583" start="9739" end="9745" title="bullet" label="bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="9763" end="9771" title="firearms" label="firearms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041604" start="9810" end="9816" title="Torpex" label="Torpex"/>
<link wikidata="Q635427" start="9900" end="9905" title="batik" label="batik"/>
<link wikidata="Q839494" start="10043" end="10055" title="Carnauba wax" label="Carnauba wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q898937" start="10058" end="10072" title="Candelilla wax" label="Candelilla wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q177540" start="10075" end="10087" title="Paraffin wax" label="Paraffin wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q909924" start="10090" end="10099" title="Ozokerite" label="Ozokerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055000" start="10101" end="10108" title="ceresin" label="ceresin"/>
<link wikidata="Q369682" start="10112" end="10122" title="Spermaceti" label="Spermaceti"/>
<link wikidata="Q459506" start="10218" end="10239" title="University of Bristol" label="University of Bristol"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43537" wikidata="Q108131" url="?curid=43537" title="Sacramento County, California">
<text>Sacramento County () is a county located in the U.S. state of California. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 1,585,055. Its county seat is Sacramento, which has been the state capital of California since 1854.

Sacramento County is the central county of the Greater Sacramento metropolitan area. The county covers about in the northern portion of the Central Valley, on into Gold Country. Sacramento County extends from the low delta lands between the Sacramento River and San Joaquin River, including Suisun Bay, north to about beyond the State Capitol and east into the foothills of the Sierra Nevada Mountains. The southernmost portion of Sacramento County has direct access to San Francisco Bay. Since 2010, statewide droughts in California have further strained Sacramento County&#x27;s water security.

==History==
Sacramento County was one of the original counties of California, which were created in 1850 at the time of statehood. The county was named after the Sacramento River, which forms its western border. The river was named by Spanish cavalry officer Gabriel Moraga for the &quot;Santisimo Sacramento&quot; (Most Holy Sacrament), referring to the Catholic Eucharist.

Alexander Hamilton Willard, a member of the Lewis and Clark Expedition, is buried in the old Franklin Cemetery.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (3.0%) is water. Most of the county is at an elevation close to sea level, with some areas below sea level. The highest point in the county is Carpenter Hill at , in the southeast part of Folsom. Major watercourses in the county include the American River, Sacramento River, Cosumnes River, a tributary of the Mokelumne River, and Dry Creek, a tributary of the Sacramento River.

===Adjacent counties===
* Sutter County - northwest
* Placer County - north
* El Dorado County - northeast
* Amador County - east
* San Joaquin County - south
* Contra Costa County - southwest
* Solano County - west
* Yolo County - west

===National protected areas===
* Stone Lakes National Wildlife Refuge
* California National Historic Trail
* Pony Express National Historic Trail

==Demographics==

===2020 census===


=== 2011 ===

==== Places by population, ethnicity, and income ====

===2010===
The 2010 United States census reported that Sacramento County had a population of 1,418,788. The racial makeup of Sacramento County was 815,151 (57.5%) White, 200,228 (15.4%) African American, 14,308 (1.0%) Native American, 203,211 (14.3%) Asian, 13,858 (1.0%) Pacific Islander, 131,691 (9.3%) from other races, and 93,511 (6.6%) from two or more races. There were 306,196 Hispanic or Latino residents of any race (21.6%).

===2000===
As of the census of 2000, there were 1,223,499 people, 453,602 households, and 297,562 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 474,814 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 64.0% White, 10.6% Black or African American, 1.09% Native American, 13.5% Asian, 0.6% Pacific Islander, 7.5% from other races, and 5.8% from two or more races. 19.3% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 10.2% were of German, 7.0% English, 6.7% Irish and 5.1% American ancestry according to Census 2000. 75.7% spoke only English at home; 10.0% spoke Spanish, 1.5% Hmong, 1.4% Chinese or Mandarin, 1.3% Vietnamese, 1.2% Tagalog and 1.2% Russian.

There were 453,602 households, out of which 33.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.4% were married couples living together, 14.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.4% were non-families. 26.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.64 and the average family size was 3.24.

In the county, 27.6% of the population was under the age of 18, 9.5% was from 18 to 24, 31.0% from 25 to 44, 20.9% from 45 to 64, and 11.1% was 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.9 males. For every 100 female residents aged 18 and over, there were 92.5 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $43,816, and the median income for a family was $50,717. Males had a median income of $39,482 versus $31,569 for females. The per capita income for the county was $21,142. About 10.3% of families and 14.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.2% of those under age 18 and 6.6% of those age 65 or over.

==Government and policing==
===Government===
The Government of Sacramento County is defined and authorized under the California Constitution, California law, and the Charter of the County of Sacramento. Much of the Government of California is in practice the responsibility of county governments such as the Government of Sacramento County, while municipalities such as the city of Sacramento and Folsom provide additional, often non-essential services.

It is composed of the elected five-member Board of Supervisors, several other elected offices including the Sheriff, District Attorney, and Assessor, and numerous county departments and entities under the supervision of the County Executive Officer. In addition, several entities of the government of California have jurisdiction conterminous with Sacramento County, such as the Sacramento County Superior Court.

Under its foundational Charter, the five-member elected Sacramento County Board of Supervisors (BOS) is the county legislature. The board operates in a legislative, executive, and quasi-judicial capacity. The current members are:

* Phil Serna, District 1
* Patrick Kennedy, District 2
* Rich Desmond, District 3
* Sue Frost, District 4
* Pat Hume, District 5

The Sacramento County Code is the codified law of Sacramento County in the form of local ordinances passed by the Board of Supervisors.

===Policing===
The Sacramento County Sheriff provides court protection and jail management for the entire county. It provides patrol and detective services for the unincorporated areas of the county. Incorporated municipalities within the county that have their own municipal police departments or contract with the Sacramento County sheriff for their policing are: Elk Grove, 170,000, municipal department; Citrus Heights, 88,000, municipal department; Folsom, 78,000, municipal department; Isleton, sheriff contract; Rancho Cordova, 73,000, sheriff contract; Galt, population 26,000, municipal department.

Other law enforcement agencies in the county include the Sacramento County Park Rangers that service the County Parks, Twin Rivers Unified School District Police servicing police services for Twin Rivers School District, and the Fulton-El Camino Park District Police Department servicing Recreation and Park Districts.

The Fulton- El Camino Park District Police operating under the Fulton - El Camino Recreation and Park District was disbanded as of 11/26/2024 following an alleged mismanagement of Government Funds, ethical and moral dilemmas by Emily Ballus (General Manager) and Beth Johnson (Interim Chief of Police). ABC10 conducted a investigation regarding misappropriation of funds. 

==Politics==

===Voter registration===

==== Cities by population and voter registration ====

===Overview===
Sacramento County was politically competitive in most presidential elections between 1976 and 2004, but now votes significantly in favor of the Democratic candidates. Candidates from the Democratic Party have carried the county in the past eight presidential elections, and have won a majority of the county&#x27;s votes four times during that time (in 2008, 2012, 2016, and 2020). The city of Sacramento is strongly Democratic, while rural areas are strongly Republican; suburban areas are more divided. This pattern is also present in congressional and state legislative elections. The last Republican presidential candidate to win a majority in the county was George H. W. Bush in 1988.


 



 







In gubernatorial elections, Sacramento County is typically a bellwether, having voted for the winner every time since 1962 with the exception of 1970 and 2002. 


In the House of Representatives, all of California&#x27;s 6th congressional district and portions of its 3rd, and 7th districts are in the county.

In the State Assembly, all of the 7th and 8th districts and parts of the 6th, 9th, and 11th districts are in the county.

In the State Senate, parts of the 1st, 3rd, 4th, 6th, and 8th districts are in the county.

According to the California Secretary of State, as of October 22, 2012, Sacramento County has 698,899 registered voters, out of 944,243 eligible (74%). Of those, 306,960 (44%) are registered Democrats, 225,688 (32%) are registered Republicans, and 134,677 (19%) have declined to state a political party.

== Crime ==

The following table includes the number of incidents reported and the rate per 1,000 persons for each type of offense.

=== Cities by population and crime rates ===

==Education==

===Colleges and universities===

; Public universities 
*California State University Sacramento
*UC Davis Extension
**UC Davis School of Medicine
**UC Davis Betty Irene Moore School of Nursing

; Community colleges
*Los Rios Community College District
**American River College
**Cosumnes River College
**Folsom Lake College
**Sacramento City College
*San Joaquin Delta Community College District
*Sierra Joint Community College District

; Private, not for profit
*University of the Pacific in Sacramento
*National University Sacramento Regional Campus
*University of San Francisco Regional Campus
*University of Southern California Extension
*Western Seminary
*Epic Bible College

; Private, for profit
*Alliant International University
*California Northstate University College of Pharmacy
*Chamberlain University Rancho Cordova
*DeVry University
*Lincoln Law School of Sacramento
*MTI College
*Professional School of Psychology
*San Joaquin Valley College
*The Art Institute of California – Sacramento, a branch of The Art Institute of California - Los Angeles
*Universal Technical Institute
*University of Phoenix Sacramento Valley

=== K-12 education ===
School districts include:

K-12:

* Center Joint Unified School District
* Elk Grove Unified School District
* Folsom-Cordova Unified School District
* Natomas Unified School District
* River Delta Unified School District
* Sacramento City Unified School District
* San Juan Unified School District
* Twin Rivers Unified School District - Includes some areas for grades K-12, some for 7–12 only, and some for 9–12 only
Secondary:
* Galt Joint Union High School District
* Roseville Joint Union High School District

Elementary:

* Arcohe Union School District
* Dry Creek Joint Elementary School District
* Elverta Joint Elementary School District
* Galt Joint Union Elementary School District
* Robla School District
==Transportation==
===Public Transportation===
Sacramento Regional Transit District, also known as Sacramento RT, provides public transit throughout the county. It operates bus services, as well as light rail services on the Blue, Green, and Gold lines. In addition, the Yolobus provides Sacramento County with service connecting to destinations in neighboring Yolo County, such as Davis. SaRT and Yolobus both provide bus services connecting Sacramento with Sacramento International Airport.

Amtrak and its Amtrak California subsidiary operate passenger rail service from the Sacramento Valley station. This station is served by the Coast Starlight, the California Zephyr, the Capitol Corridor, and the San Joaquins, which link the region with destinations across California and the United States.

===Major highways===
*
*
*
*
*
*

===Airports===
Sacramento International Airport is a major, full-service airport with passenger flights. It is owned by the County of Sacramento. The county also owns Sacramento Mather Airport in Rancho Cordova and Sacramento Executive Airport, both of which are general aviation airports. Sacramento McClellan Airport, formerly McClellan Air Force Base, is a privately owned airport between North Highlands and Rio Linda. There are also privately owned public use airports located in Elk Grove and Rio Linda.

===Public roadways===
The Sacramento County Department of Transportation (SACDOT) maintains approximately 2200 miles of roadway within the unincorporated area. The roads range from six lane thoroughfares to rural roads.

==Communities==

===Cities===
*Citrus Heights
*Elk Grove
*Folsom
*Galt
*Isleton
*Rancho Cordova
*Sacramento (county seat)

===Census-designated places===

*Antelope
*Arden-Arcade
*Carmichael
*Clay
*Courtland
*Elverta
*Fair Oaks
*Florin
*Foothill Farms
*Franklin
*Freeport
*Fruitridge Pocket
*Gold River
*Herald
*Hood
*La Riviera
*Lemon Hill
*Mather
*McClellan Park
*North Highlands
*Orangevale
*Parkway
*Rancho Murieta
*Rio Linda
*Rosemont
*Vineyard
*Walnut Grove
*Wilton
===Unincorporated community===
*Locke

===Former townships===

In February 1851, the county was divided into eight civil townships: the seven marked by asterisks below, plus Sacramento township. In July of that year, American township was divided off from Sacramento township. In 1856, the Board of Supervisors realigned the divisions into the 14 civil townships below, plus the city of Sacramento.
* Alabama
* American
* Brighton*
* Center*
* Cosumnes*
* Dry Creek
* Franklin
* Georgiana
* Granite
* Lee
* Mississippi*
* Natoma*
* San Joaquin*
* Sutter*
===Population ranking===

The population ranking of the following table is based on the 2020 census of Sacramento County.

† &quot;county seat&quot;

== See also ==

*History of Sacramento, California
*List of California Historical Landmarks in Sacramento County
*List of school districts in Sacramento County, California
*National Register of Historic Places listings in Sacramento County, California
*Sacramento Metropolitan Cable Television Commission

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==
*
*Sacramento County transit website
*Sacramento Metro Chamber – representing Sacramento County and surrounding counties</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q108131" start="0" end="17" title="Sacramento County, California" label="Sacramento County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="26" end="32" title="County (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="48" end="58" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="62" end="72" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="84" end="109" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="145" end="156" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="160" end="170" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="191" end="204" title="List of capitals in the United States" label="state capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5947646" start="279" end="297" title="Sacramento metropolitan area" label="Greater Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q27026" start="372" end="386" title="Central Valley (California)" label="Central Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091321" start="396" end="408" title="Gold Country" label="Gold Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q335575" start="473" end="489" title="Sacramento River" label="Sacramento River"/>
<link wikidata="Q751347" start="494" end="511" title="San Joaquin River" label="San Joaquin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q644154" start="523" end="533" title="Suisun Bay" label="Suisun Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="610" end="633" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="702" end="719" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q22058413" start="743" end="765" title="droughts in California" label="droughts in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973735" start="813" end="827" title="water security" label="water security"/>
<link wikidata="Q335575" start="992" end="1008" title="Sacramento River" label="Sacramento River"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="1073" end="1080" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515756" start="1089" end="1103" title="Gabriel Moraga" label="Gabriel Moraga"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="1194" end="1203" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719077" start="1206" end="1232" title="Alexander Hamilton Willard" label="Alexander Hamilton Willard"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="1250" end="1276" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491178" start="1299" end="1307" title="Franklin, Sacramento County, California" label="Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1350" end="1368" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045711" start="1567" end="1581" title="Carpenter Hill" label="Carpenter Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q984155" start="1612" end="1618" title="Folsom, California" label="Folsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q466699" start="1665" end="1679" title="American River" label="American River"/>
<link wikidata="Q335575" start="1681" end="1697" title="Sacramento River" label="Sacramento River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175231" start="1699" end="1713" title="Cosumnes River" label="Cosumnes River"/>
<link wikidata="Q786533" start="1734" end="1749" title="Mokelumne River" label="Mokelumne River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309490" start="1755" end="1764" title="Dry Creek (American River)" label="Dry Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q156377" start="1830" end="1843" title="Sutter County, California" label="Sutter County"/>
<link wikidata="Q156353" start="1858" end="1871" title="Placer County, California" label="Placer County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108093" start="1882" end="1898" title="El Dorado County, California" label="El Dorado County"/>
<link wikidata="Q156177" start="1913" end="1926" title="Amador County, California" label="Amador County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108499" start="1936" end="1954" title="San Joaquin County, California" label="San Joaquin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108058" start="1965" end="1984" title="Contra Costa County, California" label="Contra Costa County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108083" start="1999" end="2012" title="Solano County, California" label="Solano County"/>
<link wikidata="Q109709" start="2022" end="2033" title="Yolo County, California" label="Yolo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618977" start="2075" end="2111" title="Stone Lakes National Wildlife Refuge" label="Stone Lakes National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026956" start="2114" end="2148" title="California National Historic Trail" label="California National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q859130" start="2151" end="2187" title="Pony Express National Historic Trail" label="Pony Express National Historic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2311" end="2336" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2459" end="2464" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2482" end="2498" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2514" end="2529" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2547" end="2552" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2568" end="2584" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2606" end="2617" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2680" end="2688" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2692" end="2698" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2993" end="2998" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3006" end="3011" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3015" end="3031" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3039" end="3054" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3062" end="3067" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3074" end="3090" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3102" end="3113" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3177" end="3185" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3189" end="3195" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="3223" end="3229" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="3250" end="3255" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3296" end="3307" title="Census 2000" label="Census 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307894" start="3369" end="3374" title="Hmong language" label="Hmong"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="3392" end="3400" title="Standard Mandarin" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="3407" end="3417" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="3424" end="3431" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="3441" end="3448" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589307" start="4622" end="4653" title="Government of Sacramento County, California" label="Government of Sacramento County"/>
<link wikidata="Q196195" start="4690" end="4713" title="California Constitution" label="California Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503379" start="4715" end="4729" title="California law" label="California law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589189" start="4788" end="4812" title="Government of California" label="Government of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="4955" end="4965" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q984155" start="4970" end="4976" title="Folsom, California" label="Folsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396969" start="5070" end="5090" title="Sacramento County Board of Supervisors" label="Board of Supervisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396971" start="5136" end="5143" title="Sacramento County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Department" label="Sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5145" end="5162" title="Sacramento County District Attorney" label="District Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5168" end="5176" title="Sacramento County Assessor" label="Assessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589189" start="5315" end="5339" title="government of California" label="government of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396972" start="5407" end="5439" title="Sacramento County Superior Court" label="Sacramento County Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396969" start="5498" end="5536" title="Sacramento County Board of Supervisors" label="Sacramento County Board of Supervisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269458" start="5622" end="5636" title="Quasi-judicial body" label="quasi-judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q214214" start="5837" end="5845" title="codification (law)" label="codified"/>
<link wikidata="Q843713" start="5886" end="5901" title="local ordinance" label="local ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396971" start="5959" end="5984" title="Sacramento County Sheriff" label="Sacramento County Sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="7497" end="7507" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9062621" start="7706" end="7710" title="United States presidential election in California, 2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004202" start="7712" end="7716" title="United States presidential election in California, 2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016583" start="7718" end="7722" title="United States presidential election in California, 2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q60438611" start="7728" end="7732" title="United States presidential election in California, 2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="7747" end="7757" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="7813" end="7823" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="8016" end="8033" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892711" start="8037" end="8041" title="United States presidential election in California, 1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="8229" end="8253" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002482" start="8262" end="8306" title="California&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district" label="California&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002522" start="8327" end="8330" title="California&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="3rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002237" start="8336" end="8339" title="California&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district" label="7th"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026858" start="8377" end="8391" title="California State Assembly" label="State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020150" start="8404" end="8407" title="California&amp;#x27;s 7th State Assembly district" label="7th"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020154" start="8412" end="8415" title="California&amp;#x27;s 8th State Assembly district" label="8th"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020136" start="8443" end="8446" title="California&amp;#x27;s 6th State Assembly district" label="6th"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020156" start="8448" end="8451" title="California&amp;#x27;s 9th State Assembly district" label="9th"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019925" start="8457" end="8461" title="California&amp;#x27;s 11th State Assembly district" label="11th"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526814" start="8499" end="8511" title="California State Senate" label="State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019961" start="8526" end="8529" title="California&amp;#x27;s 1st State Senate district" label="1st"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020057" start="8531" end="8534" title="California&amp;#x27;s 3rd State Senate district" label="3rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020096" start="8536" end="8539" title="California&amp;#x27;s 4th State Senate district" label="4th"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020137" start="8541" end="8544" title="California&amp;#x27;s 6th State Senate district" label="6th"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020155" start="8550" end="8553" title="California&amp;#x27;s 8th State Senate district" label="8th"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024182" start="8601" end="8630" title="Secretary of State of California" label="California Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020915" start="8815" end="8826" title="California Republican Party" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249518" start="8851" end="8868" title="Decline to State" label="declined to state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026941" start="9140" end="9178" title="California State University Sacramento" label="California State University Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q129421" start="9180" end="9188" title="UC Davis" label="UC Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864165" start="9201" end="9228" title="UC Davis School of Medicine" label="UC Davis School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898845" start="9240" end="9275" title="Betty Irene Moore School of Nursing" label="Betty Irene Moore School of Nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683236" start="9299" end="9334" title="Los Rios Community College District" label="Los Rios Community College District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791079" start="9337" end="9359" title="American River College" label="American River College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175230" start="9362" end="9384" title="Cosumnes River College" label="Cosumnes River College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464862" start="9387" end="9406" title="Folsom Lake College" label="Folsom Lake College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396963" start="9409" end="9432" title="Sacramento City College" label="Sacramento City College"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066372" start="9434" end="9478" title="San Joaquin Delta College" label="San Joaquin Delta Community College District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7511366" start="9480" end="9519" title="Sierra College" label="Sierra Joint Community College District"/>
<link wikidata="Q630226" start="9548" end="9573" title="University of the Pacific (United States)" label="University of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568237" start="9589" end="9608" title="National University (California)" label="National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887879" start="9637" end="9664" title="University of San Francisco" label="University of San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="9682" end="9715" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988285" start="9727" end="9743" title="Western Seminary" label="Western Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382442" start="9745" end="9763" title="Epic Bible College" label="Epic Bible College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066989" start="9788" end="9820" title="Alliant International University" label="Alliant International University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020720" start="9822" end="9874" title="California Northstate University College of Pharmacy" label="California Northstate University College of Pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069580" start="9876" end="9898" title="Chamberlain University" label="Chamberlain University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298441" start="9915" end="9931" title="DeVry University" label="DeVry University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550809" start="9933" end="9965" title="Lincoln Law School of Sacramento" label="Lincoln Law School of Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026946" start="9967" end="9978" title="MTI College" label="MTI College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248024" start="9980" end="10013" title="Professional School of Psychology" label="Professional School of Psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414404" start="10015" end="10041" title="San Joaquin Valley College" label="San Joaquin Valley College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714401" start="10043" end="10087" title="The Art Institute of California – Sacramento" label="The Art Institute of California – Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714401" start="10101" end="10146" title="The Art Institute of California - Los Angeles" label="The Art Institute of California - Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894082" start="10148" end="10177" title="Universal Technical Institute" label="Universal Technical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889100" start="10179" end="10200" title="University of Phoenix" label="University of Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059437" start="10279" end="10315" title="Center Joint Unified School District" label="Center Joint Unified School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364016" start="10318" end="10351" title="Elk Grove Unified School District" label="Elk Grove Unified School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464856" start="10354" end="10392" title="Folsom-Cordova Unified School District" label="Folsom-Cordova Unified School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q17061971" start="10395" end="10426" title="Natomas Unified School District" label="Natomas Unified School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337334" start="10429" end="10464" title="River Delta Unified School District" label="River Delta Unified School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085749" start="10467" end="10506" title="Sacramento City Unified School District" label="Sacramento City Unified School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414623" start="10509" end="10541" title="San Juan Unified School District" label="San Juan Unified School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858286" start="10544" end="10579" title="Twin Rivers Unified School District" label="Twin Rivers Unified School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612262" start="10675" end="10712" title="Galt Joint Union High School District" label="Galt Joint Union High School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368733" start="10715" end="10757" title="Roseville Joint Union High School District" label="Roseville Joint Union High School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10774" end="10802" title="Arcohe Union School District" label="Arcohe Union School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309499" start="10805" end="10847" title="Dry Creek Joint Elementary School District" label="Dry Creek Joint Elementary School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368022" start="10850" end="10890" title="Elverta Joint Elementary School District" label="Elverta Joint Elementary School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519353" start="10893" end="10936" title="Galt Joint Union Elementary School District" label="Galt Joint Union Elementary School District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10939" end="10960" title="Robla School District" label="Robla School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397015" start="11008" end="11044" title="Sacramento Regional Transit District" label="Sacramento Regional Transit District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333826" start="11159" end="11178" title="SacRT light rail" label="light rail services"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929369" start="11186" end="11190" title="Blue Line (SacRT)" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000108" start="11192" end="11197" title="Green Line (SacRT)" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578775" start="11203" end="11207" title="Gold Line (SacRT)" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779123" start="11232" end="11239" title="Yolobus" label="Yolobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q109709" start="11322" end="11333" title="Yolo County" label="Yolo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q668546" start="11343" end="11348" title="Davis, California" label="Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432668" start="11420" end="11452" title="Sacramento International Airport" label="Sacramento International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="11455" end="11461" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q218438" start="11470" end="11487" title="Amtrak California" label="Amtrak California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097479" start="11539" end="11564" title="Sacramento Valley station" label="Sacramento Valley station"/>
<link wikidata="Q225313" start="11596" end="11611" title="Coast Starlight" label="Coast Starlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q373845" start="11617" end="11634" title="California Zephyr" label="California Zephyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q510836" start="11640" end="11656" title="Capitol Corridor" label="Capitol Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q287167" start="11666" end="11678" title="San Joaquins" label="San Joaquins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432668" start="11811" end="11843" title="Sacramento International Airport" label="Sacramento International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396997" start="11963" end="11988" title="Sacramento Mather Airport" label="Sacramento Mather Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q986928" start="11992" end="12006" title="Rancho Cordova" label="Rancho Cordova"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396985" start="12011" end="12039" title="Sacramento Executive Airport" label="Sacramento Executive Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q650456" start="12086" end="12114" title="Sacramento McClellan Airport" label="Sacramento McClellan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q658402" start="12559" end="12573" title="Citrus Heights, California" label="Citrus Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q671314" start="12575" end="12584" title="Elk Grove, California" label="Elk Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q984155" start="12586" end="12592" title="Folsom, California" label="Folsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q985262" start="12594" end="12598" title="Galt, California" label="Galt"/>
<link wikidata="Q933024" start="12600" end="12607" title="Isleton, California" label="Isleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q986928" start="12609" end="12623" title="Rancho Cordova, California" label="Rancho Cordova"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="12625" end="12635" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470866" start="12684" end="12692" title="Antelope, California" label="Antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q638819" start="12694" end="12706" title="Arden-Arcade, California" label="Arden-Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006574" start="12708" end="12718" title="Carmichael, California" label="Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129810" start="12720" end="12724" title="Clay, California" label="Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178547" start="12726" end="12735" title="Courtland, California" label="Courtland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244057" start="12737" end="12744" title="Elverta, California" label="Elverta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393019" start="12746" end="12755" title="Fair Oaks, California" label="Fair Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460991" start="12757" end="12763" title="Florin, California" label="Florin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436505" start="12765" end="12779" title="Foothill Farms, California" label="Foothill Farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491178" start="12781" end="12789" title="Franklin, Sacramento County, California" label="Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501102" start="12791" end="12799" title="Freeport, California" label="Freeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506466" start="12801" end="12818" title="Fruitridge Pocket, California" label="Fruitridge Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q629530" start="12820" end="12830" title="Gold River, California" label="Gold River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458808" start="12832" end="12838" title="Herald, California" label="Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5897418" start="12840" end="12844" title="Hood, California" label="Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q634572" start="12846" end="12856" title="La Riviera, California" label="La Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972693" start="12858" end="12868" title="Lemon Hill, California" label="Lemon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786925" start="12870" end="12876" title="Mather, Sacramento County, California" label="Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q9385088" start="12878" end="12892" title="McClellan Park, California" label="McClellan Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q530920" start="12894" end="12909" title="North Highlands, California" label="North Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028231" start="12911" end="12921" title="Orangevale, California" label="Orangevale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644903" start="12923" end="12930" title="Parkway, California" label="Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313069" start="12932" end="12946" title="Rancho Murieta, California" label="Rancho Murieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154437" start="12948" end="12957" title="Rio Linda, California" label="Rio Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q973717" start="12959" end="12967" title="Rosemont, California" label="Rosemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252655" start="12969" end="12977" title="Vineyard, California" label="Vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819794" start="12979" end="12991" title="Walnut Grove, California" label="Walnut Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345262" start="12993" end="12999" title="Wilton, California" label="Wilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476716" start="13032" end="13037" title="Locke, California" label="Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394476" start="13115" end="13129" title="civil township" label="civil township"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="13643" end="13654" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866305" start="13722" end="13755" title="History of Sacramento, California" label="History of Sacramento, California"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13757" end="13817" title="List of California Historical Landmarks#Sacramento County" label="List of California Historical Landmarks in Sacramento County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637272" start="13819" end="13864" title="List of school districts in Sacramento County, California" label="List of school districts in Sacramento County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977367" start="13878" end="13956" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Sacramento County, California" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Sacramento County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396998" start="13958" end="14009" title="Sacramento Metropolitan Cable Television Commission" label="Sacramento Metropolitan Cable Television Commission"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43551" wikidata="Q43088" url="?curid=43551" title="Ruby">
<text>Ruby is a pinkish-red-to-blood-red-colored gemstone, a variety of the mineral corundum (aluminium oxide). Ruby is one of the most popular traditional jewelry gems and is very durable. Other varieties of gem-quality corundum are called sapphires. Ruby is one of the traditional cardinal gems, alongside amethyst, sapphire, emerald, and diamond. The word &quot;ruby&quot; comes from &quot;ruber&quot;, Latin for red. The color of a ruby is due to the presence of chromium.

Some gemstones that are popularly or historically called rubies, such as the Black Prince&#x27;s Ruby in the British Imperial State Crown, are actually spinels. These were once known as &quot;Balas rubies&quot;.

The quality of a ruby is determined by its color, cut, and clarity, which, along with carat weight, affect its value. The brightest and most valuable shade of red, called blood-red or pigeon blood, commands a large premium over other rubies of similar quality. After color follows clarity: similarly to diamonds, a clear stone will command a premium, but a ruby without any needle-like rutile inclusions may indicate that the stone has been treated. Ruby is the traditional birthstone for July and is usually pinker than garnet, although some rhodolite garnets have a similar pinkish hue to most rubies. The world&#x27;s most valuable ruby to be sold at auction is the Estrela de Fura, which sold for US$34.8 million.

==Physical properties==

Rubies have a hardness of 9.0 on the Mohs scale of mineral hardness. Among the natural gems, only moissanite and diamond are harder, with diamond having a Mohs hardness of 10.0 and moissanite falling somewhere in between corundum (ruby) and diamond in hardness. Sapphire, ruby, and pure corundum are α-alumina, the most stable form of AlO, in which 3 electrons leave each aluminium ion to join the regular octahedral group of six nearby O ions; in pure corundum this leaves all of the aluminium ions with a very stable configuration of no unpaired electrons or unfilled energy levels, and the crystal is perfectly colorless, and transparent except for flaws.

When a chromium atom replaces an occasional aluminium atom, it too loses 3 electrons to become a chromium ion to maintain the charge balance of the AlO crystal. However, the Cr ions are larger and have electron orbitals in different directions than aluminium. The octahedral arrangement of the O ions is distorted, and the energy levels of the different orbitals of those Cr ions are slightly altered because of the directions to the O ions. Those energy differences correspond to absorption in the ultraviolet, violet, and yellow-green regions of the spectrum.

If one percent of the aluminium ions are replaced by chromium in ruby, the yellow-green absorption results in a red color for the gem. Additionally, absorption at any of the above wavelengths stimulates fluorescent emission of 694-nanometer-wavelength red light, which adds to its red color and perceived luster. The chromium concentration in artificial rubies can be adjusted (in the crystal growth process) to be ten-to-twenty times less than in the natural gemstones. Theodore Maiman says that &quot;because of the low chromium level in these crystals they display a lighter red color than gemstone ruby and are referred to as pink ruby.&quot;

After absorbing short-wavelength light, there is a short interval of time when the crystal lattice of ruby is in an excited state before fluorescence occurs. If 694-nanometer photons pass through the crystal during that time, they can stimulate more fluorescent photons to be emitted in-phase with them, thus strengthening the intensity of that red light. By arranging mirrors or other means to pass emitted light repeatedly through the crystal, a ruby laser in this way produces a very high intensity of coherent red light.

All natural rubies have imperfections in them, including color impurities and inclusions of rutile needles known as &quot;silk&quot;. Gemologists use these needle inclusions found in natural rubies to distinguish them from synthetics, simulants, or substitutes. Usually, the rough stone is heated before cutting. These days, almost all rubies are treated in some form, with heat treatment being the most common practice. Untreated rubies of high quality command a large premium.

Some rubies show a three-point or six-point asterism or &quot;star&quot;. These rubies are cut into cabochons to display the effect properly. Asterisms are best visible with a single-light source and move across the stone as the light moves or the stone is rotated. Such effects occur when light is reflected off the &quot;silk&quot; (the structurally oriented rutile needle inclusions) in a certain way. This is one example where inclusions increase the value of a gemstone. Furthermore, rubies can show color changes—though this occurs very rarely—as well as chatoyancy or the &quot;cat&#x27;s eye&quot; effect.

===Versus pink sapphire===
Generally, gemstone-quality corundum in all shades of red, including pink, are called rubies. However, in the United States, a minimum color saturation must be met to be called a ruby; otherwise, the stone will be called a pink sapphire. Drawing a distinction between rubies and pink sapphires is relatively new, having arisen sometime in the 20th century. Often, the distinction between ruby and pink sapphire is not clear and can be debated. As a result of the difficulty and subjectiveness of such distinctions, trade organizations such as the International Colored Gemstone Association (ICGA) have adopted the broader definition for ruby which encompasses its lighter shades, including pink.

==Occurrence and mining==
Historically, rubies have been mined in Thailand, in the Pailin and Samlout District of Cambodia, as well as in Afghanistan, Australia, Brazil, Colombia, India, Namibia, Japan, and Scotland. After the Second World War, ruby deposits were found in Madagascar, Mozambique, Nepal, Pakistan, Tajikistan, Tanzania, and Vietnam.

The Republic of North Macedonia is the only country in mainland Europe to have naturally occurring rubies. They can mainly be found around the city of Prilep. Macedonian rubies have a unique raspberry color.

A few rubies have been found in the U.S. states of Montana, North Carolina, South Carolina and Wyoming.

Spinel, another red gemstone, is sometimes found along with rubies in the same gem gravel or marble. Red spinels may be mistaken for rubies by those lacking experience with gems. However, the finest red spinels, now heavily sought, can have values approaching all but the finest examples of ruby.
The Mogok Valley in Upper Myanmar (Burma) was for centuries the world&#x27;s main source for rubies. That region has produced some exceptional rubies; however, in recent years few good rubies have been found. In central Myanmar, the area of Mong Hsu began producing rubies during the 1990s and rapidly became the world&#x27;s main ruby mining area. The most recently found ruby deposit in Myanmar is in Namya (Namyazeik) located in the northern state of Kachin.

In Pakistani Kashmir there are vast proven reserves of millions of rubies, worth up to half a billion dollars. However, as of 2017 there was only one mine (at Chitta Katha) due to lack of investment. In Afghanistan, rubies are mined at Jegdalek. In 2017 the Aappaluttoq mine in Greenland began running.

The rubies in Greenland are said to be among the oldest in the world at approximately 3 billion years old. The Aappaluttoq mine in Greenland is located 160 kilometers south of Nuuk, the capital of Greenland. The rubies are traceable from mine to market.

The Montepuez ruby mine in northeastern Mozambique is situated on one of the most significant ruby deposits in the world, although, rubies were only discovered here for the first time in 2009. In less than a decade, Mozambique has become the world&#x27;s most productive source for gem-quality ruby.

==Factors affecting value==

Rubies, as with other gemstones, are graded using criteria known as the four Cs, namely color, cut, clarity and carat weight. Rubies are also evaluated on the basis of their geographic origin.

=== Color ===
In the evaluation of colored gemstones, color is the most important factor. Color divides into three components: &quot;hue&quot;, &quot;saturation&quot; and &quot;tone&quot;. Hue refers to color as we normally use the term. Transparent gemstones occur in the &quot;pure spectral hues&quot; of red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet. In nature, there are rarely pure hues, so when speaking of the hue of a gemstone, we speak of primary and secondary and sometimes tertiary hues. Ruby is defined to be red. All other hues of the gem species corundum are called sapphire. Ruby may exhibit a range of secondary hues, including orange, purple, violet, and pink.

=== Clarity ===
Because rubies host many inclusions, their clarity is evaluated by the inclusions’ size, number, location, and visibility. Rubies with the highest clarity grades are known as “eye-clean,” because their inclusions are the least visible to the naked human eye. Rubies may also have thin, intersecting inclusions called silk. Silk can scatter light, brightening the gem&#x27;s appearance, and the presence of silk can also show whether a ruby has been previously heat treated, since intense heat will degrade a ruby&#x27;s silk.

==Treatments and enhancements==

Improving the quality of gemstones by treating them is common practice. Some treatments are used in almost all cases and are therefore considered acceptable. During the late 1990s, a large supply of low-cost materials caused a sudden surge in supply of heat-treated rubies, leading to a downward pressure on ruby prices.

Improvements used include color alteration, improving transparency by dissolving rutile inclusions, healing of fractures (cracks) or even completely filling them.

The most common treatment is the application of heat. Most rubies at the lower end of the market are heat treated to improve color, remove &quot;purple tinge&quot;, blue patches, and silk. These heat treatments typically occur around temperatures of 1800 °C (3300 °F). Some rubies undergo a process of low tube heat, when the stone is heated over charcoal of a temperature of about 1300 °C (2400 °F) for 20 to 30 minutes. The silk is partially broken, and the color is improved.

Another treatment, which has become more frequent in recent years, is lead glass filling. Filling the fractures inside the ruby with lead glass (or a similar material) dramatically improves the transparency of the stone, making previously unsuitable rubies fit for applications in jewelry. The process is done in four steps:

# The rough stones are pre-polished to eradicate all surface impurities that may affect the process
# The rough is cleaned with hydrogen fluoride
# The first heating process during which no fillers are added. The heating process eradicates impurities inside the fractures. Although this can be done at temperatures up to 1400 °C (2500 °F) it most likely occurs at a temperature of around 900 °C (1600 °F) since the rutile silk is still intact.
# The second heating process in an electrical oven with different chemical additives. Different solutions and mixes have shown to be successful; however, mostly lead-containing glass-powder is used at present. The ruby is dipped into oils, then covered with powder, embedded on a tile and placed in the oven where it is heated at around 900 °C (1600 °F) for one hour in an oxidizing atmosphere. The orange colored powder transforms upon heating into a transparent to yellow-colored paste, which fills all fractures. After cooling the color of the paste is fully transparent and dramatically improves the overall transparency of the ruby.

If a color needs to be added, the glass powder can be &quot;enhanced&quot; with copper or other metal oxides as well as elements such as sodium, calcium, potassium etc.

The second heating process can be repeated three to four times, even applying different mixtures. When jewelry containing rubies is heated (for repairs) it should not be coated with boracic acid or any other substance, as this can etch the surface; it does not have to be &quot;protected&quot; like a diamond.

The treatment can be identified by noting bubbles in cavities and fractures using a 10× loupe.

==Synthesis and imitation==

In 1837, Gaudin made the first synthetic rubies by fusing potash alum at a high temperature with a little chromium as a pigment. In 1847, Ebelmen made white sapphire by fusing alumina in boric acid. In 1877, Edmond Frémy and industrial glass-maker Charles Feil made crystal corundum from which small stones could be cut. In 1887, Fremy and Auguste Verneuil manufactured artificial ruby by fusing BaF and AlO with a little chromium at red heat.

In 1903, Verneuil announced he could produce synthetic rubies on a commercial scale using this flame fusion process, later also known as the Verneuil process. By 1910, Verneuil&#x27;s laboratory had expanded into a 30 furnace production facility, with annual gemstone production having reached in 1907.

Other processes in which synthetic rubies can be produced are through Czochralski&#x27;s pulling process, flux process, and the hydrothermal process. Most synthetic rubies originate from flame fusion, due to the low costs involved. Synthetic rubies may have no imperfections visible to the naked eye but magnification may reveal curved striae and gas bubbles. The fewer the number and the less obvious the imperfections, the more valuable the ruby is; unless there are no imperfections (i.e., a perfect ruby), in which case it will be suspected of being artificial. Dopants are added to some manufactured rubies so they can be identified as synthetic, but most need gemological testing to determine their origin.

Synthetic rubies have technological uses as well as gemological ones. Rods of synthetic ruby are used to make ruby lasers and masers. The first working laser was made by Theodore H. Maiman in 1960. Maiman used a solid-state light-pumped synthetic ruby to produce red laser light at a wavelength of 694 nanometers (nm). Ruby lasers are still in use.

Rubies are also used in applications where high hardness is required such as at wear-exposed locations in mechanical clockworks, or as scanning probe tips in a coordinate measuring machine.

Imitation rubies are also marketed. Red spinels, red garnets, and colored glass have been falsely claimed to be rubies. Imitations go back to Roman times and already in the 17th century techniques were developed to color foil red—by burning scarlet wool in the bottom part of the furnace—which was then placed under the imitation stone. Trade terms such as balas ruby for red spinel and rubellite for red tourmaline can mislead unsuspecting buyers. Such terms are therefore discouraged from use by many gemological associations such as the Laboratory Manual Harmonisation Committee (LMHC).

==Records and famous examples==

* The Smithsonian&#x27;s National Museum of Natural History in Washington, D.C. has some of the world&#x27;s largest and finest ruby gemstones. The Burmese ruby, set in a platinum ring with diamonds, was donated by businessman and philanthropist Peter Buck in memory of his late wife Carmen Lúcia. This gemstone displays a richly saturated red color combined with an exceptional transparency. The finely proportioned cut provides vivid red reflections. The stone was mined from the Mogok region of Burma (now Myanmar) in the 1930s.
* In 2007, the London jeweler Garrard &amp; Co featured a heart-shaped 40.63-carat ruby on their website.
* On 13/14 December 2011, Elizabeth Taylor&#x27;s complete jewelry collection was auctioned by Christie&#x27;s. Several ruby-set pieces were included in the sale, notably a ring set with an 8.24 ct gem that broke the &#x27;price-per-carat&#x27; record for rubies (US$512,925 per carat – i.e., over US$4.2 million in total), and a necklace that sold for over US$3.7 million.
* The Liberty Bell Ruby is the largest mined ruby in the world. It was stolen in a heist in 2011.
* The Sunrise Ruby was the world&#x27;s most expensive ruby, most expensive colored gemstone, and most expensive gemstone other than a diamond when it sold at auction in Switzerland to an anonymous buyer for US$30 million In May 2015.
* A synthetic ruby crystal became the gain medium in the world&#x27;s first optical laser, conceived, designed and constructed by Theodore H. &quot;Ted&quot; Maiman, on 16 May 1960 at Hughes Research Laboratories.
:The concept of electromagnetic radiation amplification through the mechanism of stimulated emission had already been successfully demonstrated in the laboratory by way of the maser, using other materials such as ammonia and, later, ruby, but the ruby laser was the first device to work at optical (694.3 nm) wavelengths. Maiman&#x27;s prototype laser is still in working order.

==Historical and cultural references==
* The Old Testament of the Bible mentions ruby many times in the Book of Exodus, and many times in the Book of Proverbs, as well as various other times. It is not certain that the Biblical words mean &#x27;ruby&#x27; as distinct from other jewels.
* An early recorded transport and trading of rubies arises in the literature on the North Silk Road of China, wherein about 200 BC rubies were carried along this ancient trackway moving westward from China.
* Rubies have always been held in high esteem in Asian countries. They were used to ornament armor, scabbards, and harnesses of noblemen in India and China. Rubies were laid beneath the foundation of buildings to secure good fortune to the structure.
* A traditional Hindu astrological belief holds rubies as the &quot;gemstone of the Sun and also the heavenly deity Surya, the leader of the nine heavenly bodies (Navagraha).&quot; The belief is that worshiping and wearing rubies causes the Sun to be favorable to the wearer.
* In the Marvel comic books, the Godstone is a ruby that the son of J. Jonah Jameson, John Jameson found on the Moon that becomes activated by moonlight, grafts itself to his chest which turns him into the Man-Wolf.

==See also==

*Anyolite
*List of individual gemstones
*List of minerals
*Shelby Gem Factory
*Verneuil process
*Emerald

==References==
==External links==

* International Colored Stone Association&#x27;s ruby overview page
* Webmineral crystallographic and mineral info</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43088" start="0" end="4" title="Ruby" label="Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q429220" start="10" end="14" title="pink" label="pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="43" end="51" title="gemstone" label="gemstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="70" end="77" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q131777" start="78" end="86" title="corundum" label="corundum"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="88" end="103" title="aluminium oxide" label="aluminium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q127583" start="235" end="243" title="sapphire" label="sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038632" start="277" end="289" title="cardinal gem" label="cardinal gem"/>
<link wikidata="Q79058" start="302" end="310" title="amethyst" label="amethyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q127583" start="312" end="320" title="sapphire" label="sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43513" start="322" end="329" title="emerald" label="emerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="335" end="342" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="400" end="405" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="461" end="469" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106213" start="549" end="573" title="Black Prince&amp;#x27;s Ruby" label="Black Prince&amp;#x27;s Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358618" start="589" end="609" title="Imperial State Crown" label="Imperial State Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q191310" start="624" end="630" title="spinel" label="spinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q261247" start="771" end="776" title="Carat (mass)" label="carat"/>
<link wikidata="Q320603" start="1071" end="1077" title="rutile" label="rutile"/>
<link wikidata="Q728944" start="1078" end="1088" title="Inclusion (mineral)" label="inclusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144700" start="1159" end="1169" title="birthstone" label="birthstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q105368" start="1206" end="1212" title="garnet" label="garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031845" start="1228" end="1237" title="rhodolite" label="rhodolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q127377788" start="1354" end="1369" title="Estrela de Fura" label="Estrela de Fura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236003" start="1443" end="1451" title="hardness" label="hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q41472" start="1466" end="1496" title="Mohs scale of mineral hardness" label="Mohs scale of mineral hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q418215" start="1527" end="1537" title="moissanite" label="moissanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="1542" end="1549" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="1811" end="1814" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2291" end="2308" title="Electron configuration#Ionization of the transition metals" label="electron orbitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="2855" end="2866" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998326" start="2957" end="2963" title="Lustre (mineralogy)" label="luster"/>
<link wikidata="Q315399" start="3123" end="3138" title="Theodore Maiman" label="Theodore Maiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q933263" start="3748" end="3758" title="ruby laser" label="ruby laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q193147" start="3805" end="3813" title="Coherence (physics)" label="coherent"/>
<link wikidata="Q320603" start="3918" end="3924" title="rutile" label="rutile"/>
<link wikidata="Q747746" start="4350" end="4358" title="asterism (gemmology)" label="asterism"/>
<link wikidata="Q615008" start="4406" end="4415" title="cabochons" label="cabochons"/>
<link wikidata="Q320603" start="4667" end="4673" title="rutile" label="rutile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068275" start="4867" end="4877" title="chatoyancy" label="chatoyancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127583" start="5171" end="5184" title="sapphire" label="pink sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q506646" start="5728" end="5734" title="Pailin" label="Pailin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385818" start="5739" end="5755" title="Samlout District" label="Samlout District"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="5759" end="5767" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="5783" end="5794" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="5796" end="5805" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="5807" end="5813" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="5815" end="5823" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="5825" end="5830" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="5832" end="5839" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="5841" end="5846" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5872" end="5888" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="5918" end="5928" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="5930" end="5940" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="5959" end="5969" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="5971" end="5979" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="5985" end="5992" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="5999" end="6026" title="Republic of North Macedonia" label="Republic of North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157032" start="6146" end="6152" title="Prilep" label="Prilep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="6255" end="6262" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="6264" end="6278" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="6280" end="6294" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="6299" end="6306" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q191310" start="6309" end="6315" title="Spinel" label="Spinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712129" start="6610" end="6615" title="Mogok" label="Mogok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936648" start="6626" end="6639" title="Upper Myanmar" label="Upper Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q140646" start="7060" end="7066" title="Kachin State" label="Kachin"/>
<link wikidata="Q200130" start="7072" end="7089" title="Azad Kashmir" label="Pakistani Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="7272" end="7283" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q392551" start="10438" end="10448" title="lead glass" label="lead glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468" start="10822" end="10839" title="hydrogen fluoride" label="hydrogen fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q26840944" start="12441" end="12452" title="potash alum" label="potash alum"/>
<link wikidata="Q907419" start="12521" end="12528" title="Jacques-Joseph Ebelmen" label="Ebelmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="12559" end="12566" title="alumina" label="alumina"/>
<link wikidata="Q901574" start="12591" end="12603" title="Edmond Frémy" label="Edmond Frémy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131777" start="12657" end="12665" title="corundum" label="corundum"/>
<link wikidata="Q279487" start="12723" end="12739" title="Auguste Verneuil" label="Auguste Verneuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="12817" end="12825" title="Incandescence" label="red heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q898662" start="12969" end="12985" title="Verneuil process" label="Verneuil process"/>
<link wikidata="Q594666" start="13202" end="13236" title="Czochralski process" label="Czochralski&amp;#x27;s pulling process"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861356" start="13260" end="13280" title="hydrothermal synthesis" label="hydrothermal process"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623560" start="13468" end="13474" title="Striation (geology)" label="striae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15119237" start="13698" end="13704" title="Dopant" label="Dopant"/>
<link wikidata="Q243330" start="13798" end="13809" title="gemology" label="gemological"/>
<link wikidata="Q933263" start="13956" end="13966" title="ruby laser" label="ruby laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q487875" start="13972" end="13977" title="maser" label="maser"/>
<link wikidata="Q315399" start="14016" end="14034" title="Theodore Maiman" label="Theodore H. Maiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426871" start="14356" end="14384" title="coordinate measuring machine" label="coordinate measuring machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191310" start="14427" end="14433" title="spinel" label="spinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q105368" start="14440" end="14446" title="garnet" label="garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q191310" start="14744" end="14754" title="balas ruby" label="balas ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q385783" start="14774" end="14783" title="rubellite" label="rubellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q179911" start="14792" end="14802" title="tourmaline" label="tourmaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q148554" start="15036" end="15070" title="National Museum of Natural History" label="National Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173039" start="15257" end="15267" title="Peter Buck (restaurateur)" label="Peter Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712129" start="15493" end="15498" title="Mogok" label="Mogok"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="15509" end="15514" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="15520" end="15527" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494435" start="15573" end="15589" title="Garrard &amp;amp; Co" label="Garrard &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="15675" end="15691" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q503176" start="15744" end="15759" title="Christie&amp;#x27;s" label="Christie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="15913" end="15916" title="United states dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979756" start="16029" end="16046" title="Liberty Bell Ruby" label="Liberty Bell Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q21589328" start="16127" end="16139" title="Sunrise Ruby" label="Sunrise Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q315399" start="16486" end="16520" title="Theodore Maiman" label="Theodore H. &amp;quot;Ted&amp;quot; Maiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q853656" start="16651" end="16670" title="stimulated emission" label="stimulated emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q487875" start="16746" end="16751" title="maser" label="maser"/>
<link wikidata="Q933263" start="16817" end="16827" title="ruby laser" label="ruby laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="16995" end="17008" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="17016" end="17021" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q9190" start="17054" end="17068" title="Book of Exodus" label="Book of Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579" start="17092" end="17108" title="Book of Proverbs" label="Book of Proverbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446144" start="17321" end="17336" title="North Silk Road" label="North Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="17365" end="17367" title="Before Christ" label="BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q445741" start="17407" end="17415" title="trackway" label="trackway"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="17711" end="17716" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="17779" end="17782" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q204418" start="17811" end="17816" title="Surya" label="Surya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078632" start="17858" end="17867" title="Navagraha" label="Navagraha"/>
<link wikidata="Q174221" start="18203" end="18211" title="Anyolite" label="Anyolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417189" start="18213" end="18241" title="List of individual gemstones" label="List of individual gemstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q243479" start="18243" end="18259" title="List of minerals" label="List of minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q22059659" start="18261" end="18279" title="Shelby Gem Factory" label="Shelby Gem Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q898662" start="18281" end="18297" title="Verneuil process" label="Verneuil process"/>
<link wikidata="Q43513" start="18299" end="18306" title="Emerald" label="Emerald"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43552" wikidata="Q1064154" url="?curid=43552" title="Ruby character">
<text>Ruby characters or rubi characters () are small, annotative glosses that are usually placed above or to the right of logographic characters of languages in the East Asian cultural sphere, such as Chinese &quot;hanzi&quot;, Japanese &quot;kanji&quot;, and Korean &quot;hanja&quot;, to show the logographs&#x27; pronunciation; these were formerly also used for Vietnamese &quot;chữ Hán&quot; and &quot;chữ Nôm&quot;, and may still occasionally be seen in that context when reading archaic texts. Typically called just ruby or rubi, such annotations are most commonly used as pronunciation guides for characters that are likely to be unfamiliar to the reader.

== Examples ==
Here is an example of Japanese ruby characters (called &quot;furigana&quot;) for Tokyo (&quot;&quot;):

Most are written with the &quot;hiragana&quot; syllabary, but &quot;katakana&quot; and &quot;romaji&quot; are also occasionally used. Alternatively, sometimes foreign words (usually English) are printed with furigana to provide the meaning, and vice versa. Textbooks sometimes render on-readings with katakana and kun-readings with hiragana.

Here is an example of ruby characters for Beijing (&quot;&quot;) in Zhuyin (a.k.a. Bopomofo), Xiao&#x27;erjing, and Pinyin.

In Taiwan, the main syllabary used for Chinese ruby characters is &quot;Zhuyin fuhao&quot; (also known as &quot;Bopomofo&quot;); in mainland China &quot;pinyin&quot; is mainly used. Typically, unlike the example shown above, zhuyin is used with a vertical traditional writing and zhuyin is written on the right side of the characters. In mainland China, horizontal script is used and ruby characters (pinyin) are written above the Chinese characters.

Xiao&#x27;erjing is a Perso-Arabic alphabet, adopted by Hui Muslims and at times utilized as ruby characters in various manuscripts. This system does have its shortcomings, mainly that it has no way of indicating tones. With the spread of pinyin, the usage of this system has been in decline in the past decades. Most manuscripts that do mark the characters with Xiao&#x27;erjing, do so from right-to-left, which is quite unique, compared to other systems. This is because usually such manuscripts include Arabic texts such as the Quran, and the Chinese writing is the explanation or translation.

Books with phonetic guides (especially pinyin) are popular with children and foreigners learning Chinese.

Here is an example of the Korean ruby characters for Korea (&quot;):

Romaja is normally used in foreign textbooks until Hangul is introduced. Ruby characters can be quite common on signs in certain parts of South Korea.

Here is an example of the Vietnamese ruby characters () for Hanoi (&quot;):


Chinese characters and its derivations of it (&quot;chữ Hán&quot; and &quot;chữ Nôm&quot;) which was used by the Vietnamese have fallen out of use in favour of Latin-based script &quot;chữ Quốc ngữ&quot; during the French colonial period when it was made a part of compulsory education (1920s onwards). Currently still used by Gin people.

== Uses ==
Ruby may be used for different reasons:

* because the character is rare and the pronunciation unknown to many—personal name characters often fall into this category;
* because the character has more than one pronunciation, and the context is insufficient to determine which to use;
* because the intended readers of the text are still learning the language and are not expected to always know the pronunciation or meaning of a term;
* because the author is using a nonstandard pronunciation for a character or a term

Also, ruby may be used to show the meaning, rather than pronunciation, of a possibly-unfamiliar (usually foreign) or slang word. This is generally used with spoken dialogue and applies only to Japanese publications. The most common form of ruby is called &quot;furigana&quot; or &quot;yomigana&quot; and is found in Japanese instructional books, newspapers, comics and books for children.

In Japanese, certain characters, such as the sokuon () (little &quot;tsu&quot;, ) that indicates a pause before the consonant it precedes, are normally written at about half the size of normal characters. When written as ruby, such characters are usually the same size as other ruby characters. Advancements in technology now allow certain characters to render accurately.

In Chinese, the practice of providing phonetic cues via ruby is rare, but does occur systematically in grade-school level text books or dictionaries. The Chinese have no special name for this practice, as it is not as widespread as in Japan. In Taiwan, it is known as &quot;zhuyin&quot;, from the name of the phonetic system employed for this purpose there. It is virtually always used vertically, because publications are normally in a vertical format, and zhuyin is not as easy to read when presented horizontally. Where zhuyin is not used, other Chinese phonetic systems like pinyin are employed.

In academic settings, Vietnamese text written in or may be glossed with ruby for modern readers.

Sometimes interlinear glosses are visually similar to ruby, appearing above or below the main text in smaller type. However, this is a distinct practice used for helping students of a foreign language by giving glosses for the words in a text, as opposed to the pronunciation of lesser-known characters.

Ruby annotation can also be used in handwriting.

== History ==
In British typography, &quot;ruby&quot; was originally the name for type with a height of 5.5 points, which printers used for interlinear annotations in printed documents. In Japanese, rather than referring to a font size, the word became the name for typeset &quot;furigana&quot;. When transliterated back into English, some texts rendered the word as &quot;rubi&quot; (a typical romanisation of the Japanese word , instead of (&quot;rubī&quot;), the expected transliteration of &quot;ruby&quot;). However, the spelling &quot;ruby&quot; has become more common since the W3C published a recommendation for &quot;ruby markup&quot;. In the US, the font size had been called &quot;agate&quot;, a term in use since 1831 according to the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot;.

== HTML markup ==
In 2001, the W3C published the Ruby Annotation specification for supplementing XHTML with ruby markup. Ruby markup is incorporated into the XHTML 1.1 specification and in HTML5.

For browsers that do not support Ruby natively, Ruby support is most easily added by using CSS rules that are available on the web.

Ruby markup is structured such that a fallback rendering, consisting of the ruby characters in parentheses immediately after the main text, appears if the browser does not support ruby.

The W3C is also working on a specific ruby module for CSS level 2, which additionally allows the grouping of ruby and automatic omission of furigana matching their annotated part.

=== Markup examples ===
Below are a few examples of ruby markup. The markup is shown first, and the rendered markup is shown next, followed by the unmarked version. Web browsers either render it with the correct size and positioning as shown in the table-based examples above, or use the fallback rendering with the ruby characters in parentheses:

Note that Chinese ruby text would normally be displayed in vertical columns to the right of each character. This approach is not typically supported in browsers at present.

This is a table-based example of vertical columns:
=== Complex ruby markup ===
Complex ruby markup makes it possible to associate more than one ruby text with a base text, or parts of ruby text with parts of base text.

== Unicode ==

Unicode and its companion standard, the Universal Character Set, support ruby via these &quot;interlinear annotation&quot; characters:
* Code point codice_1 (hex)—Interlinear annotation anchor—marks start of annotated text
* Code point codice_2 (hex)—Interlinear annotation separator—marks start of annotating character(s)
* Code point codice_3 (hex)—Interlinear annotation terminator—marks end of annotated text

Few applications implement these characters. Unicode Technical Report #20 clarifies that these characters are not intended to be exposed to users of markup languages and software applications. It suggests that ruby markup be used instead, where appropriate.

The interlinear annotation characters are part of the &quot;Specials&quot; Unicode block:
== ANSI ==
ISO/IEC 6429 (also known as ECMA-48) which defines the ANSI escape codes also provided a mechanism for ruby text for use by text terminals, although few terminals and terminal emulators implement it. The PARALLEL TEXTS (PTX) escape code accepted six parameter values giving the following escape sequences for marking ruby text:
* codice_4 (or simply codice_5 since 0 is used as the default value for this control) – end of parallel texts
* codice_6 – beginning of a string of principal parallel text
* codice_7 – beginning of a string of supplementary parallel text
* codice_8 – beginning of a string of supplementary Japanese phonetic annotation
* codice_9 – beginning of a string of supplementary Chinese phonetic annotation
* codice_10 – end of a string of supplementary phonetic annotations

== See also ==
*, and Furigana (Japanese)
*Emphasis points, marks use for emphasis, which can be implemented similarly to ruby
*Harakat – vocalised Arabic script diacritical marks that provide phonetic assistance for reading texts in Arabic.
*Niqqud – vocalised Hebrew script vowel pointings that provide phonetic assistance for reading Hebrew. (The Hebrew abjad represents only the consonants.)

== References ==
== Further reading ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1064154" start="0" end="15" title="Ruby character" label="Ruby characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064154" start="19" end="34" title="Ruby character" label="rubi characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132324" start="60" end="67" title="gloss (annotation)" label="glosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q138659" start="117" end="128" title="logogram" label="logographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q716566" start="160" end="186" title="East Asian cultural sphere" label="East Asian cultural sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q33857" start="196" end="203" title="Sinitic languages" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="204" end="221" title="Chinese characters" label="&amp;quot;hanzi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q33612" start="223" end="231" title="Japonic languages" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="238" end="243" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="255" end="261" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q485619" start="268" end="273" title="hanja" label="hanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="359" end="369" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378119" start="376" end="383" title="chữ Hán" label="chữ Hán"/>
<link wikidata="Q875344" start="400" end="407" title="chữ Nôm" label="chữ Nôm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064154" start="516" end="520" title="Ruby character" label="ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064154" start="524" end="528" title="Ruby character" label="rubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q504694" start="734" end="742" title="furigana" label="furigana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="754" end="759" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q82946" start="845" end="853" title="katakana" label="katakana"/>
<link wikidata="Q192509" start="870" end="876" title="romaji" label="romaji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1061" end="1072" title="Kanji#On&amp;#x27;yomi (Sino-Japanese reading)" label="on-readings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1091" end="1103" title="Kanji#Kun&amp;#x27;yomi (native reading)" label="kun-readings"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="1162" end="1169" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q849187" start="1214" end="1230" title="Xiao&amp;#x27;erjing" label="Xiao&amp;#x27;erjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q198269" start="1317" end="1329" title="Bopomofo" label="Zhuyin fuhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="1398" end="1404" title="pinyin" label="pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q849187" start="1697" end="1713" title="Xiao&amp;#x27;erjing" label="Xiao&amp;#x27;erjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="1753" end="1764" title="Hui people" label="Hui Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="2455" end="2460" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="2684" end="2689" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="2815" end="2825" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="2862" end="2867" title="Latin script" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q622712" start="2887" end="2899" title="Vietnamese alphabet" label="chữ Quốc ngữ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059102" start="3029" end="3039" title="Gin people" label="Gin people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199708" start="4007" end="4013" title="sokuon" label="sokuon"/>
<link wikidata="Q198269" start="4610" end="4616" title="Bopomofo" label="zhuyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="4915" end="4921" title="pinyin" label="pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q632346" start="5045" end="5064" title="interlinear glosses" label="interlinear glosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691480" start="5433" end="5437" title="Ruby (typography)" label="ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q156389" start="5498" end="5504" title="point (typography)" label="points"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="5785" end="5797" title="romanisation" label="romanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="5975" end="5978" title="W3C" label="W3C"/>
<link wikidata="Q37045" start="6021" end="6027" title="markup language" label="markup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691480" start="6082" end="6087" title="Agate (typography)" label="agate"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="6143" end="6168" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q166074" start="6274" end="6279" title="XHTML" label="XHTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="6465" end="6468" title="CSS" label="CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="6748" end="6751" title="Cascading Style Sheets" label="CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="7633" end="7640" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q777955" start="7673" end="7696" title="Universal Character Set" label="Universal Character Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="7791" end="7794" title="hexadecimal" label="hex"/>
<link wikidata="Q760000" start="8407" end="8419" title="ISO/IEC 6429" label="ISO/IEC 6429"/>
<link wikidata="Q837335" start="8435" end="8439" title="Ecma International" label="ECMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q760000" start="8462" end="8478" title="ANSI escape code" label="ANSI escape code"/>
<link wikidata="Q504694" start="9225" end="9233" title="Furigana" label="Furigana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015738" start="9246" end="9260" title="Emphasis point" label="Emphasis point"/>
<link wikidata="Q920915" start="9277" end="9285" title="Emphasis (typography)" label="emphasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q775724" start="9331" end="9338" title="Harakat" label="Harakat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828555" start="9351" end="9364" title="Arabic script" label="Arabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="9437" end="9443" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777790" start="9446" end="9452" title="Niqqud" label="Niqqud"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="9465" end="9478" title="Hebrew script" label="Hebrew script"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="9540" end="9546" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q185087" start="9560" end="9565" title="abjad" label="abjad"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43564" wikidata="Q188473" url="?curid=43564" title="Action film">
<text>The action film is a film genre that predominantly features chase sequences, fights, shootouts, explosions, and stunt work. The specifics of what constitutes an action film has been in scholarly debate since the 1980s. While some scholars such as David Bordwell suggested they were films that favor spectacle to storytelling, others such as Geoff King stated they allow the scenes of spectacle to be attuned to storytelling. Action films are often hybrid with other genres, mixing into various forms such as comedies, science fiction films, and horror films.

While the term &quot;action film&quot; or &quot;action adventure film&quot; has been used as early as the 1910s, the contemporary definition usually refers to a film that came with the arrival of New Hollywood and the rise of anti-heroes appearing in American films of the late 1960s and 1970s drawing from war films, crime films and Westerns. These genres were followed by what is referred to as the &quot;classical period&quot; in the 1980s. This was followed by the post-classical era where American action films were influenced by Hong Kong action cinema and the growing using of computer generated imagery in film. Following the September 11 attacks, a return to the early forms of the genre appeared in the wake of &quot;Kill Bill&quot; and &quot;The Expendables&quot; films.
Scott Higgins wrote in 2008 in &quot;Cinema Journal&quot; that action films are both one of the most popular and popularly derided of contemporary cinema genres, stating that &quot;in mainstream discourse, the genre is regularly lambasted for favoring spectacle over finely tuned narrative.&quot; Bordwell echoed this in his book, &quot;The Way Hollywood Tells It&quot;, writing that the reception to the genre as being &quot;the emblem of what Hollywood does worst.&quot;

==Characteristics==
In the &quot;Journal of Film and Video&quot;, Lennart Soberson stated that the action film genre has been a subject of scholarly debate since the 1980s. Soberson wrote that repeated traits of the genre include chase sequences, fights, shootouts, explosions, and stunt work while other scholars asserted there were more underlying traits that define the genre. David Bordwell in &quot;The Way Hollywood Tells It&quot; wrote that audiences are &quot;told that spectacle overrides narrative&quot; in action cinema while Wheeler Winston Dixon echoed that these films were typified by &quot;excessive spectacle&quot; as a &quot;desperate attempt to mask the lack of content.&quot; Geoff King argued that the spectacle can also be a vehicle for narrative, opposed to interfering with it. Soberson stated that Harvey O&#x27;Brien had &quot;perhaps the most convincing understanding of the genre&quot;, stating that the action film was &quot;best understood as a fusion of form and content. It represents the idea and ethic of action through a form in which action, agitation and movement are paramount.&quot;

O&#x27;Brien wrote further in his book &quot;Action Movies: The Cinema of Striking Back&quot; to suggest action films being unique and not just a series of action sequences, stating that that was the difference between &quot;Raiders of the Lost Ark&quot; (1981) and &quot;Die Hard&quot; (1988), that while both were mainstream Hollywood blockbusters with a hero asserting masculinity and overcoming obstacles to a personal and social solution, John McClane in &quot;Die Hard&quot; repeatedly firing his automatic pistol while swinging from a high rise was not congruent with the image of Indiana Jones in &quot;Raiders&quot; swinging his whip to fend off villains in the backstreets of Cairo. British author and academic Yvonne Tasker expanded on this topic, stating that action films have no clear and constant iconography or settings. In her book &quot;The Hollywood Action and Adventure Film&quot; (2015), she found that the most broadly consistent themes tend to be a characters quest from freedom from oppression such as a hero overcoming enemies or obstacles and physical conflicts or challenge, usually battling other humans or alien opponents.

By late 2010s studies of genre analysis, the term &quot;genre&quot; itself is often replaced or supplemented with the words &quot;mode&quot; and &quot;narrative form&quot; with all three terms often being used interchangeably. Johan Höglund and Agnieszka Soltysik Monnet said that the difference between these concepts are elusive, but stated that genre could be defined as belonging to specific historical and cultural moments while &quot;mode&quot; and &quot;form&quot; can refer to a larger pattern that operates across a wider historical and cultural field. In their book &quot;Action Cinema Since 2000&quot; (2024), Tasker, Lisa Purse, and Chris Holmlund stated that thinking of action as a mode is more helpful than thinking of it as a genre. The three authors suggested that action frames a certain manner of filmmaking and viewing exceed genre without eclipsing it stating that websites such as IMDb and Wikipedia rarely label films by a single genre and that streaming services such as Amazon Prime and Netflix similarly dilutes what is marketed and received as action.

==History==

In transnational cinema, there are two major trends in action films: Hollywood action films and their style being imitated around the globe and the other being Chinese-language martial arts films. The roots of action films extend into the beginning of film but it was only in the mid-20th century when action films developed into their own recognizable genre instead of being a collection of other types of films such as Westerns, swashbucklers or adventure films.
Films have been described &quot;action films&quot; or &quot;action-adventure film&quot; as early as the 1910s. Only by the 1980s was the term action as its own unique genre used routinely in terms of promotion and reviewing practices.

===Hong Kong action films===

The first Chinese-language martial arts films can be traced to Shanghai cinema of the late 1920s. These films were popular during the period, which comprised almost 60% of the total Chinese films. Man-Fung Yip stated that these film were &quot;rather tame&quot; by contemporary standards. He wrote that they lacked the kind of dazzling action choreography as expected today and had crude and rudimentary special effects. These films came under increasing attack by both government officials and cultural elites for their allegedly superstitious and anarchistic tendencies, leading them to be banned in 1932. It was not until the base of Chinese commercial filmmaking was relocated from Shanghai to Hong Kong in the late 1940s that martial arts cinema was revived. These films contained much of the characteristics of the previous era. During this period, over 100 films were based on the adventures of real life Cantonese folk hero Wong Fei-hung who first appeared in film in 1949. These films primarily on circuited within Hong Kong and Cantonese-speaking areas with Chinese diaspora. Yip continued that these Hong Kong films were still lagging behind in aesthetic and technical standards that films from the United States, Europe and Japan had during this period.

Yip described Japanese cinema as the most advanced in Asia at the time. This was showcased by the international breakthrough of Akira Kurosawa&#x27;s films like &quot;Rashomon&quot; (1950). The film genre known as the &quot;chanbara&quot; was at its height in Japan. The style was a sub-genre to the &quot;jidai-geki&quot;, or period drama with an emphasis on sword fighting and action. It had a similar level of popularity to that of the Western in the United States. The most internationally known films of this era were the films Kurosawa with &quot;Seven Samurai&quot; (1954), &quot;The Hidden Fortress&quot; (1958), and &quot;Yojimbo&quot; (1961). By at least the 1950s, Japanese films were looked upon as a model to be emulated by Hong Kong film production, and Hong Kong film companies began actively enlisting professionals from Japan, such as cinematographer Tadashi Nishimoto to contribute to color and widescreen cinematography. New literary sources also developed in martial arts films of this period, with the &quot;xinpai wuxia xiaoshuo&quot; (or &quot;new school martial arts fiction&quot;) coming into prominence with the success of Liang Yusheng&#x27;s &quot;Longhu Dou Jinghua&quot; (1954) and Jin Yong&#x27;s &quot;Shujian enchou lu&quot; (1956) which showed influence of the Shanghai martial arts films but also circulated from Hong Kong to Taiwan and Chinese communities overseas. This led to a growing demand in both local and regional markets in the early 1960s and saw a surge in production of Hong Kong martial arts films that went beyond the stories about Wong Fei-hung which were declining in popularity. These new martial arts films featured magical swordplay and higher production values and more sophisticated special effects than the previous films with Shaw Brothers a campaign of &quot;new school&quot; (&quot;xinpai&quot;) martial arts swordplay films such as Xu Zenghong&#x27;s &quot;Temple of the Red Lotus&quot; (1965) and King Hu&#x27;s &quot;Come Drink with Me&quot; (1966).

In the 1970s, the Hong Kong martial arts films began to grow under the format of &quot;yanggang&quot; (&quot;staunch masculinity&quot;) mostly through the films of Chang Cheh which were popular. This transition led to the kung fu film sub-genre at beginning of the decade and moved beyond the swordplay films with contemporary settings of late Qing or early Republican periods and had more hand-to-hand combat over supernatural swordplay and special effects. A new studio, Golden Harvest quickly became one of independent filmmakers to grant creative freedom and pay and attracted new directors and actors, including Bruce Lee. The popularity of kung fu films and Bruce Lee led to attract a global audience of these films in the United States and Europe, but was cut short on Lee&#x27;s death in 1973 leading the phases popularity to decline. Following a period of stagnation, Chang Cheh and Lau Kar-leung revitalized the genre with shaolin kung fu films and Chor Yuen&#x27;s series of darker swordplay films based on the novels of Gu Long. Kung Fu comedies appeared featuring Jackie Chan as martial arts films flourished into the 1980s. Other films again modernized the form with gangster films of John Woo (&quot;A Better Tomorrow&quot; (1986), &quot;The Killer&quot; (1989)) and the Wong Fei Hung saga returning in Tsui Hark&#x27;s &quot;Once Upon a Time in China&quot; featuring Jet Li which again revitalized the swordplay styled films. By the turn of the century Hollywood action films would look towards Hong Kong cinema and bringing some of their major actors and directors over to apply their style to their films, such as Chan, Woo, Li, Michelle Yeoh and Yuen Woo-Ping. The release of Ang Lee&#x27;s &quot;Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon&quot; (2000) led to a Global release status of Chinese-language martial arts films, most notably Zhang Yimou&#x27;s &quot;Hero&quot; (2002) and &quot;House of Flying Daggers&quot; (2004), Stephen Chow&#x27;s &quot;Kung Fu Hustle&quot; (2004) and Chen Kaige&#x27;s &quot;The Promise&quot; (2005). Most Hong Kong action films in the first quarter of the 21st century, such as those in &quot;Cold War&quot; (2012), &quot;Cold War 2&quot; (2016) and &quot;The White Storm&quot; film series have their violence toned down, especially compared to the earlier work of directors like Woo and Johnnie To. Antong Chen, in his study on the Hong Kong action film, wrote that the influence of China and the amount of Chinese co-productions made with Hong Kong created a shift in these films, particularly following the release of &quot;Infernal Affairs&quot; (2002).

===Hollywood action films===
Harvey O&#x27;Brien wrote in 2012 that the contemporary action film emerged through other genres, primarily Westerns, crime and war films and can be separated into four forms: the formative, the classical, the post-classical and neoclassical phases. Yvonne Tasker reiterated this in her book on action and adventure films, saying that action films became a distinct genre during the New Hollywood period of the 1970s.
The formative films would be from the 1960s to the early 1980s where the Anti-hero appears in cinema, featuring characters who act and transcend the law and social conventions. This appears initially in films like &quot;Bullitt&quot; (1968) where a tough police officer protects society by upholding the law against systematic corruption. This extended into films which O&#x27;Brien described as &quot;knee-jerk responses&quot; to perceived threats with rogue cop and vigilante films such as &quot;Dirty Harry&quot; (1971) and &quot;Death Wish&quot; (1974) where the restoration of order is only possible by force and antisocial characters prepared to act when society does not. The vigilantism reappears in other films that were exploitative of southern society such as &quot;Billy Jack&quot; (1971) and &quot;White Lightning&quot; (1973) and &quot;good ol&#x27; boy&quot; comedies like &quot;Smokey and the Bandit&quot; (1977). This era also emphasizes the car chase scenes as moments of spectacle in films like &quot;Bullitt&quot; and &quot;The French Connection&quot; (1971). O&#x27;Brien described these films as emphasizing &quot;the fusion of man and machine&quot; with the drivers and vehicles acting as one, concluding with what he described as &quot;the ultimate in apocalyptic modernity and social erasure&quot; in &quot;Mad Max 2&quot; (1981).

O&#x27;Brien described the classical form of action cinema to be the 1980s. The decade continued the trends of formative period with heroes as avengers (&quot;Lethal Weapon&quot; (1987)), rogue police officers (&quot;Die Hard&quot; (1988)) and mercenary warriors (&quot;Commando&quot; (1985)). Following the continuity of the car and man hybrid of the previous decade, the 1980s featured weaponized men with who were either also carrying weapons such as &quot;Sudden Impact&quot; (1983), trained to be weapons (&quot;American Ninja&quot; (1985)) or imbued with technology (&quot;RoboCop&quot; (1987)). O&#x27;Brien noted that the formative trends at this point had become &quot;identifiably generic&quot; as film industries began to reproduced these films during the decade producers like Joel Silver and production companies like The Cannon Group, Inc. began to formulate production of these films with both high and low budgets. The action films of this era have roots in classical story telling, specifically rooted from martial arts films and Westerns, and are built around a three-act structure centered on survival, resistance and revenge with narratives where the physical body of the hero is tested, traumatized and ultimately triumphant.

The third shift in action cinema, the postclassical, was defined by the predominance of Eastern cinema and its aesthetics, primarily the wire-work of Hong Kong action cinema from the classical era, through the convention of the increasingly computer generated effects. This saw the decline of overt masculinity in the action film which corresponded with the end of the Cold War in 1991, while the rise of self-referential and parodies of this era grew in films like &quot;Last Action Hero&quot; (1993). O&#x27;Brien described this era as being soft where the hard bodies of the classical era were replaced with computer generated imagery such as that of &quot;Terminator 2: Judgment Day&quot; (1991). This was displayed in corresponding with corresponded with millennial angst and apocalypticism showcased in films like &quot;Independence Day&quot; (1996) and &quot;Armageddon&quot; (1998). Action films of mass destruction began requiring more overtly super heroic characters with further comic book adaptations being made with increased non-realistic settings with films like &quot;The Matrix&quot; (1999).

The fourth phase arrived following the September 11 attacks in 2001, which suggested an end to fantastical elements that defined the action hero and genre. Following the release of Quentin Tarantino&#x27;s &quot;Kill Bill: Volume 1&quot; (2003) and &quot;Kill Bill: Volume 2&quot; (2004) revisited the tropes of 1970s action films leading a renaissance of vengeance narratives in films like &quot;The Brave One&quot; (2007) and &quot;Taken&quot; (2008). O&#x27;Brien found that Tarantino&#x27;s films were post-modern takes on the themes that rescinded irony to restore &quot;cinephile re-actualization of the genre&#x27;s conventions.&quot; The genre went into full circle resurrecting films from the classical period with &quot;Live Free or Die Hard&quot; (2007) and &quot;Rambo&quot; (2008) finding the characters navigating a contemporary world while also acknowledging their age, culminating into &quot;The Expendables&quot; (2010) film.

The most commercially successful action films and franchise of the 21st century have been comic book adaptations, which commenced with the &quot;X-Men&quot; and is seen in other series such as &quot;Spider-Man&quot;, and &quot;Iron Man&quot; series. Tasker wrote that despite the central characters in superhero cinema being extraordinary, occasionally even God-like, they often followed the traces of the central character becoming powerful of which is fundamental to action films, often dealt with origin stories in superhero films.

==Subgenres==
===Hybrid genres===
Action films often interface with other genres. Tasker wrote that films are often labelled action thrillers, action-fantasy and action-adventure films with different nuances. Tasker later discussed that the term action film genre and adventure are often used in hybrid, and are even used interchangeably. Along with Holmund and Purse, Tasker wrote that the action films expansiveness complicates easy categorization and though the genre is often spoken of as singular genre, it is rarely discussed as singular style.

Screenwriter and academic Jule Selbo expanded on this, describing a film as &quot;crime/action&quot; or an &quot;action/crime&quot; or other hybrids was &quot;only a semantic exercise&quot; as both genres are important in the construction phase of the narrative. Mark Bould in &quot;A Companion to Film Noir&quot; (2013) said that categorization of multiple generic genre labels was common in film reviews who are rarely concerned with succinct descriptions that evoke elements of the film&#x27;s form, content and make no claims beyond on how these elements combine.

Film Studies began to engage generic hybridity in the 1970s. James Monaco wrote in 1979 in &quot;American Film Now: The People, The Power, The Money, the Movies&quot; that &quot;the lines that separate on genre from another have continued to disintegrate.&quot; Tasker said that most post-classical action films are hybrids, drawing from genres as varied as war films, science fiction, horror, crime, martial arts, and comedy films.

===Martial arts film===

In Chinese-language films, both &quot;wuxia&quot; and kung fu are genre-specific terms, while martial arts is a generic term to refer to several types of films containing martial arts.

====Wuxia====

The &quot;wuxia&quot; film is the oldest genre in Chinese cinema. Stephen Teo wrote in his book on &quot;Wuxia&quot; that there is no satisfactory English translation of the term, with it often being identified as &quot;the swordplay film&quot; in critical studies. It is derived from the Chinese words &quot;wu&quot; denoting militarist or martial qualities and &quot;xia&quot; denoting chivalry, gallantry, and qualities of knighthood. The term &quot;wuxia&quot; entered into popular culture in the serialization of &quot;Jinaghu qixia zhuan&quot; (1922) (). In &quot;wuxia&quot;, the emphasis is on chivalry and righteousness and allows for phantasmagoric actions over the kung fu film&#x27;s more ground-based combat.

====Kung fu film====

The Kung fu film emerged in the 1970s from the swordplay films. Its name is derived from the Cantonese term &quot;gong fu&quot; which has two meanings: the physical effort required to completing a task and the abilities and skills acquired over time. Films from the period reflected on the cultural and social climate from the period, as seen in invoking Japanese or Western imperialist forces as foils.

The kung fu film came out of the &quot;wuxia&quot; films. In comparison to the &quot;wuxia&quot;, film, the focus on the kung fu film is on the martial arts over chivalry, The martial arts films was in decline by the mid-1970s in Hong Kong in relation to the stock market crash which went from over 150 films in 1972 to just over 80 in 1975, which led to a downfall in martial arts films produced. When the economy became to rebound, a new trend of martial arts films, the Shaolin kung fu films emerged and sparked a revival of the genre. Unlike the &quot;wuxia&quot;, the kung fu film primarily focuses on fighting on the ground. While heroes in kung fu films often display chivalry, they generally hail from different fighting schools, namely &quot;wudang&quot; and shaolin.

====American-styled productions====
American martial arts films feature what author M. Ray Lott described as a more realistic style of violence over the Hong Kong &quot;wuxia&quot; films with more realism and are often low-budget productions. Martial arts began routinely appearing in fight scenes in American films in the 1960s with films like &quot;The Born Losers&quot; (1967) which was predominantly a drama, interspersed with martial arts scenes. American martial arts films predominantly came into production following the release of &quot;Enter the Dragon&quot; (1973), with the only higher-budgeted American film to follow in its wake being &quot;The Yakuza&quot; (1974). Lott noted the two films would lead to the two subsequent styles of martial arts films in the United States, with films like &quot;Enter the Dragon&quot; about people who reveled in combat, often in a tournament setting, and &quot;The Yakuza&quot; which had several genres attached to it, but featured several martial arts sequences. By the end of the 1970s, the style was an established genre in American cinema, often featuring tough heroic characters who would fight and not think about their actions until after a fight sequence. In the 1980s, American martial arts films reflected the national move towards conservatism, reflected in films of Chuck Norris and other actors such as Sho Kosugi. The genre would shift from theatrical releases towards the end of the decade with the rise of home video, the lower box-office of American martial arts productions, and a significant portion of direct-to-video action films that first were made in the late 1980s in the United States were martial arts films. Towards the end of the 1990s, production of low-budget martial arts films declined as no new stars in the genre developed and older actors such as Cynthia Rothrock and Steven Seagal started showing up in less and less films. Even internationally popular films like &quot;Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon&quot; (2000) had negligible effects in American productions in either the direct-to-video field, or in similarly low-budget theatrical releases such as &quot;Bulletproof Monk&quot; (2003).

While the American styled-films were predominantly made in the United States, productions were also made in Australia, Canada, Hong Kong and South Africa, and were predominantly shot in the English-language.

===Heroic bloodshed===

Heroic Bloodshed is genre a that originates with English-language Hong Kong action and crime film fan communities in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Author Bey Logan stated that the term was coined by Rick Baker, in the British fanzine &quot;Eastern Heroes&quot;. The term is used broadly. Baker described the style as Hong Kong action films which feature gangsters and gunplay and martial arts that were more violent than kung fu films and academic Kristof Van Den Troost described it a term used to distinguish Hong Kong gun-heavy action films from period martial arts films from the late 1980s and early 1990s.

In the Chinese language, the term used for these films is &quot;jinghungpin&quot;, literally meaning &quot;hero films&quot;. Academic Laikwan Pang asserts that these gangster films appeared at a time when Hong Kong citizens felt particularly powerless with the handover of Hong Kong from the United Kingdom to China set for 1997.
The key directors of the genre were John Woo and Ringo Lam, and producer Tsui Hark, with the starting point of the genre being traced to Woo&#x27;s &quot;A Better Tomorrow&quot; (1986) make a record-breaking HK$34.7 million at the Hong Kong box office. The style of these films would influence American productions, such as Michael Bay&#x27;s &quot;Bad Boys II&quot; (2003) and the Wachowskis&#x27; &quot;The Matrix&quot; (1999). Korean media recognized the more fatalistic and pessimistic tone of these films, leading to Korean journalists to label the style as &quot;Hong Kong &quot;noir&quot;&quot;. The influence of these films was evident in early Korean films such as Im Kwon-taek&#x27;s &quot;General&#x27;s Son&quot; (1990) and later films such Song Hae-sung&#x27;s &quot;A Better Tomorrow&quot; (2010), &quot;Cold Eyes&quot; (2013) and &quot;New World&quot; (2013).

Postcolonial Hong Kong cinema has struggled to maintain its international identity as a provider of these types action films because the talents involved had abandoned the Hong Kong film industry after the handover in 1997.

==Regional action cinema==
Anglophone action film scholarship has tended to emphasize bigger budget American action films, with academics tending to find films that fall out of Hollywood productions as not quite fitting definitions of the genre. By 2024, many national and regional industries were known for action films. These include international films such as Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam, South Korean, Japanese, Thai, Brazilian, Chinese, South African, French and Italian action titles.

===Australia===
At the turn of the millennium, Australian genre films have gained increasing acceptance in the Australian feature film industry, while the action genre represented a small percentage of its output in the 21st century.

Scholars of Australian genre film generally used the term &quot;action-adventure&quot; which allows them to apply it to various forms of narratives such as tongue in cheek heroic posturing stories like &quot;Crocodile Dundee&quot; (1986), road movies or bush/outback films. In the book &quot;Australian Genre Film&quot;, Amanda Howell suggested that this label was used to help distance Australian cinema from Hollywood films as it would be suggesting commerce over culture and that it would be &quot;quite unacceptable to make Australian movies using conventions established in the U.S.A.&quot; Howell stated this to be the case with action films of the 1970s and 1980s with Brian Trenchard-Smith&#x27;s &quot;Turkey Shoot&quot; (1982) being the most notorious. Smith had previously released films like &quot;Deathcheaters&quot; (1976) and &quot;Stunt Rock&quot; (1979) when financial incentives were available for overtly commercial projects. She commented that action films did tell identifiably Australian stories such as the Sandy Harbutt&#x27;s biker film &quot;Stone&quot; (1974) and Miller&#x27;s post-apocalyptic film &quot;Mad Max&quot; (1979) derived from Australia&#x27;s social and cultural realities, as well as how George Miller&#x27;s later &quot;Mad Max: Fury Road&quot; (2015) derived from Australia&#x27;s long-standing cinematic fascination with the road and cars and a history of cultural anxiety towards a bleak and forbidding outback landscape opposed to the optimism of American action films.

===France===

France is a major European country for film production and has made co-production commitments with 44 countries around the world. Around beginning of the 21st century, France began producing a series of films explicitly intended for international markets, with action films representing a significant portion. These films include &quot;Taxi 2&quot; (2000), &quot;Kiss of the Dragon&quot; (2001), &quot;District 13&quot; (2004) and &quot;Unleashed&quot; (2005). Whan asked about the Americanization of these French films, Christophe Gans, director of &quot;Brotherhood of the Wolf&quot; (2001) stated that &quot;Hollywood ownership of certain elements [...] must be challenged, in order to show that these elements have also long been present in European culture.&quot;

The most significant producers of French action films with international ambitions is Luc Besson&#x27;s France-based EuropaCorp, who released films like &quot;Taxi&quot; (1998) and &quot;From Paris with Love&quot; (2010). EuropaCorp produced &quot;Transporter&quot; franchise starred British actor Jason Statham and made him an action film star, which led him to feature in &quot;The Expendables&quot; series by the end of the 2010s.

===India===
The action film genre has been a staple of Bollywood cinema.
In the 1970s, the Bollywood action film consolidated with two films starring Amitabh Bachchan: Prakash Mehra&#x27;s &quot;Zanjeer&quot; (1973) and Yash Chopra&#x27;s &quot;Deewaar&quot; (1975). The box office success of these films made Bachchan a star and spawned the &quot;angry young man&quot; film in Bollywood cinema. 
Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, the action genre film declined considerably with new films predominantly featuring former bodybuilders failing to reach the popularity Bachan had. These films predominantly earned their revenue through longer runs at B-grade theatres. A cycle of action films came from these films in the 1980s and 1990s called the Avenging Woman film, where female protagonists seek justice for a rape victim, where the protagonist seeks revenge through violence.

In 2009, the action genre was re-popularized with the box office success of &quot;Wanted&quot; (2009) starring Salman Khan. Khan reinvented his screen persona with that of his image in the Bollywood press who reported on him in the headlines of Bollywood magazines for his public brawls and affairs with leading actresses. In &quot;Dabangg&quot; (2010), Khan continued with this public persona, which was repeated in several of his later films such as &quot;Ready&quot; (2011), &quot;Bodyguard&quot; (2011), &quot;Ek Tha Tiger&quot; (2012) and &quot;Dabangg 2&quot; (2012).

From the 1980s, generations of actors in Telugu cinema have invoked Hong Kong action films, such as Srihari who stated he wanted to become an actor after watching his first Bruce Lee film. Several films in Telugu cinema were remakes of Hong Kong films, such as &quot;Hello Brother&quot; (1994) which is based on &quot;Twin Dragons&quot; (1992). Other films such as the martial arts film &quot;Bhadrachlam&quot; (2001), borrows from American cinema with the Jean-Claude Van Damme film &quot;Kickboxer&quot; (1989). SS Rajamouli&#x27;s &quot;RRR&quot; (2022) was among the highest budgeted films made in India, and became a rare hit film outside of Indian diaspora, where it broke box office records in Japan and performed exceptionally well in American box office.

===Japan===
Japan was a difficult market for Hong Kong action cinema to break into. Prompted by the success of &quot;Enter the Dragon&quot; and the popularity of Bruce Lee, Toei made their own Bruce Lee-style martial arts films, with &quot;The Street Fighter&quot; and its two sequels starring Sonny Chiba as well as a spin-off with a female lead similar to Hong Kong&#x27;s Angela Mao called &quot;Sister Street Fighter&quot;. The success of &quot;Enter the Dragon&quot; briefly allowed an influx of Hong Kong films to Japan, but the trend did not last, with 28 Hong Kong films, mostly kung fu films, being released in 1974, and the number decreasing to five in 1975, four in 1977 and only two in 1978.

Ryuhei Kitamura, director of &quot;Versus&quot; (2000), said in 2004 that he grew frustrated with the Japanese film industry as producers felt they couldn&#x27;t make action films in competition with Hong Kong or American productions. &quot;Versus&quot; grew to become popular outside of Japan, and Kitamura said he was aiming for the foreign audience, as he was disappointed with the current state of Japanese films. Kitamura&#x27;s characters have been described as &quot;a careful combination of the maverick independence of 1980s Hollywood action heroes and the calmness and acceptance of Japanese samurai, a consistent criticism of Japanese people today.&quot; Kitamura followed up &quot;Versus&quot; with two manga-inspired big-budget action films, &quot;Azumi&quot; and &quot;Sky High&quot;. Both released in 2003, the former was one of the highest-grossing movies of the year in Japan. Following &quot;LoveDeath&quot;, Kitamura&#x27;s next directing work was in the United States.

===Korea===
The action cinema of South Korea mostly existed on the margins of the film industry in South Korea. The genre was initially called the &quot;Hwalkuk&quot; (&quot;living theatre&quot;) was a term that indicated plays and films driven by action scenes, while this term has not been used regularly since the late 1970s, with &quot;action movie&quot; becoming the more familiar term. The Korean action films came from Japanese cinema, James Bond series, and Hong Kong action cinema. As North Korea borders China, it block access to the continent from a South Korean perspective, the Cold War allowed South Koreans to substitute deferred travel beyond the border through films with locations shot in Hong Kong. While melodrama and comedy were staples in South Korean cinema, most action films were sporadic and tied to the use of locations such as Hong Kong. These films often featured one-legged or otherwise handicapped action characters similar to those of Japanese films (&quot;Zatoichi&quot;) and Hong Kong films (&quot;The One-Armed Swordsmen&quot;). These included Im Kwon-taek&#x27;s &quot;Returned Left-Handed Man&quot; (1968), Aekkunun Bak&#x27;s &quot;One-Eyd Park&quot; (1970) and Lee Doo-yong&#x27;s &quot;Returned One-Legged Man&quot; (1974).

In the 1990s, the country&#x27;s national cinema was in decline leading to Hong Kong gangster films filled in this void leading to large commercial success at the national box office. Early Korean heirs to Hong Kong action films include &quot;Rules of The Game&quot; (1994), &quot;Beat&quot; (1997), and &quot;Green Fish&quot; (1997) involving men who gain confidence and achieve personal growth as they embark on journeys to protect national state and meet devastating ends.
South Korean cinema only received international attention in both art film and blockbuster formats towards the end of the 1990s. Films such as &quot;Chunhang&quot; (2000) and &quot;Memento Mori&quot; (2000) and action films &quot;Shiri&quot; (1999) and &quot;Nowhere to Hide&quot; (1999) received commercial releases in North America, Asia, and Europe. The success of the latter two films was unprecedented, and was followed by other South Korean action films in the early 2000s reaching the top of the local box office. These South Korean films mimic some traits of the Hong Kong action cinema, such melodramatic male bonding and marginalized women characters, while the Korean films also have greater elements of tragedy and romance emphasized.

==Reception==
Most martial arts films made before the mid-1960s were Cantonese-language productions. In comparison, Mandarin-language films were an integral part of Hong Kong cinema due to the influx of Shanghai film talent in the postwar period. These films were targeted at the more educated and more refined middle-class audiences who saw themselves as above the contemporary martial arts films.

Scott Higgins wrote in 2008 in &quot;Cinema Journal&quot; that Hollywood action films are both one of the most popular and popularly derided of contemporary cinema genres, stating that &quot;in mainstream discourse, the genre is regularly lambasted for favoring spectacle over finely tuned narrative.&quot; Bordwell echoed this in his book, &quot;The Way Hollywood Tells It&quot;, writing that the reception to the genre as being &quot;the emblem of what Hollywood does worst.&quot;

Tasker wrote that when action and adventure films secured awards, it is often in categories such as visual effects and sound editing.

=== Acclaimed action films ===
&quot;Time Out&quot; magazine conducted a poll with fifty experts in the field of action cinema, including actors, critics, filmmakers and stuntmen. Out of the 101 films ranked in the poll, the following films were voted the top ten best action films of all time.

===Gender in action cinema===

====Hong Kong====
In Hong Kong, the &quot;new school&quot; of martial arts films that Shaw Brothers brought in 1965 featured what Yip described as &quot;strong, active female characters as protagonists.&quot; These female-centered films were challenged with the rise of a new male heroic prototype marked by a strong sense of youthful energy and defiance and by a propensity for violent action, identified with the films of Chang Cheh.

====Hollywood====
Violent female characters have been part of cinema since its early inception, with characters such as Kate Kelly brandishing a shotgun in &quot;The Story of the Kelly Gang&quot; (1906). Women traditionally appear in action films as romantic interests, tomboys, or sidekicks to male protagonists.

Violent white women would appear in other genres as well such as the &quot;femme fatales&quot; in &quot;film noir&quot; and horror films of the 1970s. Violent women were common in action films since the 1960s. These films featured working-class women exacting revenge. Films of the 1970s featured black women such as Pam Grier in films like &quot;Foxy Brown&quot; (1974).

In the 1980s, a new symbolically transgressive character emerged in the form of Ellen Ripley in &quot;Aliens&quot; (1986) and Sarah Connor in &quot;Terminator 2: Judgment Day&quot; (1991) and the title character in &quot;China O&#x27;Brien&quot; (1990) who were physically muscular and or enacted more extreme violence that was usually reserved for male action leads. In her book &quot;Contemporary Action Cinema&quot; (2011), Lisa Purse described the media response to female leads in action films reveal a discomfort about their presence and are often described with hesitant terms of women moving into territories that are perceived as masculine. Revealing woman in this form deconstructs the notion that traditional marks of masculinity are not exclusive to men and that musculature was not natural, but something to be achieved. Accusations of these muscular women of the era were levelled at that them by 1993 were that they were &quot;men in drag&quot; and that the films generally have to &quot;explain&quot; why their female leads displayed physical aggression and why they were &quot;driven to do it.&quot; As the 1990s went on, Hollywood films began having more conventional looking women in their action films such as &quot;The Long Kiss Goodnight&quot; (1996).
A vibrant debate exists about whether hypersexualization is itself empowering and, if not, whether a hypersexualized female character can still represent strength and autonomy.
Hypersexualized female action leads had tight fitting or revealing costumes that Tasker identified as &quot;exaggerated statements of sexuality&quot; and in the tradition of &quot;fetishistic figure of fantasy&quot; derives from comic books and soft pornography. This originated in television with characters like Buffy Summers (&quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot; (1997–2003)) and Xena (&quot;&quot; (1995–2001)). These series popularity demonstrated a growing market for female action film heroes, in films of the 2000s like &quot;Lara Croft: Tomb Raider&quot; (2001), &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels&quot; (2000), &quot;Ultraviolet&quot; (2006), &quot;Salt&quot; (2010) and series like &quot;Underworld&quot; and &quot;Resident Evil&quot;. These series like their television series earlier, had their leads eroticized as active and physically capable while also being scantily-clad, hyper-feminized similar to the woman of exploitation films of the 1970s such as &quot;Caged Heat&quot; (1974) and &quot;Big Bad Mama&quot; (1974). While characters like Frank in &quot;The Transporter&quot; series are permitted to visibly sweat, strain and be bloodied, Purse found a reluctance for filmmakers to have their female leads have any appearance warping injuries to ensure a perfectly made-up face. Comedy is often used in films of this period to place the female leads in implausible elements, such as in &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels&quot;, &quot;Fantastic Four&quot; (2005) and &quot;My Super Ex-Girlfriend&quot; (2006). The fighting styles of women also tend towards more traditionally feminine fluid movements of martial arts, over using guns or directly punching.

Purse wrote that the contemporary female action film lead&#x27;s sexualized brand had her in close proximity of post-feminism discourse about choice, power and sexuality. Marc O&#x27;Day interprets the action heroine&#x27;s dual status of an active subject and sexual object was overturning the traditional gender binary because the films &quot;assume that women are powerful&quot; without resorting to justify her physical aggression through narratives involving maternal drive, mental instability or trauma. Purse found that female leads in films like &quot;Elektra&quot; (2005), &quot;Kill Bill&quot;, &quot;Underworld&quot;, &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels&quot; and &quot;Mr. &amp; Mrs. Smith&quot; (2005) did showcase women having expensive cars, clothing, travel, homes and often high-paying jobs, but that this was only shown as being applicable to white middle-class women. Purse found that these women were empowered at the price of women of other ethnicities. This is seen in &quot;Aeon Flux&quot; (2005) where Sithandra dies protecting Aeon and Rain&#x27;s death to make way for Alice in &quot;Resident Evil&quot; (2002).

==See also==

* List of action film actors
* List of action film directors
* List of female action heroes and villains
* Action hero
* Film genre
* Lists of action films
* List of female action heroes

==References==
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="4" end="15" title="Action film" label="action film"/>
<link wikidata="Q201658" start="21" end="31" title="film genre" label="film genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406205" start="85" end="94" title="shootouts" label="shootouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q179057" start="96" end="106" title="explosions" label="explosions"/>
<link wikidata="Q638397" start="247" end="261" title="David Bordwell" label="David Bordwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="508" end="516" title="comedy film" label="comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="518" end="539" title="science fiction films" label="science fiction films"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="545" end="557" title="horror films" label="horror films"/>
<link wikidata="Q377616" start="756" end="769" title="New Hollywood" label="New Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="786" end="796" title="antihero" label="anti-heroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q369747" start="867" end="876" title="war films" label="war films"/>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="878" end="889" title="crime films" label="crime films"/>
<link wikidata="Q172980" start="894" end="902" title="Western (film)" label="Westerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q845641" start="1095" end="1118" title="Hong Kong action cinema" label="Hong Kong action cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="1144" end="1170" title="computer generated imagery" label="computer generated imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="1194" end="1214" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q165325" start="1287" end="1296" title="Kill Bill" label="Kill Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062086" start="1313" end="1328" title="The Expendables (franchise)" label="The Expendables"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120737" start="1379" end="1393" title="Cinema Journal" label="Cinema Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6295207" start="1849" end="1874" title="Journal of Film and Video" label="Journal of Film and Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q638397" start="2196" end="2210" title="David Bordwell" label="David Bordwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992253" start="2353" end="2374" title="Wheeler Winston Dixon" label="Wheeler Winston Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q174284" start="3164" end="3187" title="Raiders of the Lost Ark" label="Raiders of the Lost Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q105598" start="3211" end="3219" title="Die Hard" label="Die Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082223" start="3383" end="3395" title="John McClane" label="John McClane"/>
<link wikidata="Q148659" start="3527" end="3540" title="Indiana Jones (character)" label="Indiana Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q80143533" start="3660" end="3673" title="Yvonne Tasker" label="Yvonne Tasker"/>
<link wikidata="Q56883897" start="4319" end="4332" title="Johan Anders Höglund" label="Johan Höglund"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="4995" end="4999" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="5004" end="5013" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21086634" start="5087" end="5099" title="Amazon Prime" label="Amazon Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="5104" end="5111" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q317869" start="6848" end="6861" title="Wong Fei-hung" label="Wong Fei-hung"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="6992" end="7000" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006" start="7311" end="7325" title="Akira Kurosawa" label="Akira Kurosawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q135465" start="7350" end="7358" title="Rashomon" label="Rashomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q169672" start="7407" end="7415" title="Samurai cinema" label="chanbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q629917" start="7489" end="7499" title="Jidaigeki" label="jidai-geki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168625" start="7510" end="7522" title="Historical drama" label="period drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q172980" start="7622" end="7629" title="Western film" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q189540" start="7736" end="7749" title="Seven Samurai" label="Seven Samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q39946" start="7770" end="7789" title="The Hidden Fortress" label="The Hidden Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q20475" start="7814" end="7821" title="Yojimbo" label="Yojimbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q587083" start="8332" end="8345" title="Liang Yusheng" label="Liang Yusheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q180626" start="8395" end="8403" title="Jin Yong" label="Jin Yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q947354" start="8968" end="8981" title="Shaw Brothers Studio" label="Shaw Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q667128" start="9143" end="9150" title="King Hu" label="King Hu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170354" start="9164" end="9182" title="Come Drink with Me" label="Come Drink with Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q709580" start="9362" end="9372" title="Chang Cheh" label="Chang Cheh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072042" start="9420" end="9432" title="kung fu film" label="kung fu film"/>
<link wikidata="Q541569" start="9671" end="9685" title="Orange Sky Golden Harvest" label="Golden Harvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q16397" start="9815" end="9824" title="Bruce Lee" label="Bruce Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q706293" start="10090" end="10103" title="Lau Kar-leung" label="Lau Kar-leung"/>
<link wikidata="Q710875" start="10157" end="10166" title="Chor Yuen" label="Chor Yuen"/>
<link wikidata="Q709435" start="10230" end="10237" title="Gu Long" label="Gu Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q36970" start="10275" end="10286" title="Jackie Chan" label="Jackie Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444356" start="10379" end="10392" title="gangster film" label="gangster film"/>
<link wikidata="Q55432" start="10397" end="10405" title="John Woo" label="John Woo"/>
<link wikidata="Q641346" start="10413" end="10430" title="A Better Tomorrow" label="A Better Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q269326" start="10451" end="10461" title="The Killer (1989 film)" label="The Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q317814" start="10516" end="10525" title="Tsui Hark" label="Tsui Hark"/>
<link wikidata="Q947446" start="10539" end="10564" title="Once Upon a Time in China" label="Once Upon a Time in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q159577" start="10581" end="10587" title="Jet Li" label="Jet Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q214289" start="10845" end="10858" title="Michelle Yeoh" label="Michelle Yeoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q460297" start="10863" end="10876" title="Yuen Woo-Ping" label="Yuen Woo-Ping"/>
<link wikidata="Q160726" start="10893" end="10900" title="Ang Lee" label="Ang Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q273978" start="10914" end="10944" title="Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" label="Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q55430" start="11042" end="11053" title="Zhang Yimou" label="Zhang Yimou"/>
<link wikidata="Q260379" start="11067" end="11071" title="Hero (2002 film)" label="Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q369388" start="11095" end="11118" title="House of Flying Daggers" label="House of Flying Daggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q311179" start="11133" end="11145" title="Stephen Chow" label="Stephen Chow"/>
<link wikidata="Q470759" start="11159" end="11173" title="Kung Fu Hustle" label="Kung Fu Hustle"/>
<link wikidata="Q202597" start="11191" end="11201" title="Chen Kaige" label="Chen Kaige"/>
<link wikidata="Q611370" start="11215" end="11226" title="The Promise (2005 film)" label="The Promise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089457" start="11334" end="11342" title="Cold War (2012 film)" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q24731518" start="11363" end="11373" title="Cold War 2 (film)" label="Cold War 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q111169463" start="11397" end="11412" title="The White Storm (film series)" label="The White Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q470104" start="11529" end="11539" title="Johnnie To" label="Johnnie To"/>
<link wikidata="Q714057" start="11768" end="11784" title="Infernal Affairs" label="Infernal Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q172980" start="11937" end="11945" title="Western (film)" label="Westerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="11947" end="11952" title="crime films" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q369747" start="11957" end="11966" title="war films" label="war films"/>
<link wikidata="Q80143533" start="12079" end="12092" title="Yvonne Tasker" label="Yvonne Tasker"/>
<link wikidata="Q319221" start="12135" end="12150" title="adventure films" label="adventure films"/>
<link wikidata="Q377616" start="12212" end="12225" title="New Hollywood" label="New Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="12320" end="12329" title="Antihero" label="Anti-hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q261209" start="12467" end="12474" title="Bullitt" label="Bullitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642760" start="12715" end="12729" title="vigilante film" label="vigilante film"/>
<link wikidata="Q110206" start="12745" end="12756" title="Dirty Harry" label="Dirty Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q841961" start="12780" end="12790" title="Death Wish (1974 film)" label="Death Wish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027905" start="13024" end="13034" title="Billy Jack" label="Billy Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080532" start="13058" end="13073" title="White Lightning (1973 film)" label="White Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q521948" start="13141" end="13162" title="Smokey and the Bandit" label="Smokey and the Bandit"/>
<link wikidata="Q220735" start="13291" end="13312" title="The French Connection (film)" label="The French Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125262" start="13579" end="13588" title="Mad Max 2" label="Mad Max 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q462447" start="13763" end="13776" title="Lethal Weapon" label="Lethal Weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105598" start="13821" end="13829" title="Die Hard" label="Die Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q744551" start="13874" end="13882" title="Commando (1985 film)" label="Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q785461" start="14064" end="14077" title="Sudden Impact" label="Sudden Impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q464294" start="14121" end="14135" title="American Ninja" label="American Ninja"/>
<link wikidata="Q372514" start="14183" end="14190" title="RoboCop" label="RoboCop"/>
<link wikidata="Q539718" start="14393" end="14404" title="Joel Silver" label="Joel Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033465" start="14435" end="14457" title="The Cannon Group, Inc." label="The Cannon Group, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1033891" start="14628" end="14646" title="martial arts films" label="martial arts films"/>
<link wikidata="Q845641" start="15002" end="15025" title="Hong Kong action cinema" label="Hong Kong action cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="15221" end="15229" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q858840" start="15324" end="15340" title="Last Action Hero" label="Last Action Hero"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15512" end="15538" title="Terminator 2: Judgment Day" label="Terminator 2: Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q105387" start="15678" end="15694" title="Independence Day (1996 film)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q208344" start="15718" end="15728" title="Armageddon (1998 film)" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83495" start="15936" end="15946" title="The Matrix" label="The Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="16001" end="16021" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="16143" end="16160" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16174" end="16193" title="Kill Bill: Volume 1" label="Kill Bill: Volume 1"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16217" end="16236" title="Kill Bill: Volume 2" label="Kill Bill: Volume 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q427091" start="16359" end="16372" title="The Brave One (2007 film)" label="The Brave One"/>
<link wikidata="Q277080" start="16396" end="16401" title="Taken (film)" label="Taken"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="16468" end="16479" title="post-modern" label="post-modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092380" start="16538" end="16547" title="cinephile" label="cinephile"/>
<link wikidata="Q50861" start="16692" end="16713" title="Live Free or Die Hard" label="Live Free or Die Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q159870" start="16737" end="16742" title="Rambo (2008 film)" label="Rambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q206374" start="16870" end="16885" title="The Expendables (2010 film)" label="The Expendables"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006869" start="17051" end="17056" title="X-Men (film series)" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307877" start="17105" end="17115" title="Spider-Man in film" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17133" end="17141" title="Iron Man in other media#Marvel Cinematic Universe" label="Iron Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q23770427" start="18020" end="18030" title="Jule Selbo" label="Jule Selbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="18076" end="18081" title="crime film" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680845" start="18624" end="18636" title="James Monaco" label="James Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="18932" end="18947" title="science fiction film" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="18949" end="18955" title="horror film" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033891" start="18964" end="18976" title="martial arts films" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="18982" end="18994" title="comedy films" label="comedy films"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072042" start="19899" end="19911" title="kung fu film" label="kung fu film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="20082" end="20089" title="Chinese martial arts" label="gong fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324353" start="21124" end="21130" title="Wudangquan" label="wudang"/>
<link wikidata="Q855119" start="21141" end="21148" title="Shaolin kung fu" label="shaolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961825" start="21502" end="21517" title="The Born Losers" label="The Born Losers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044064" start="21806" end="21816" title="The Yakuza" label="The Yakuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673" start="22479" end="22491" title="Chuck Norris" label="Chuck Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q535906" start="22517" end="22527" title="Sho Kosugi" label="Sho Kosugi"/>
<link wikidata="Q844580" start="22723" end="22738" title="direct-to-video" label="direct-to-video"/>
<link wikidata="Q238415" start="22984" end="23000" title="Cynthia Rothrock" label="Cynthia Rothrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q82110" start="23005" end="23018" title="Steven Seagal" label="Steven Seagal"/>
<link wikidata="Q258754" start="23297" end="23313" title="Bulletproof Monk" label="Bulletproof Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15251" start="24438" end="24459" title="handover of Hong Kong" label="handover of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q55432" start="24543" end="24551" title="John Woo" label="John Woo"/>
<link wikidata="Q285908" start="24556" end="24565" title="Ringo Lam" label="Ringo Lam"/>
<link wikidata="Q317814" start="24580" end="24589" title="Tsui Hark" label="Tsui Hark"/>
<link wikidata="Q641346" start="24661" end="24678" title="A Better Tomorrow" label="A Better Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q59259" start="24831" end="24842" title="Michael Bay" label="Michael Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q539269" start="24856" end="24867" title="Bad Boys II" label="Bad Boys II"/>
<link wikidata="Q195719" start="24889" end="24899" title="Wachowskis" label="Wachowskis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83495" start="24912" end="24922" title="The Matrix" label="The Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q488312" start="25181" end="25193" title="Im Kwon-taek" label="Im Kwon-taek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531634" start="25207" end="25225" title="General&amp;#x27;s Son" label="General&amp;#x27;s Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q493288" start="25260" end="25273" title="Song Hae-sung" label="Song Hae-sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q498105" start="25287" end="25304" title="A Better Tomorrow (2010 film)" label="A Better Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597149" start="25325" end="25334" title="Cold Eyes" label="Cold Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408823" start="25358" end="25367" title="New World (2013 film)" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744006" start="25994" end="26003" title="Malayalam cinema" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973223" start="26029" end="26033" title="Cinema of Thailand" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189739" start="26035" end="26044" title="Cinema of Brazil" label="Brazilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q842792" start="26046" end="26053" title="Cinema of China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120795" start="26055" end="26068" title="Cinema of South Africa" label="South African"/>
<link wikidata="Q903165" start="26081" end="26088" title="Cinema of Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q615254" start="26548" end="26564" title="Crocodile Dundee" label="Crocodile Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q628165" start="26579" end="26590" title="road movies" label="road movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q913154" start="27016" end="27037" title="Brian Trenchard-Smith" label="Brian Trenchard-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235799" start="27051" end="27063" title="Turkey Shoot (1982 film)" label="Turkey Shoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247671" start="27150" end="27163" title="Deathcheaters" label="Deathcheaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628788" start="27187" end="27197" title="Stunt Rock" label="Stunt Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417274" start="27370" end="27383" title="Sandy Harbutt" label="Sandy Harbutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618838" start="27408" end="27413" title="Stone (1974 film)" label="Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q248775" start="27473" end="27480" title="Mad Max (film)" label="Mad Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q446960" start="27570" end="27583" title="George Miller (director)" label="George Miller"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27603" end="27621" title="Mad Max: Fury Road" label="Mad Max: Fury Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q756572" start="28208" end="28214" title="Taxi 2" label="Taxi 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q471913" start="28235" end="28253" title="Kiss of the Dragon" label="Kiss of the Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q70069" start="28274" end="28285" title="District 13" label="District 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q470507" start="28309" end="28318" title="Unleashed (2005 film)" label="Unleashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q950697" start="28393" end="28408" title="Christophe Gans" label="Christophe Gans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123891" start="28428" end="28451" title="Brotherhood of the Wolf" label="Brotherhood of the Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q484779" start="28728" end="28738" title="Luc Besson" label="Luc Besson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375196" start="28759" end="28769" title="EuropaCorp" label="EuropaCorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q726215" start="28801" end="28805" title="Taxi (1998 film)" label="Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q865346" start="28829" end="28849" title="From Paris with Love (film)" label="From Paris with Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076792" start="28890" end="28901" title="Transporter (franchise)" label="Transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q169963" start="28940" end="28953" title="Jason Statham" label="Jason Statham"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="29132" end="29148" title="Hindi cinema" label="Bollywood cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="29168" end="29177" title="Hindi cinema" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9570" start="29227" end="29243" title="Amitabh Bachchan" label="Amitabh Bachchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q535404" start="29245" end="29258" title="Prakash Mehra" label="Prakash Mehra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417226" start="29272" end="29279" title="Zanjeer (1973 film)" label="Zanjeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q30876" start="29297" end="29308" title="Yash Chopra" label="Yash Chopra"/>
<link wikidata="Q787034" start="29322" end="29329" title="Deewaar" label="Deewaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q124100" start="29596" end="29608" title="Bodybuilding" label="bodybuilders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622347" start="30037" end="30043" title="Wanted (2009 film)" label="Wanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q9543" start="30066" end="30077" title="Salman Khan" label="Salman Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q733065" start="30287" end="30294" title="Dabangg" label="Dabangg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351117" start="30413" end="30418" title="Ready (2011 film)" label="Ready"/>
<link wikidata="Q312951" start="30439" end="30448" title="Bodyguard (2011 Hindi film)" label="Bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991452" start="30469" end="30481" title="Ek Tha Tiger" label="Ek Tha Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651780" start="30505" end="30514" title="Dabangg 2" label="Dabangg 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q779935" start="30571" end="30584" title="Telugu cinema" label="Telugu cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586371" start="30630" end="30637" title="Srihari" label="Srihari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5708631" start="30797" end="30810" title="Hello Brother (1994 film)" label="Hello Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093119" start="30848" end="30860" title="Twin Dragons" label="Twin Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q26877305" start="30923" end="30934" title="Bhadrachalam (film)" label="Bhadrachlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q308840" start="30987" end="31008" title="Jean-Claude Van Damme" label="Jean-Claude Van Damme"/>
<link wikidata="Q544098" start="31020" end="31029" title="Kickboxer (1989 film)" label="Kickboxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521531" start="31044" end="31056" title="SS Rajamouli" label="SS Rajamouli"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424165" start="31070" end="31073" title="RRR" label="RRR"/>
<link wikidata="Q331617" start="31412" end="31428" title="Enter the Dragon" label="Enter the Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066018" start="31468" end="31472" title="Toei Company" label="Toei"/>
<link wikidata="Q922792" start="31535" end="31553" title="The Street Fighter" label="The Street Fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q351732" start="31589" end="31600" title="Sonny Chiba" label="Sonny Chiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q276444" start="31670" end="31680" title="Angela Mao" label="Angela Mao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080067" start="31694" end="31715" title="Sister Street Fighter" label="Sister Street Fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088074" start="32000" end="32015" title="Ryuhei Kitamura" label="Ryuhei Kitamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759605" start="32035" end="32041" title="Versus (2000 film)" label="Versus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733515" start="32761" end="32766" title="Azumi (film)" label="Azumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16167586" start="32783" end="32791" title="Sky High (2003 film)" label="Sky High"/>
<link wikidata="Q151472" start="33433" end="33450" title="James Bond in film" label="James Bond series"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="33581" end="33589" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876902" start="34536" end="34540" title="Beat (1997 film)" label="Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q626649" start="34565" end="34575" title="Green Fish" label="Green Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q482728" start="34880" end="34888" title="Chunhyang (film)" label="Chunhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505604" start="34912" end="34924" title="Memento Mori (film)" label="Memento Mori"/>
<link wikidata="Q391544" start="34961" end="34966" title="Shiri (film)" label="Shiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q626803" start="34990" end="35005" title="Nowhere to Hide (1999 film)" label="Nowhere to Hide"/>
<link wikidata="Q845641" start="35302" end="35325" title="Hong Kong action cinema" label="Hong Kong action cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="35548" end="35566" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="35595" end="35612" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin-language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35644" end="35660" title="Hong Kong cinema" label="Hong Kong cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120737" start="35916" end="35930" title="Cinema Journal" label="Cinema Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8317" start="36463" end="36477" title="visual effects" label="visual effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657609" start="36535" end="36543" title="Time Out (magazine)" label="Time Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q709580" start="37249" end="37259" title="Chang Cheh" label="Chang Cheh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212945" start="37424" end="37451" title="The Story of the Kelly Gang" label="The Story of the Kelly Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q845799" start="37532" end="37538" title="tomboy" label="tomboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q281525" start="37544" end="37552" title="sidekick" label="sidekick"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="37585" end="37596" title="White people" label="white women"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="37652" end="37664" title="femme fatale" label="femme fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="37681" end="37690" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="37808" end="37821" title="working-class" label="working-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="37874" end="37879" title="Black people" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q233862" start="37894" end="37903" title="Pam Grier" label="Pam Grier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440249" start="37924" end="37934" title="Foxy Brown (film)" label="Foxy Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q988925" start="38030" end="38042" title="Ellen Ripley" label="Ellen Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q496437" start="38076" end="38088" title="Sarah Connor (Terminator)" label="Sarah Connor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38098" end="38124" title="Terminator 2: Judgment Day" label="Terminator 2: Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073464" start="38171" end="38189" title="China O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="China O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168399" start="39186" end="39209" title="The Long Kiss Goodnight" label="The Long Kiss Goodnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000136" start="39646" end="39662" title="Softcore pornography" label="soft pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799459" start="39715" end="39728" title="Buffy Summers" label="Buffy Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q183513" start="39736" end="39760" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q545694" start="39784" end="39788" title="Xena" label="Xena"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39935" end="39958" title="Lara Croft: Tomb Raider" label="Lara Croft: Tomb Raider"/>
<link wikidata="Q229599" start="39979" end="40000" title="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels (2000 film)" label="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q951900" start="40021" end="40032" title="Ultraviolet (film)" label="Ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q628139" start="40053" end="40057" title="Salt (2010 film)" label="Salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q82332" start="40093" end="40103" title="Underworld (film series)" label="Underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276325" start="40120" end="40133" title="Resident Evil (film series)" label="Resident Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q541887" start="40370" end="40380" title="Caged Heat" label="Caged Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904980" start="40404" end="40416" title="Big Bad Mama" label="Big Bad Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q224130" start="40841" end="40855" title="Fantastic Four (2005 film)" label="Fantastic Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216648" start="40879" end="40901" title="My Super Ex-Girlfriend" label="My Super Ex-Girlfriend"/>
<link wikidata="Q143823" start="41175" end="41188" title="post-feminism" label="post-feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q610159" start="41623" end="41630" title="Elektra (2005 film)" label="Elektra"/>
<link wikidata="" start="41651" end="41660" title="Kill Bill: Volume 1" label="Kill Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q191040" start="41736" end="41756" title="Mr. &amp;amp; Mrs. Smith (2005 film)" label="Mr. &amp;amp; Mrs. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919862" start="42052" end="42061" title="Æon Flux (film)" label="Aeon Flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q153484" start="42165" end="42178" title="Resident Evil (film)" label="Resident Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604935" start="42210" end="42236" title="List of action film actors" label="List of action film actors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604936" start="42239" end="42268" title="List of action film directors" label="List of action film directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619392" start="42271" end="42312" title="List of female action heroes and villains" label="List of female action heroes and villains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033357" start="42315" end="42326" title="Action hero" label="Action hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q201658" start="42329" end="42339" title="Film genre" label="Film genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766205" start="42342" end="42363" title="Lists of action films" label="Lists of action films"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619392" start="42366" end="42394" title="List of female action heroes" label="List of female action heroes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43566" wikidata="Q42198" url="?curid=43566" title="Heat (1995 film)">
<text>Heat is a 1995 American epic crime film written and directed by Michael Mann. It features an ensemble cast led by Al Pacino and Robert De Niro, with Tom Sizemore, Jon Voight and Val Kilmer in supporting roles. The film follows the conflict between a Los Angeles Police Department detective, played by Pacino, and a career thief, played by De Niro, while also depicting its effect on their professional relationships and personal lives.

Mann wrote the original script for &quot;Heat&quot; in 1979, basing it on Chicago police officer Chuck Adamson&#x27;s pursuit of criminal Neil McCauley, after whom De Niro&#x27;s character is named. The script was first used for a television pilot developed by Mann, which became the 1989 television film &quot;L.A. Takedown&quot; after the pilot did not receive a series order. In 1994, Mann revisited the script to turn it into a feature film, co-producing the project with Art Linson. The film marks De Niro and Pacino&#x27;s first on-screen appearance together following a period of acclaimed performances from both. Due to their esteemed reputations, promotion centered on their involvement.

&quot;Heat&quot; was released by Warner Bros. Pictures on December 15, 1995, to critical and commercial success. It grossed $187 million on a $60 million budget, while receiving positive reviews for Mann&#x27;s direction and the performances of Pacino and De Niro. The film is regarded as one of the most influential films of its genre and has inspired several other works. A sequel was announced to be in development on July 20, 2022.

==Plot==
Neil McCauley is a professional thief based in Los Angeles. He and his crew—right-hand man Chris Shiherlis, enforcer Michael Cheritto, driver Gilbert Trejo and newly hired hand Waingro—rob $1.6 million in bearer bonds from an armored car. During the heist, Waingro kills a guard without provocation, forcing the crew to eliminate the other two guards. McCauley prepares to kill Waingro in retaliation for the deaths of the guards, but he escapes.

LAPD Lieutenant Vincent Hanna and his team investigate the robbery. Hanna, a dedicated lawman and former Marine, has a strained relationship with his third wife Justine, and struggles to connect with his stepdaughter Lauren. McCauley, who lives a solitary life, begins a relationship with Eady, a graphic designer. They bond over their mutual isolation from society, and, claiming to be a salesman, McCauley asks her to emigrate to New Zealand with him.

McCauley&#x27;s fence Nate suggests that he sell the stolen bonds to their original owner, money launderer Roger Van Zant. Van Zant pretends to agree but instead arranges an ambush. Anticipating a trap, McCauley and his crew counter-ambush and kill the hitmen. Afterward, McCauley threatens Van Zant with revenge. An LAPD informant connects Cheritto to the robbery, and Hanna&#x27;s team begins monitoring him, identifying the rest of the crew and their next target, a precious metals depository. The team stakes out the depository, but when a careless officer makes a noise, McCauley aborts the heist.

McCauley&#x27;s crew agrees to one last bank robbery worth $12.2 million. Hanna tracks McCauley and pulls him over on the 105 Freeway, inviting him to coffee. They discuss their dedication to their respective jobs and the limitations of their personal lives; Hanna describes his failing marriage, and McCauley confides that he is similarly isolated. Despite their mutual respect, both men acknowledge that they will kill the other if necessary. Waingro makes a deal with Van Zant to help eliminate McCauley&#x27;s crew. Trejo quits the bank robbery at the last moment, claiming that the LAPD is following him too closely. McCauley recruits old colleague Don Breedan to take Trejo&#x27;s place as the getaway driver, and the crew carries out the heist.

Tipped by Van Zant&#x27;s bodyguard, the LAPD intercepts the crew as they leave the bank, leading to a massive shootout. Breedan and Cheritto are killed alongside many police officers, while McCauley escapes with a wounded Shiherlis, and Bosko, one of Hanna&#x27;s detectives, is killed. McCauley takes Shiherlis to a doctor to treat his wounds and leaves him with Nate. Suspecting that Trejo tipped off the LAPD, McCauley arrives at his house to confront him, but finds him mortally wounded and his wife killed.

Before asking McCauley to kill him, Trejo reveals that Waingro and Van Zant forced him to divulge the bank heist plans. McCauley breaks into Van Zant&#x27;s mansion and kills him. After learning of McCauley&#x27;s connection to Waingro and that the latter is hiding in a hotel, Hanna uses Waingro as bait to lure McCauley. As McCauley prepares to flee the country, Eady discovers his criminal identity but agrees to go with him. Before escaping, Shiherlis attempts to reconcile with his wife Charlene after his wife has been forced by the LAPD to bring him in. As Shiherlis encounters Charlene at her safe house, she warns him away with a hand gesture, and he escapes.

Having separated from Justine, Hanna finds Lauren in his hotel room, having attempted suicide. He rushes her to the hospital and saves her life. Hanna reconciles with Justine, although they both agree that their relationship will never work.

McCauley drives with Eady to the Los Angeles International Airport to flee to New Zealand via private jet. However, when Nate gives him Waingro&#x27;s location, McCauley abandons his usual caution to seek revenge. McCauley infiltrates the hotel and kills Waingro in his room. However, as McCauley returns to Eady, he is spotted by Hanna and flees. Hanna chases McCauley onto the tarmac at the airport, and the two stalk each other before Hanna gets the drop on McCauley and shoots him in the chest. Hanna takes McCauley&#x27;s hand as he dies of his wounds.

==Cast==
Additional cast members include Martin Ferrero as a hardware salesman and Hazelle Goodman as the mother of a prostitute murdered by Waingro. Featured as members of the LAPD are Paul Herman as Sergeant Heinz, Cindy Katz as forensics investigator Rachel, and Dan Martin as Detective Harry Dieter. Stuntmen Rick Avery, Bill McIntosh and Thomas Rosales Jr. portray the armored truck guards. Patricia Healy appears as a woman in a relationship with Bosko, and Yvonne Zima plays the girl taken hostage by Cheritto. News reporter Claudia is portrayed by Farrah Forke. Bud Cort makes an uncredited appearance as restaurant owner Solenko.

==Development==
===Factual basis===
&quot;Heat&quot; is based on the true story of Neil McCauley, a calculating criminal and ex-Alcatraz inmate who was tracked down by Detective Chuck Adamson in 1964. In 1961, McCauley was transferred from Alcatraz to McNeil Island Corrections Center, as mentioned in the film. He was released in 1962 and immediately began planning new crimes. Michael Parille and William Pinkerton used bolt cutters and drills to rob a manufacturing company of diamond drill bits, which is recreated in the film.

Pacino&#x27;s character is largely based on Detective Chuck Adamson, who began keeping tabs on McCauley&#x27;s crew, knowing that he had begun committing crimes again. Adamson and McCauley met for coffee once, as portrayed in the film. Their dialogue in the script is based on the conversation that McCauley and Adamson had. The next time that the two met, guns were drawn, which is also mirrored in the movie.

On March 25, 1964, McCauley and members of his regular crew followed an armored car that delivered money to a National Tea grocery store at 4720 S. Cicero Avenue, Chicago. When the drop was made, three of the robbers entered the store. They threatened the clerks and stole money bags worth $13,137 (equivalent to $ in ) before getting away after police gunfire.

McCauley&#x27;s crew was unaware that Adamson and eight other detectives had blocked off all potential exits; the getaway car turned down an alley, and the robbers saw the blockade and realized that they were trapped. All four exited the vehicle and began firing. Russell Bredon (or Breaden) and Michael Parille were slain in an alley while Miklos Polesti (on whom Chris Shiherlis is loosely based) shot his way out and escaped. McCauley was shot to death on the lawn of a nearby home. He was 50 years old and the prime suspect in several burglaries. Polesti was caught days later and sent to prison. Polesti was still alive in 2011.

Adamson went on to a successful career as a television and film producer, and he died in 2008 at age 71. Mann&#x27;s 2009 film &quot;Public Enemies&quot; is dedicated to Adamson&#x27;s memory.

The character of Nate played by Jon Voight is based on criminal-turned-author Edward Bunker, who served as a consultant to Mann on the film.

===Canceled TV series===
In 1979, Mann wrote a 180-page draft of &quot;Heat&quot;. He rewrote it after making &quot;Thief&quot; in 1981, hoping to find a director to make it and mentioning it public in a promotional interview for his 1983 film &quot;The Keep&quot;. In the late 1980s, he offered the film to his friend, film director Walter Hill, who turned him down. Following the success of &quot;Miami Vice&quot; and &quot;Crime Story&quot;, Mann was to produce a new crime television show for NBC. He turned the script that would become &quot;Heat&quot; into a 90-minute pilot for a television series featuring the Los Angeles Police Department Robbery–Homicide division, featuring Scott Plank in the role of Hanna, and Alex McArthur playing the character of Neil McCauley, renamed to Patrick McLaren.

The pilot was shot in nineteen days, atypical for Mann. The script was shortened to almost a third of its original length, omitting many subplots that made it into &quot;Heat&quot;. The network was unhappy with Plank as the lead actor, and asked Mann to recast Hanna&#x27;s role. Mann declined and the show was canceled and the pilot aired on August 27, 1989, as a television film entitled &quot;L.A. Takedown&quot;, which was eventually released on VHS and DVD in Europe.

==Production==
===Pre-production===
On April 5, 1994, Mann was reported to have abandoned his earlier plan to shoot a biopic of James Dean in favor of directing &quot;Heat&quot;, producing it with Art Linson. The film marks the first on-screen appearance together of Al Pacino and Robert De Niro. Both actors had starred in &quot;The Godfather Part II&quot; but, owing to the film&#x27;s story structure, they are not seen in the same scene. Pacino and De Niro were Mann&#x27;s first choices for the roles of Hanna and McCauley, respectively, and they both immediately agreed to act.

Mann assigned Janice Polley, a former collaborator on &quot;The Last of the Mohicans&quot;, as the film&#x27;s location manager, along with Lori Balton, who primarily handled scouting duties. Scouting locations lasted from August to December 1994. Mann requested locations that had not appeared on film before, in which Balton was successful—fewer than 10 of the 85 filming locations were previously used. The most challenging shooting location proved to be Los Angeles International Airport, with the film crew nearly missing the shot due to a threat to the airport by the Unabomber.

To make the long shootout more realistic, they hired British ex-Special Air Service sergeant Andy McNab as a technical weapons trainer and adviser. He designed a weapons-training curriculum to train the actors for three months using live ammunition before shooting with blanks for the actual take and worked with training them for the bank robbery.

=== Casting ===
De Niro was the first cast member to receive the film script, showing it to Pacino, who also wanted to be part of the film. De Niro believed that &quot;Heat&quot; was a &quot;very good story, had a particular feel to it, a reality and authenticity&quot;. In 2016, Pacino revealed that he viewed his character as having been under the influence of cocaine throughout the film.

Mann took Kilmer, Sizemore and De Niro to Folsom State Prison to interview actual career criminals to prepare for their roles. While researching her role, Judd met several former prostitutes who became housewives.

Keanu Reeves was offered the role of Chris Shiherlis, but he turned it down in favor of playing Hamlet at the Manitoba Theatre Centre. As a result, Val Kilmer was given the role.

===Filming===
Principal photography for &quot;Heat&quot; lasted 107 days during the summer of 1995. All of the shooting was done on location in and around Los Angeles due to Mann&#x27;s decision not to use a soundstage. Among the key filming locations were the Citigroup Center, where the bank heist and police shootout takes place, and the Kate Mantilini restaurant, which serves as the location of the meeting over coffee between Pacino and De Niro&#x27;s characters.

The film&#x27;s cinematographer Dante Spinotti used a combination of natural and practical lighting to capture grittiness and realism for the film. The film&#x27;s visual style also captures the vastness of Los Angeles and the isolation of its characters within the urban sprawl. Mann and Spinotti often use wide shots and long takes to create a sense of scale and immersion.

Both Al Pacino and Robert De Niro prepared extensively for their roles. They spent time with real detectives and criminals to understand their characters in depth. The diner scene with Pacino and De Niro was shot with minimal rehearsals to maintain the spontaneity and intensity of their interaction. Mann used multiple cameras to capture the scene from different angles, focusing on close-ups to highlight the tension and subtleties of each actor&#x27;s performance.

== Soundtrack ==
On December 19, 1995, Warner Bros. Records released a soundtrack album on cassette and CD to accompany the film, titled &quot;Heat: Music from the Motion Picture&quot;. The album is produced by Matthias Gohl. It contains a 29-minute selection of the film score composed by Elliot Goldenthal, as well as songs by other artists, such as U2 and Brian Eno (collaborating as Passengers), Terje Rypdal, Moby and Lisa Gerrard.

&quot;Heat&quot; uses an abridged instrumental rendition of the Joy Division song &quot;New Dawn Fades&quot; by Moby, which is also featured in the same form on the soundtrack album. Mann reused the Einstürzende Neubauten track &quot;Armenia&quot; in his 1999 film &quot;The Insider&quot;. The film ends with Moby&#x27;s &quot;God Moving Over the Face of the Waters&quot;, a different version of which is included at the end of the soundtrack album.

Mann and Goldenthal decided on an atmospheric situation for the film soundtrack. Goldenthal uses a setup consisting of multiple guitars, which he termed &quot;guitar orchestra&quot;, and thought that it brought the film score closer to a European style.

==Release==
===Box office===
&quot;Heat&quot; was released on December 15, 1995, and opened at the box office with $8.4 million from 1,325 theaters, finishing in third place behind &quot;Jumanji&quot; and &quot;Toy Story&quot;. It went on to earn a total gross of $67.4 million in United States, and $120 million in foreign box offices. &quot;Heat&quot; was ranked the #25 highest-grossing film of 1995.

===Home media===
&quot;Heat&quot; was released on VHS on November 12, 1996, by Warner Home Video. Due to its running time, the film had to be released on two cassettes. A DVD release followed on July 27, 1999. A two-disc special-edition DVD was released by Warner Home Video on February 22, 2005, featuring an audio commentary by Michael Mann, deleted scenes and numerous documentaries detailing the film&#x27;s production. This edition contains the original theatrical cut.

The initial Blu-ray release was by Warner Home Video on November 10, 2009, featuring a high-definition film transfer, supervised by Mann. Among the disc extras are Mann&#x27;s audio commentary, a one-hour documentary about the making of the film, and ten minutes of scenes deleted from the film. As well as approving the look of the transfer, Mann also recut two scenes slightly differently, referring to them as &quot;new content changes&quot;.

A &quot;Director&#x27;s Definitive Edition&quot; blu-ray was released on May 9, 2017, by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment, who acquired the distribution rights to the film through their part-ownership of Regency back in 2015. Sourced from a 4K remaster of the film supervised by Mann, the two-disc set contains all the extras from the 2009 Blu-ray, with two filmmakers panels from 2015 and 2016, one of which was moderated by Christopher Nolan.

A 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray Ultimate Collector&#x27;s Edition of &quot;Heat&quot; that contains the Director&#x27;s Definitive Edition of the film on UHD Blu-ray and Blu-ray, along with legacy bonus materials released on August 9, 2022, by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment (under the 20th Century Studios label), was released coinciding with the release date of Mann&#x27;s sequel novel. Unlike the previous home media releases, the Director&#x27;s Definitive Edition Blu-ray and the 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray Ultimate Collector&#x27;s Edition did not feature the Warner Bros. Pictures logo at the beginning, although the in-credit closing is retained.

&quot;Heat&quot; was broadcast on NBC television on January 3, 1999, in a significantly edited version. Mann had offered the network some scenes that had been filmed but omitted from the theatrical edit with hope of having the film shown in four hours (with commercials) over two nights. Instead, NBC chose to cut nearly 40 minutes from the theatrical version so that &quot;Heat&quot; could be shown in a three-hour time slot (with commercials). Mann told &quot;Variety&quot;, &quot;They cut so much out of the movie that they destroyed the narrative of the film along with its integrity... Too much time was taken out of the film that wasn&#x27;t due to language or other content.&quot; As a result, Mann had his director&#x27;s credit on the TV version replaced with the pseudonym &quot;Alan Smithee&quot;.

==Reception==
On Rotten Tomatoes, &quot;Heat&quot; holds an approval rating of 83%, based on 150 reviews and an average rating of 7.8/10. The website&#x27;s critical consensus reads, &quot;Though Al Pacino and Robert De Niro share but a handful of screen minutes together, &quot;Heat&quot; is an engrossing crime drama that draws compelling performances from its stars – and confirms Michael Mann&#x27;s mastery of the genre.&quot; On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 76 out of 100, based on 22 critics, indicating &quot;generally favorable&quot; reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of &quot;A−&quot; on a scale of A+ to F.

Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three and a half stars out of four. He described Mann&#x27;s script as &quot;uncommonly literate&quot;, with a psychological insight into the symbiotic relationship between police and criminals, and the fractured intimacy between the male and female characters: &quot;It&#x27;s not just an action picture. Above all, the dialogue is complex enough to allow the characters to say what they&#x27;re thinking: They are eloquent, insightful, fanciful, poetic when necessary. They&#x27;re not trapped with cliches. Of the many imprisonments possible in our world, one of the worst must be to be inarticulate – to be unable to tell another person what you really feel.&quot; Simon Cote of &quot;The Austin Chronicle&quot; called the film &quot;one of the most intelligent crime-thrillers to come along in years&quot;, and said Pacino and De Niro&#x27;s scenes together were &quot;poignant and gripping.&quot;

Kenneth Turan of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; called the film a &quot;sleek, accomplished piece of work, meticulously controlled and completely involving. The dark end of the street doesn&#x27;t get much more inviting than this.&quot; Todd McCarthy of &quot;Variety&quot; wrote, &quot;Stunningly made and incisively acted by a large and terrific cast, Michael Mann&#x27;s ambitious study of the relativity of good and evil stands apart from other films of its type by virtue of its extraordinarily rich characterizations and its thoughtful, deeply melancholy take on modern life.&quot; Owen Gleiberman of &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; gave it a B− rating, saying that &quot;Mann&#x27;s action scenes ... have an existential, you-are-there jitteriness,&quot; but called the heist-planning and Hanna&#x27;s investigation scenes &quot;dry, talky.&quot;

&quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked &quot;Heat&quot; #28 on its list of &quot;The 100 Greatest Movies of the &#x27;90s&quot;, and &quot;The Guardian&quot; ranked it #22 on its list of &quot;The Greatest Crime Films of All Time&quot;, while other publications have noted its influence on numerous subsequent films.

Although it did not receive any major award nominations, the film was nominated for Best Action/Adventure Film and Kilmer for Best Supporting Actor at the Saturn Awards but lost to &quot;The Usual Suspects&quot; and &quot;12 Monkeys&quot; respectively.

==Impact==
French gangster Rédoine Faïd told Mann at a film festival &quot;You were my technical adviser&quot;. The media described later robberies as resembling scenes from &quot;Heat&quot;, including armored car robberies in South Africa, Colombia, Denmark, and Norway and the 1997 North Hollywood shootout, in which Larry Phillips Jr. and Emil Mătăsăreanu robbed the North Hollywood branch of the Bank of America and, similarly to the film, were confronted by the LAPD as they left the bank. A copy of &quot;Heat&quot; was found in the VCR at Phillips&#x27; residence. This shootout is one of the longest and bloodiest events of its type in American police history. Both robbers were killed, and eleven police officers and seven civilians were injured during the shootout. &quot;Heat&quot; was widely referenced during the coverage of the shootout.

For his 2008 film &quot;The Dark Knight&quot;, director Christopher Nolan drew inspiration in his portrayal of Gotham City from &quot;Heat&quot; in order &quot;to tell a very large, city story or the story of a city&quot;. In 2016, a year after the 20th anniversary of &quot;Heat&quot;, Nolan moderated a Q&amp;A session with Michael Mann and cast and crew at the Samuel Goldwyn Theater.

&quot;Heat&quot; was one of the inspirations behind the highly influential 2001 video game &quot;Grand Theft Auto III&quot; as well as the 2008 sequel &quot;Grand Theft Auto IV&quot;, notably the mission &quot;Three Leaf Clover&quot;, which was inspired by the climactic bank robbery and police shootout, and the 2013 sequel &quot;Grand Theft Auto V&quot;, notably the mission &quot;Blitz Play&quot; where the crew blocks and then knocks over an armored car in order to rob it.

Director Mia Hansen-Løve has said she is &quot;obsessed&quot; with &quot;Heat&quot; and said &quot;the themes of &quot;Heat&quot;, actually, are themes of my films, except in a very different way, in a very different world&quot;.

==Subsequent works ==

On March 16, 2016, Mann announced that he was developing a &quot;Heat&quot; prequel novel, as a part of launching his company Michael Mann Books. On April 27, 2017, Reed Farrel Coleman joined the project as co-author. On May 15, 2020, Mann stated that the novel would function as both a prequel and a sequel, with plot taking place before and after the film&#x27;s main events. By January 19, 2022, it was revealed that the novel would be a collaboration between Mann and Meg Gardiner; it was subsequently released in August 2022. The title is &quot;Heat 2.&quot;

In September 2019, Michael Mann stated that he intends to produce an adaptation of the novel, acknowledging film and television as possible mediums for release. By July 5, 2022, Mann reaffirmed his plans to adapt the novel follow-up into a feature film, while stating that the principal cast from the first installment may be recast for the adaptation. In April 2023, it was reported that the sequel was in development, with Adam Driver in talks to play young McCauley.

==See also==
* Heist film

==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* Heat. Work and genre Jump Cut magazine, by J. A. Lindstrom, no. 43, July 2000, pp. 21–37
* De Niro and Pacino Star in a Film. Together, from &quot;The New York Times&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q652256" start="24" end="28" title="Epic film" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="29" end="39" title="crime film" label="crime film"/>
<link wikidata="Q270097" start="64" end="76" title="Michael Mann" label="Michael Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154757" start="93" end="106" title="ensemble cast" label="ensemble cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="114" end="123" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="128" end="142" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q349852" start="149" end="161" title="Tom Sizemore" label="Tom Sizemore"/>
<link wikidata="Q167520" start="163" end="173" title="Jon Voight" label="Jon Voight"/>
<link wikidata="Q191084" start="178" end="188" title="Val Kilmer" label="Val Kilmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q214126" start="250" end="279" title="Los Angeles Police Department" label="Los Angeles Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="511" end="518" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115323" start="534" end="547" title="Chuck Adamson" label="Chuck Adamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q917117" start="748" end="761" title="L.A. Takedown" label="L.A. Takedown"/>
<link wikidata="Q705631" start="913" end="923" title="Art Linson" label="Art Linson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016302" start="1168" end="1189" title="Warner Bros. Pictures" label="Warner Bros. Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1628" end="1639" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q259038" start="1786" end="1797" title="bearer bond" label="bearer bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q214126" start="2029" end="2033" title="Los Angeles Police Department" label="LAPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="2134" end="2140" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="2461" end="2472" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q113588644" start="2500" end="2505" title="fence (criminal)" label="fence"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="2575" end="2590" title="money laundering" label="money launderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364673" start="2806" end="2815" title="informant" label="informant"/>
<link wikidata="Q399974" start="3210" end="3221" title="Interstate 105 (California)" label="105 Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8731" start="5301" end="5334" title="Los Angeles International Airport" label="Los Angeles International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q718338" start="5868" end="5882" title="Martin Ferrero" label="Martin Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q11834994" start="5910" end="5925" title="Hazelle Goodman" label="Hazelle Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898080" start="6013" end="6024" title="Paul Herman" label="Paul Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213941" start="6093" end="6103" title="Dan Martin (actor)" label="Dan Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q66018910" start="6140" end="6150" title="Rick Avery" label="Rick Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500595" start="6170" end="6188" title="Thomas Rosales Jr." label="Thomas Rosales Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q20640083" start="6223" end="6237" title="Patricia Healy" label="Patricia Healy"/>
<link wikidata="Q286033" start="6291" end="6302" title="Yvonne Zima" label="Yvonne Zima"/>
<link wikidata="Q743512" start="6383" end="6395" title="Farrah Forke" label="Farrah Forke"/>
<link wikidata="Q39982" start="6397" end="6405" title="Bud Cort" label="Bud Cort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142661" start="6595" end="6603" title="Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary" label="Alcatraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115323" start="6645" end="6658" title="Chuck Adamson" label="Chuck Adamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802522" start="6719" end="6751" title="McNeil Island Corrections Center" label="McNeil Island Corrections Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978843" start="7522" end="7534" title="National Tea" label="National Tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q329448" start="8543" end="8557" title="Public Enemies (2009 film)" label="Public Enemies"/>
<link wikidata="Q167520" start="8636" end="8646" title="Jon Voight" label="Jon Voight"/>
<link wikidata="Q250539" start="8682" end="8695" title="Edward Bunker" label="Edward Bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193098" start="8862" end="8867" title="Thief (film)" label="Thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754140" start="8996" end="9004" title="The Keep (film)" label="The Keep"/>
<link wikidata="Q350422" start="9080" end="9091" title="Walter Hill (director)" label="Walter Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q559321" start="9145" end="9155" title="Miami Vice" label="Miami Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140021" start="9172" end="9183" title="Crime Story (U.S. TV series)" label="Crime Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="9243" end="9246" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="9321" end="9326" title="television pilot" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515251" start="9432" end="9443" title="Scott Plank" label="Scott Plank"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147116" start="9470" end="9483" title="Alex McArthur" label="Alex McArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="9918" end="9933" title="television film" label="television film"/>
<link wikidata="Q917117" start="9949" end="9962" title="L.A. Takedown" label="L.A. Takedown"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="10003" end="10006" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="10011" end="10014" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="10145" end="10151" title="biopic" label="biopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83359" start="10155" end="10165" title="James Dean" label="James Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q705631" start="10224" end="10234" title="Art Linson" label="Art Linson"/>
<link wikidata="Q184768" start="10357" end="10378" title="The Godfather Part II" label="The Godfather Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q144483" start="10672" end="10696" title="The Last of the Mohicans (1992 film)" label="The Last of the Mohicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q222134" start="11186" end="11195" title="Unabomber" label="Unabomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="11262" end="11281" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q433597" start="11291" end="11301" title="Andy McNab" label="Andy McNab"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="11911" end="11918" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435594" start="11983" end="12002" title="Folsom State Prison" label="Folsom State Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q43416" start="12156" end="12168" title="Keanu Reeves" label="Keanu Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="12252" end="12258" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750161" start="12266" end="12289" title="Manitoba Theatre Centre" label="Manitoba Theatre Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="12350" end="12371" title="Principal photography" label="Principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497985" start="12544" end="12554" title="soundstage" label="soundstage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498921" start="12597" end="12613" title="Citigroup Center (Los Angeles)" label="Citigroup Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q125510434" start="12677" end="12702" title="Kate Mantilini" label="Kate Mantilini restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="13692" end="13712" title="Warner Bros. Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176708" start="13724" end="13740" title="soundtrack album" label="soundtrack album"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="13744" end="13752" title="Cassette tape" label="cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="13757" end="13759" title="Compact disc" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909917" start="13864" end="13877" title="Matthias Gohl" label="Matthias Gohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q264565" start="13943" end="13960" title="Elliot Goldenthal" label="Elliot Goldenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="14005" end="14007" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q569003" start="14012" end="14021" title="Brian Eno" label="Brian Eno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078102" start="14040" end="14050" title="Passengers (side project)" label="Passengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q615123" start="14053" end="14065" title="Terje Rypdal" label="Terje Rypdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14045" start="14067" end="14071" title="Moby" label="Moby"/>
<link wikidata="Q40580" start="14076" end="14088" title="Lisa Gerrard" label="Lisa Gerrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q172763" start="14155" end="14167" title="Joy Division" label="Joy Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006807" start="14179" end="14193" title="New Dawn Fades" label="New Dawn Fades"/>
<link wikidata="Q14045" start="14203" end="14207" title="Moby" label="Moby"/>
<link wikidata="Q11898" start="14290" end="14312" title="Einstürzende Neubauten" label="Einstürzende Neubauten"/>
<link wikidata="Q463832" start="14362" end="14373" title="The Insider (film)" label="The Insider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954714" start="14418" end="14456" title="God Moving Over the Face of the Waters" label="God Moving Over the Face of the Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q222939" start="14984" end="14991" title="Jumanji" label="Jumanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q171048" start="15008" end="15017" title="Toy Story" label="Toy Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="15252" end="15255" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="15281" end="15298" title="Warner Home Video" label="Warner Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="15373" end="15376" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="15459" end="15476" title="Warner Bros. Discovery Home Entertainment" label="Warner Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q440991" start="15512" end="15528" title="audio commentary" label="audio commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253643" start="15546" end="15559" title="deleted scene" label="deleted scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="15690" end="15697" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084961" start="16214" end="16249" title="20th Century Fox Home Entertainment" label="20th Century Fox Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q466459" start="16332" end="16339" title="Regency Enterprises" label="Regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q238162" start="16369" end="16371" title="4K resolution" label="4K"/>
<link wikidata="Q25191" start="16554" end="16571" title="Christopher Nolan" label="Christopher Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953724" start="16579" end="16595" title="Ultra HD Blu-ray" label="Ultra HD Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053254" start="16808" end="16846" title="Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment" label="Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="16858" end="16878" title="20th Century Studios" label="20th Century Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016302" start="17132" end="17153" title="Warner Bros. Pictures" label="Warner Bros. Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="17256" end="17259" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="17684" end="17691" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q734916" start="18011" end="18023" title="Alan Smithee" label="Alan Smithee"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="18049" end="18064" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="18467" end="18477" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="18628" end="18639" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="18713" end="18724" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519844" start="19453" end="19473" title="The Austin Chronicle" label="The Austin Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353410" start="19668" end="19681" title="Kenneth Turan" label="Kenneth Turan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="19695" end="19712" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894636" start="19908" end="19921" title="Todd McCarthy" label="Todd McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="19931" end="19938" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114488" start="20259" end="20274" title="Owen Gleiberman" label="Owen Gleiberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="20284" end="20304" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="20533" end="20546" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="20660" end="20672" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q115737" start="20923" end="20949" title="Saturn Award for Best Action or Adventure Film" label="Best Action/Adventure Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258647" start="20965" end="20986" title="Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q105447" start="20994" end="21007" title="Saturn Awards" label="Saturn Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q132351" start="21026" end="21044" title="The Usual Suspects" label="The Usual Suspects"/>
<link wikidata="Q175038" start="21061" end="21071" title="12 Monkeys" label="12 Monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454674" start="21120" end="21132" title="Rédoine Faïd" label="Rédoine Faïd"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="21320" end="21332" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="21334" end="21342" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="21344" end="21351" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954884" start="21357" end="21363" title="NOKAS robbery" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q659385" start="21377" end="21401" title="North Hollywood shootout" label="North Hollywood shootout"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="21493" end="21508" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q214126" start="21560" end="21564" title="Los Angeles Police Department" label="LAPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q163872" start="21970" end="21985" title="The Dark Knight" label="The Dark Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q25191" start="22002" end="22019" title="Christopher Nolan" label="Christopher Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q732858" start="22057" end="22068" title="Gotham City" label="Gotham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q240970" start="22310" end="22332" title="Samuel Goldwyn Theater" label="Samuel Goldwyn Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q149106" start="22432" end="22452" title="Grand Theft Auto III" label="Grand Theft Auto III"/>
<link wikidata="Q94797" start="22492" end="22511" title="Grand Theft Auto IV" label="Grand Theft Auto IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q17452" start="22666" end="22684" title="Grand Theft Auto V" label="Grand Theft Auto V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307854" start="22823" end="22838" title="Mia Hansen-Løve" label="Mia Hansen-Løve"/>
<link wikidata="Q678345" start="23144" end="23151" title="prequel" label="prequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16025004" start="23233" end="23252" title="Reed Farrel Coleman" label="Reed Farrel Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q523653" start="23540" end="23552" title="Meg Gardiner" label="Meg Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678990" start="24058" end="24069" title="Adam Driver" label="Adam Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q496523" start="24119" end="24129" title="Heist film" label="Heist film"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="24320" end="24338" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43567" wikidata="Q5472" url="?curid=43567" title="Hindu Kush">
<text>The Hindu Kush is an mountain range in Central and South Asia to the west of the Himalayas. It stretches from central and eastern Afghanistan into northwestern Pakistan and far southeastern Tajikistan. The range forms the western section of the &quot;Hindu Kush Himalayan Region&quot; (&quot;HKH&quot;); to the north, near its northeastern end, the Hindu Kush buttresses the Pamir Mountains near the point where the borders of China, Pakistan and Afghanistan meet, after which it runs southwest through Pakistan and into Afghanistan near their border. 

The eastern end of the Hindu Kush in the north merges with the Karakoram Range. Towards its southern end, it connects with the White Mountains near the Kabul River. It divides the valley of the Amu Darya (the ancient &quot;Oxus&quot;) to the north from the Indus River valley to the south. The range has numerous high snow-capped peaks, with the highest point being Tirich Mir or Terichmir at in the Chitral District of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan.

The Hindu Kush range region was a historically significant center of Buddhism, with sites such as the Bamiyan Buddhas. The range and communities settled in it hosted ancient monasteries, important trade networks and travelers between Central Asia and South Asia. While the vast majority of the region has been majority-Muslim for several centuries now, certain portions of the Hindu Kush only became Islamized relatively recently, such as Kafiristan, which retained ancient polytheistic beliefs until the 19th century when it was converted to Islam by the Durrani Empire and renamed Nuristan (&quot;land of light&quot;). The Hindu Kush range has also been the passageway for invasions of the Indian subcontinent, and continues to be important to contemporary warfare in Afghanistan.

==Name origin==
The earliest known usage of the Persian name &quot;Hindu Kush&quot; occurs on a map published about 1000 CE. Some modern scholars remove the space and refer to the mountain range as &quot;Hindukush&quot;.

=== Etymology ===
&quot;Hindu Kush&quot; is generally translated as &quot;Killer of Hindu&quot; or &quot;Hindu-Killer&quot; by most writers. Boyle&#x27;s Persian–English dictionary indicates that the Persian suffix -&quot;koš&quot; is the present stem of the verb &#x27;to kill&#x27; (&quot;koštan&quot; ). According to linguist Francis Joseph Steingass, the suffix -&quot;kush&quot; means &quot;a male; (imp. of &quot;kushtan&quot; in comp.) a killer, who kills, slays, murders, oppresses as &quot;azhdaha-kush&quot; [&#x27;dragon-slayer&#x27;].&quot;

The term was earliest used by Ibn Battuta. According to him, &quot;Hindu Kush&quot; means Hindu Killer as Hindu slaves from the Indian subcontinent died in the harsh climatic conditions of the mountains while being taken from India to Turkestan by Muslim traders. 

Several other theories have been propounded as to the origins of the name. According to Nigel Allan, the term &quot;Hindu Kush&quot; has two alternate meanings i.e &#x27;sparkling snows of India&#x27; and &#x27;mountains of India&#x27;, with &quot;Kush&quot; possibly being a soft variant of the Persian &quot;kuh&quot; (&#x27;mountain&#x27;). Allan states that Hindu Kush was the frontier boundary to Arab geographers. Yet others suggest that the name may be derived from ancient Avestan, meaning &#x27;water mountain&#x27;. 

According to &quot;Hobson-Jobson&quot;, a 19th-century British dictionary, &quot;Hindukush&quot; might be a corruption of the ancient Latin &quot;Indicus (Caucasus);&quot; the entry mentions the interpretation first given by Ibn Battuta as a popular theory already at that time, despite doubts cast upon it.

=== Other names ===
In Vedic Sanskrit, the range was known as &quot;upariśaina&quot;, and in Avestan, as &quot;upāirisaēna&quot; (from Proto-Iranian *&quot;upārisaina&quot;- &#x27;covered with juniper&#x27;). It can alternatively be interpreted as &quot;beyond the reach of eagles&quot;.

In the time of Alexander the Great, the mountain range was referred to as the &quot;Caucasus Indicus&quot; (as opposed to the Greater Caucasus range between the Caspian and Black Seas), and the extention of the former as &quot;Paropamisos&quot; (see &quot;Paropamisadae&quot;) by Hellenic Greeks in the late first millennium BCE.

Some 19th-century encyclopedias and gazetteers state that the term &quot;Hindu Kush&quot; originally applied only to the peak in the area of the Kushan Pass, which had become a center of the Kushan Empire by the first century.

==Geography==



The range forms the western section of the &quot;Hindu Kush Himalayan Region&quot; (&quot;HKH&quot;) and is the westernmost extension of the Pamir Mountains, the Karakoram and the Himalayas. It divides the valley of the Amu Darya (the ancient &quot;Oxus&quot;) to the north from the Indus River valley to the south. The range has numerous high snow-capped peaks, with the highest point being Tirich Mir or Terichmir at in the Chitral District of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan. To the north, near its northeastern end, the Hindu Kush buttresses the Pamir Mountains near the point where the borders of China, Pakistan and Afghanistan meet, after which it runs southwest through Pakistan and into Afghanistan near their border. The eastern end of the Hindu Kush in the north merges with the Karakoram Range. Towards its southern end, it connects with the Spin Ghar Range near the Kabul River.

=== Peaks ===
Many peaks of the range are between ; however, some are much higher, with an average peak height of . The mountains of the Hindu Kush range diminish in height as they stretch westward. Near Kabul, in the west, they attain heights of ; in the east they extend from . 
=== Passes ===
Numerous high passes (&quot;kotal&quot;) transect the mountains, forming a strategically important network for the transit of caravans. The most important mountain pass in Afghanistan is the Salang Pass (Kotal-e Salang) () north of Kabul, which links southern Afghanistan to northern Afghanistan. The Salang Tunnel at and the extensive network of galleries on the approach roads was constructed with Soviet financial and technological assistance and involved drilling through the heart of the Hindu Kush; since the start of the wars in Afghanistan it has been an active area of armed conflict with various parties trying to control the strategic tunnel. The range has several other passes in Afghanistan, the lowest of which is the southern Shibar pass () where the Hindu Kush range terminates.

Before the Salang Tunnel, another feat of engineering was the road constructed through the Tang-e Gharu gorge near Kabul, replacing the ancient Lataband Pass and greatly reducing travel time towards the Pakistani border at the Khyber Pass.

Other mountain passes are at altitudes of about or higher, including the Broghil Pass at 12,460 feet in Pakistan, and the Dorah Pass between Pakistan and Afghanistan at 14,000 feet. Other high passes in Pakistan include the Lowari Pass at 10,200 feet, the Gomal Pass. The Darmodar Aghost Pass is at elevation of . The Ishkoman Aghost Pass is at elevation of .

===Watershed===
The Hindu Kush form the boundary between the Indus watershed in South Asia, and Amu Darya watershed in Central Asia. Melt water from snow and ice feeds major river systems in Central Asia: the Amu Darya (which feeds the Aral Sea), Helmand River (which is a major source of water for the Sistan Basin in southern Afghanistan and Iran), and the Kabul Riverthe last of which is a major tributary of the Indus River. Smaller rivers with headwaters in the range include the Khash, the Farah and the Arashkan (Harut) rivers. The basins of these rivers serve the ecology and economy of the region, but the water flow in these rivers greatly fluctuates, and reliance on these has been a historical problem with extended droughts being commonplace. The eastern end of the range, with the highest peaks, high snow accumulation allows to long-term water storage.

==Geology ==
Geologically, the range is rooted in the formation of the subcontinent from a region of Gondwana that drifted away from East Africa about 160 million years ago, around the Middle Jurassic period. The Indian subcontinent, Australia and islands of the Indian Ocean rifted further, drifting northeastwards, with the Indian subcontinent colliding with the Eurasian Plate nearly 55 million years ago, towards the end of Palaeocene. This collision gradually formed the Himalayas, including the Hindu Kush.

The Hindu Kush are a part of the &quot;young Eurasian mountain range consisting of metamorphic rocks such as schist, gneiss and marble, as well as of intrusives such as granite, diorite of different age and size&quot;. The northern regions of the Hindu Kush witness Himalayan winter and have glaciers, while its southeastern end witnesses the fringe of Indian subcontinent summer monsoons.

The Hindu Kush range remains geologically active and is still rising; it is prone to earthquakes. The Hindu Kush system stretches about laterally, and its median north–south measurement is about . The mountains are orographically described in several parts. Peaks in the western Hindu Kush rise to over and stretch between Darra-ye Sekari and the Shibar Pass in the west and the Khawak Pass in the east. The central Hindu Kush peaks rise to over , and this section has numerous spurs between the Khawak Pass in the east and the Durāh Pass in the west. In 2005 and 2015 there were some major earthquakes.

The eastern Hindu Kush, also known as the &quot;High Hindu Kush&quot;, is mostly located in northern Pakistan and the Nuristan and Badakhshan provinces of Afghanistan with peaks over . This section extends from the Durāh Pass to the Baroghil Pass at the border between northeastern Afghanistan and north Pakistan. The Chitral District of Pakistan is home to Tirich Mir, Noshaq, and Istoro Nalthe highest peaks in the Hindu Kush. The ridges between Khawak Pass and Badakshan is over and are called the Kaja Mohammed range.

==Land cover and land use ==

ICIMOD&#x27;s first annual regional 30-meter resolution land cover database of HKH generated using public domain Landsat images demonstrated that grassland was the most dominant land cover, followed by barren land, which includes areas with bare areas. In 2000, 2005, 2010, and 2015, grassland covered 37.2%, 37.6%, 38.7%, and 38.2%, respectively, of the total area of the HKH region. During the same years, the second dominant land cover was barren areas, including bare soil and bare rock. In 2000, 2005, 2010, and 2015, bare soil and bare rock covered 32.1, 31.4, 30.4, and 30.7%. The cropland cover in 2000 was about 5.1% and about 5.4% in 2015. Snow and glacier areas covered about 4% of the high-elevation section in 2018, while waterbodies and riverbeds/channels together accounted for 2%. The weather conditions also have an impact on the land cover patterns across the regions. In the HKH, forest cover is mostly distributed in the south and south-eastern areas, where precipitation is more; the grasslands are mostly distributed in the north and north-western parts, while cropland is mostly found in the southern part of the region.

=== Flora and fauna ===
The mountainous areas of Hindu Kush range are mostly barren or, at the most, sparsely sprinkled with trees and stunted bushes. From about , states Yarshater, &quot;sclerophyllous forests are predominant with Quercus and Olea (wild olive); above that, up to a height of about one finds coniferous forests with Cedrus, Picea, Abies, Pinus, and junipers&quot;. The inner valleys of the Hindu Kush see little rain and have desert vegetation. On the other hand, Eastern Himalaya is home to multiple biodiversity hotspots, and 353 new species (242 plants, 16 amphibians, 16 reptiles, 14 fish, two birds, two mammals and 61+ invertebrates) have been discovered there in between 1998 and 2008, with an average of 35 new species finds every year. With Eastern Himalaya included, the entire Hindu Kush Himalaya region is home to an estimated 35,000+ species of plants and 200+ species of animals.

== History ==

The high altitudes of the mountains have historical significance in South and Central Asia. The Hindu Kush range was a major center of Buddhism with sites such as the Bamiyan Buddhas. It has also been the passageway during the invasions of the Indian subcontinent, a region where the Taliban and al-Qaeda grew, and a scene of modern era warfare in Afghanistan. Ancient mines producing lapis lazuli are found in Kowkcheh Valley, while gem-grade emeralds are found north of Kabul in the valley of the Panjsher River and some of its tributaries. According to Walter Schumann, the West Hindu Kush mountains have been the source of the finest Lapis lazuli for thousands of years.
Buddhism was widespread in the ancient Hindu Kush region. The ancient artwork of Buddhism includes the giant rock-carved statues called the Bamiyan Buddhas, in the southern and western end of the Hindu Kush. These statues were destroyed by Taliban Islamists in 2001. The southeastern valleys of Hindu Kush connecting towards the Indus Valley region were a major center that hosted monasteries, religious scholars from distant lands, trade networks and merchants of the ancient Indian subcontinent.

One of the early Buddhist schools, the Mahāsāṃghika-Lokottaravāda, was prominent in the area of Bamiyan. The Chinese Buddhist monk Xuanzang visited a Lokottaravāda monastery in the 7th century CE, at Bamiyan, Afghanistan. Birchbark and palm leaf manuscripts of texts in this monastery&#x27;s collection, including Mahāyāna sūtras, have been discovered in the caves of Hindu Kush, and these are now a part of the Schøyen Collection. Some manuscripts are in the Gāndhārī language and Kharoṣṭhī script, while others are in Sanskrit and written in forms of the Gupta script.

According to Alfred Foucher, the Hindu Kush and nearby regions gradually converted to Buddhism by the 1st century CE, and this region was the base from where Buddhism crossed the Hindu Kush expanding into the Oxus valley region of Central Asia. Buddhism later disappeared and locals were forced to convert to Islam. Richard Bulliet also proposes that the area north of Hindu Kush was center of a new sect that had spread as far as Kurdistan, remaining in existence until the Abbasid times. The area eventually came under the control of the Hindu Shahi dynasty of Kabul. The Islamic conquest of the area happened under Sabuktigin who conquered Jayapala&#x27;s dominion west of Peshawar in the 10th century.

===Ancient===
The significance of the Hindu Kush mountain ranges has been recorded since the time of Darius I of the Achaemenid Empire. Alexander entered the Indian subcontinent through the Hindu Kush as his army moved past the Afghan Valleys in the spring of 329 BCE. He moved towards the Indus Valley river region in the Indian subcontinent in 327 BCE;_his armies built several towns in this region over the intervening two years.

After Alexander died in 323 BCE, the region became part of the Seleucid Empire, according to the ancient history of Strabo written in the 1st century BCE, before it became a part of the Indian Maurya Empire around 305 BCE. The region became a part of the Kushan Empire around the start of the common era.

===Medieval era===
The lands north of the Hindu Kush, in the Hephthalite dominion, Buddhism was the predominant religion by mid 1st millennium CE. These Buddhists were religiously tolerant and they co-existed with followers of Zoroastrianism, Manichaeism, and Nestorian Christianity. This Central Asia region along the Hindu Kush was taken over by Western Turks and Arabs by the eighth century, facing wars with mostly Iranians. One major exception was the period in the mid to late seventh century when the Tang dynasty from China destroyed the Northern Turks and extended its rule all the way to the Oxus River valley and regions of Central Asia bordering all along the Hindu Kush.
The subcontinent and valleys of the Hindu Kush remained unconquered by the Islamic armies until the 9th century, even though they had conquered the southern regions of the Indus River valley such as Sind. Kabul fell to the army of Al-Ma&#x27;mun, the seventh Abbasid caliph, in 808 and the local king agreed to accept Islam and pay annual tributes to the caliph. However, states André Wink, inscriptional evidence suggests that the Kabul area near Hindu Kush had an early presence of Islam. When the extraction of silver from the mines in the Hindu Kush was at its greatest (c.850), the value of silver in relation to gold dropped, and the content of silver in the Carolingian &quot;denarius&quot; was increased so that it should maintain its intrinsic value.

The range came under the control of the Hindu Shahi dynasty of Kabul but was conquered by Sabuktigin who took all of Jayapala&#x27;s dominion west of Peshawar.

Mahmud of Ghazni came to power in 998 CE, in Ghazna, Afghanistan, south of Kabul and the Hindu Kush range. He began a military campaign that rapidly brought both sides of the Hindu Kush range under his rule. From his mountainous Afghani base, he systematically raided and plundered kingdoms in north India from east of the Indus river to west of Yamuna river seventeen times between 997 and 1030.

Mahmud of Ghazni raided the treasuries of kingdoms, sacked cities, and destroyed Hindu temples, with each campaign starting every spring, but he and his army returned to Ghazni and the Hindu Kush base before monsoons arrived in the northwestern part of the subcontinent. He retracted each time, only extending Islamic rule into western Punjab.

In 1017, the Iranian Islamic historian Al-Biruni was deported after a war that Mahmud of Ghazni won, to the northwest Indian subcontinent under Mahmud&#x27;s rule. Al Biruni stayed in the region for about fifteen years, learnt Sanskrit, and translated many Indian texts, and wrote about Indian society, culture, sciences, and religion in Persian and Arabic. He stayed for some time in the Hindu Kush region, particularly near Kabul. In 1019, he recorded and described a solar eclipse in what is the modern era Laghman Province of Afghanistan through which Hindu Kush pass. Al Biruni also wrote about early history of the Hindu Kush region and Kabul kings, who ruled the region long before he arrived, but this history is inconsistent with other records available from that era. Al Biruni was supported by Sultan Mahmud. Al Biruni found it difficult to get access to Indian literature locally in the Hindu Kush area, and to explain this he wrote, &quot;Mahmud utterly ruined the prosperity of the country, and performed wonderful exploits by which the Hindus became the atoms scattered in all directions, and like a tale of old in the mouth of the people. (...) This is the reason, too, why Hindu sciences have retired far from those parts of the country conquered by us, and have fled to places which our hand cannot yet reach, to Kashmir, Benares and other places&quot;.

In the late 12th century, the historically influential Ghurid empire led by Mu&#x27;izz al-Din ruled the Hindu Kush region. He was influential in seeding the Delhi Sultanate, shifting the base of his Sultanate from south of the Hindu Kush range and Ghazni towards the Yamuna River and Delhi. He thus helped bring Islamic rule to the northern plains of the Indian subcontinent. In the Mongol invasion of the Khwarazmian Empire, Genghis Khan invaded the region from the northeast in one of his many conquests to create the huge Mongol Empire. 

The Moroccan traveler Ibn Battuta arrived in the Delhi Sultanate by passing through the Hindu Kush. The mountain passes of the Hindu Kush range were used by Timur and his army and they crossed to launch the 1398 invasion of the northern Indian subcontinent. Timur, also known as Temur or Tamerlane in Western scholarly literature, marched with his army to Delhi, plundering and killing all the way. He arrived in the capital Delhi where his army. Then he carried the wealth and the captured slaves, returning to his capital through the Hindu Kush.

Babur, the founder of the Mughal Empire, was a patrilineal descendant of Timur with roots in Central Asia. He first established himself and his army in Kabul and the Hindu Kush region. In 1526, he made his move into north India, and won the Battle of Panipat, ending the last Delhi Sultanate dynasty, and starting the era of the Mughals.

====Slavery====
Slavery, as with all major ancient and medieval societies, has been a part of Central Asia and South Asia history. The Hindu Kush mountain passes connected the slave markets of Central Asia with slaves seized in South Asia. The seizure and transportation of slaves from the Indian subcontinent became intense in and after the 8th century CE, with evidence suggesting that the slave transport involved &quot;hundreds of thousands&quot; of slaves from India in different periods of Islamic rule era. According to John Coatsworth and others, the slave trading operations during the pre-Akbar Mughal and Delhi Sultanate era &quot;sent thousands of Hindus every year north to Central Asia to pay for horses and other goods&quot;. However, the interaction between Central Asia and South Asia through the Hindu Kush was not limited to slavery, it included trading in food, goods, horses and weapons.

The practice of raiding tribes, hunting, and kidnapping people for slave trading continued through the 19th century, at an extensive scale, around the Hindu Kush. According to a British Anti-Slavery Society report of 1874, the governor of Faizabad, Mir Ghulam Bey, kept 8,000 horses and cavalrymen who routinely captured non-Muslims as well as Shia Muslims as slaves. Others alleged to be involved in the slave trade were feudal lords such as Ameer Sheer Ali. The isolated communities in the Hindu Kush were one of the targets of these slave-hunting expeditions.

===Modern era===

The people of Kafiristan practiced had ancient polytheistic traditions until the 1896 invasion and conversion to Islam at the hands of Afghans under Amir Abdur Rahman Khan.

British era

The Hindu Kush served as a geographical barrier to the British Empire, leading to a paucity of information and scarce direct interaction between the British colonial officials and Central Asian peoples. The British had to rely on tribal chiefs, Sadozai and Barakzai noblemen for information, and they generally downplayed the reports of slavery and other violence for geo-political strategic considerations. The first British invasion of Afghanistan ended in disaster in 1842, when 16,000 British soldiers and camp followers were massacred as they retreated through the Hindu Kush back to India.

After 1947

In the colonial era, the Hindu Kush was considered, informally, the dividing line between Russian and British areas of influence in Afghanistan. During the Cold War the Hindu Kush range became a strategic theatre, especially during the 1980s when Soviet forces and their Afghan allies fought the Afghan mujahideen channelled through Pakistan. After the Soviet withdrawal and the end of the Cold War, many mujahideen morphed into Taliban and al-Qaeda forces imposing a strict interpretation of Islamic law (Sharia), with Kabul, these mountains, and other parts of Afghanistan as their base. Other Mujahideen joined the Northern Alliance to oppose the Taliban rule.

After the 11 September 2001 terror attacks in New York City and Washington D.C., the American and ISAF campaign against Al Qaeda and their Taliban allies made the Hindu Kush once again a militarised conflict zone.

== Climate change ==
The 2019 Hindu Kush Himalaya Assessment concluded that between 1901 and 2014, the Hindu Kush Himalaya (or HKH) region had already experienced warming of 0.1 °C per decade, with the warming rate accelerating to 0.2 °C per decade over the past 50 years. Over the past 50 years, the frequency of warm days and nights had also increased by 1.2 days and 1.7 nights per decade, while the frequency of &quot;extreme&quot; warm days and nights had increased by 1.26 days and 2.54 nights per decade. There was also a corresponding decline of 0.5 cold days, 0.85 extreme cold days, 1 cold night, and 2.4 extreme cold nights per decade. The length of the growing season has increased by 4.25 days per decade. 

There is less conclusive evidence of light precipitation becoming less frequent while heavy precipitation became both more frequent and more intense. Finally, since 1970s glaciers have retreated everywhere in the region beside Karakoram, eastern Pamir, and western Kunlun, where there has been an unexpected increase in snowfall. Glacier retreat had been followed by an increase in the number of glacial lakes, some of which may be prone to dangerous floods.

In the future, if the Paris Agreement goal of 1.5 °C of global warming is not exceeded, warming in the HKH will be at least 0.3 °C higher, and at least 0.7 °C higher in the hotspots of northwest Himalaya and Karakoram. If the Paris Agreement goals are broken, then the region is expected to warm by 1.7–2.4 °C in the near future (2036–2065) and by 2.2–3.3 °C (2066–2095) near the end of the century under the &quot;intermediate&quot; Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5 (RCP4.5). 

Under the high-warming RCP8.5 scenario where the annual emissions continue to increase for the rest of the century, the expected regional warming is 2.3–3.2 °C and 4.2–6.5 °C, respectively. Under all scenarios, winters will warm more than the summers, and the Tibetan Plateau, the central Himalayan Range, and the Karakoram will continue to warm more than the rest of the region. Climate change will also lead to the degradation of up to 81% of the region&#x27;s permafrost by the end of the century.

Future precipitation is projected to increase as well, but CMIP5 models struggle to make specific projections due to the region&#x27;s topography: the most certain finding is that the monsoon precipitation in the region will increase by 4–12% in the near future and by 4–25% in the long term. There has also been modelling of the changes in snow cover, but it is limited to the end of century under the RCP 8.5 scenario: it projects declines of 30–50% in the Indus Basin, 50–60% in the Ganges basin, and 50–70% in the Brahmaputra Basin, as the snowline elevation in these regions will rise by between 4.4 and 10.0 m/yr. There has been more extensive modelling of glacier trends: it is projected that one third of all glaciers in the extended HKH region will be lost by 2100 even if the warming is limited to 1.5 °C (with over half of that loss in the Eastern Himalaya region), while RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5 are likely to lead to the losses of 50% and &gt;67% of the region&#x27;s glaciers over the same timeframe. 

Glacier melt is projected to accelerate regional river flows until the amount of meltwater peaks around 2060, going into an irreversible decline afterwards. Since precipitation will continue to increase even as the glacier meltwater contribution declines, annual river flows are only expected to diminish in the western basins where contribution from the monsoon is low: however, irrigation and hydropower generation would still have to adjust to greater interannual variability and lower pre-monsoon flows in all of the region&#x27;s rivers.

=== Future development and adaptation ===
A range of adaptation efforts are already undertaken across the HKH region: however, they suffer from underinvestment and insufficient coordination between the various state, institutional and other non-state efforts, and need to be &quot;urgently&quot; strengthened in order to be commensurate with the challenges ahead.

The 2019 Hindu Kush Himalaya Assessment outlined three main &quot;storylines&quot; for the region between now and 2080: &quot;business-as-usual&quot; (or &quot;muddling through&quot;), with no significant change from the current trends and development/adaptation initiatives proceeding as they do now; &quot;downhill&quot;, where the intensity of global climate change is high, local initiatives fail and regional cooperation breaks down; and &quot;prosperous&quot;. 

Where extensive cooperation allows region&#x27;s communities to weather &quot;moderate&quot; climate change and increase their living standards while also preserving the region&#x27;s biodiversity. In addition, it described two alternate pathways through which the &quot;prosperous&quot; future can be achieved: the first focuses on top-down, large-scale development and the latter describes a bottom-up, decentralized alternative.

==Ethnography==
Pre-Islamic populations of the Hindu Kush included Shins, Yeshkuns, Chiliss, Neemchas Koli, Palus, Gaware, and Krammins.

==See also==
*Mount Imeon
*Paropamisus Mountains
* &quot;A Short Walk in the Hindu Kush&quot;
*Geography of Afghanistan
*Geography of Pakistan
*Karakoram
*Hindustan
*List of highest mountains (a list of mountains above 7,200m)
*List of mountain ranges
*2002 Hindu Kush earthquakes
*2005 Hindu Kush earthquake

==Notes==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
; Works cited

* (facsimile of the original edition).
==Further reading==
* Drew, Frederic (1877). &quot;The Northern Barrier of India: A Popular Account of the Jammoo and Kashmir Territories with Illustrations&quot;. Frederic Drew. 1st edition: Edward Stanford, London. Reprint: Light &amp; Life Publishers, Jammu, 1971
* Gibb, H. A. R. (1929). &quot;Ibn Battūta: Travels in Asia and Africa, 1325–1354&quot;. Translated and selected by H. A. R. Gibb. Reprint: Asian Educational Services, New Delhi and Madras, 1992
* Gordon, T. E. (1876). &quot;The Roof of the World: Being the Narrative of a Journey over the High Plateau of Tibet to the Russian Frontier and the Oxus Sources on Pamir.&quot; Edinburgh. Edmonston and Douglas. Reprint: Ch’eng Wen Publishing Company. Tapei, 1971
* Leitner, Gottlieb Wilhelm (1890). &quot;Dardistan in 1866, 1886 and 1893: Being An Account of the History, Religions, Customs, Legends, Fables and Songs of Gilgit, Chilas, Kandia (Gabrial) Yasin, Chitral, Hunza, Nagyr and other parts of the Hindukush, as also a supplement to the second edition of The Hunza and Nagyr Handbook. And An Epitome of Part III of the author&#x27;s &#x27;The Languages and Races of Dardistan&quot;&#x27;. Reprint, 1978. Manjusri Publishing House, New Delhi. 
* Newby, Eric. (1958). &quot;A Short Walk in the Hindu Kush&quot;. Secker, London. Reprint: Lonely Planet. 
* Yule, Henry and Burnell, A. C. (1886). &quot;Hobson-Jobson: The Anglo-Indian Dictionary&quot;. 1996 reprint by Wordsworth Editions Ltd. 
* &quot;A Country Study: Afghanistan&quot;, Library of Congress
* Ervin Grötzbach, 
* &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;, 15th Ed., Vol. 21, pp. 54–55, 65, 1987
* &quot;An Advanced History of India&quot;, by R. C. Majumdar, H. C. Raychaudhuri, K.Datta, 2nd Ed., MacMillan and Co., London, pp. 336–37, 1965
* &quot;The Cambridge History of India, Vol. IV: The Mughul Period&quot;, by W. Haig &amp; R. Burn, S. Chand &amp; Co., New Delhi, pp. 98–99, 1963

==External links==


*Khyber Pass
*Early Explorers of the Hindu Kush 
*Geology
*More geology
*And more geology</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="4" end="14" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="21" end="35" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="39" end="46" title="Central Asia" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="51" end="61" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="81" end="90" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="130" end="141" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="160" end="168" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="190" end="200" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q161750" start="375" end="390" title="Pamir Mountains" label="Pamir Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469" start="617" end="626" title="Karakoram" label="Karakoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367275" start="681" end="696" title="White Mountains, Afghanistan" label="White Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q8515" start="706" end="717" title="Kabul River" label="Kabul River"/>
<link wikidata="Q8493" start="748" end="757" title="Amu Darya" label="Amu Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="811" end="822" title="Indus River" label="Indus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q207132" start="920" end="930" title="Tirich Mir" label="Tirich Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q878510" start="954" end="970" title="Chitral District" label="Chitral District"/>
<link wikidata="Q183314" start="974" end="992" title="Khyber Pakhtunkhwa" label="Khyber Pakhtunkhwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="1074" end="1082" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q484458" start="1107" end="1122" title="Buddhas of Bamiyan" label="Bamiyan Buddhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="1239" end="1251" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="1256" end="1266" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="1324" end="1330" title="Muslims" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610620" start="1405" end="1414" title="Islamization" label="Islamized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721082" start="1444" end="1454" title="Kafiristan" label="Kafiristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="1561" end="1575" title="Durrani Empire" label="Durrani Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q167485" start="1588" end="1596" title="Nuristan Province" label="Nuristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="1697" end="1716" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="2095" end="2100" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481579" start="2340" end="2364" title="Francis Joseph Steingass" label="Francis Joseph Steingass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="2595" end="2606" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Battuta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2677" end="2712" title="Slavery in India#Islamic invasions (8th to 12th century AD)" label="slaves from the Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315785" start="2800" end="2809" title="Turkestan" label="Turkestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29572" start="3312" end="3319" title="Avestan language" label="Avestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13115272" start="3378" end="3391" title="Hobson-Jobson" label="Hobson-Jobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="3584" end="3595" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Battuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q36858" start="3691" end="3705" title="Vedic Sanskrit" label="Vedic Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q29572" start="3761" end="3768" title="Avestan" label="Avestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167865" start="3803" end="3816" title="Proto-Iranian" label="Proto-Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="3972" end="3991" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q486986" start="4083" end="4099" title="Greater Caucasus" label="Greater Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="4118" end="4125" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="4130" end="4139" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327635" start="4213" end="4226" title="Paropamisadae" label="Paropamisadae"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="4237" end="4252" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenic Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6447883" start="4433" end="4444" title="Kushan Pass" label="Kushan Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="4479" end="4492" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q161750" start="4674" end="4689" title="Pamir Mountains" label="Pamir Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469" start="4695" end="4704" title="Karakoram" label="Karakoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="4713" end="4722" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8493" start="4753" end="4762" title="Amu Darya" label="Amu Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="4816" end="4827" title="Indus River" label="Indus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q207132" start="4925" end="4935" title="Tirich Mir" label="Tirich Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q878510" start="4959" end="4975" title="Chitral District" label="Chitral District"/>
<link wikidata="Q183314" start="4979" end="4997" title="Khyber Pakhtunkhwa" label="Khyber Pakhtunkhwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="5139" end="5147" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469" start="5320" end="5329" title="Karakoram" label="Karakoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367275" start="5384" end="5399" title="Spīn Ghar" label="Spin Ghar Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q8515" start="5409" end="5420" title="Kabul River" label="Kabul River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194223" start="5910" end="5921" title="Salang Pass" label="Salang Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="5951" end="5956" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917594" start="6020" end="6033" title="Salang Tunnel" label="Salang Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128256" start="6460" end="6471" title="Shibar Pass" label="Shibar pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917594" start="6526" end="6539" title="Salang Tunnel" label="Salang Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48783695" start="6606" end="6618" title="Tang-e Gharu" label="Tang-e Gharu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495051" start="6659" end="6672" title="Lataband Pass" label="Lataband Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q191333" start="6742" end="6753" title="Khyber Pass" label="Khyber Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q925074" start="6829" end="6841" title="Broghil Pass" label="Broghil Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243716" start="6878" end="6888" title="Dorah Pass" label="Dorah Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q943965" start="6980" end="6991" title="Lowari Pass" label="Lowari Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q775731" start="7012" end="7022" title="Gomal Pass" label="Gomal Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224061" start="7028" end="7048" title="Darmodar Aghost Pass" label="Darmodar Aghost Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6080466" start="7074" end="7094" title="Ishkoman Aghost Pass" label="Ishkoman Aghost Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q8493" start="7213" end="7222" title="Amu Darya" label="Amu Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35883" start="7353" end="7361" title="Aral Sea" label="Aral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8510" start="7364" end="7377" title="Helmand River" label="Helmand River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628762" start="7420" end="7432" title="Sistan Basin" label="Sistan Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="8087" end="8095" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="8119" end="8130" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q500054" start="8171" end="8186" title="Middle Jurassic" label="Middle Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="8220" end="8229" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188521" start="8351" end="8365" title="Eurasian Plate" label="Eurasian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q76252" start="8414" end="8424" title="Paleocene" label="Palaeocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="8609" end="8615" title="schist" label="schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="8617" end="8623" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q901704" start="9106" end="9120" title="Orography" label="orographically"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982073" start="9387" end="9398" title="Khawak Pass" label="Khawak Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243716" start="9419" end="9429" title="Dorah Pass" label="Durāh Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q167485" start="9614" end="9622" title="Nuristan" label="Nuristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q32056" start="9627" end="9637" title="Badakhshan" label="Badakhshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207132" start="9854" end="9864" title="Tirich Mir" label="Tirich Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q271700" start="9866" end="9872" title="Noshaq" label="Noshaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421873" start="9878" end="9888" title="Istoro Nal" label="Istoro Nal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666404" start="10049" end="10055" title="ICIMOD" label="ICIMOD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001793" start="10105" end="10115" title="land cover" label="land cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q849791" start="10162" end="10169" title="Landsat program" label="Landsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="10333" end="10342" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q766271" start="11382" end="11396" title="sclerophyllous" label="sclerophyllous"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="11426" end="11433" title="Quercus" label="Quercus"/>
<link wikidata="Q296910" start="11438" end="11442" title="Olea" label="Olea"/>
<link wikidata="Q128550" start="11527" end="11533" title="Cedrus" label="Cedrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="11535" end="11540" title="Picea" label="Picea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350" start="11542" end="11547" title="Abies" label="Abies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="11549" end="11554" title="Pinus" label="Pinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25662" start="11560" end="11567" title="juniper" label="juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="11712" end="11724" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="11771" end="11780" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="11786" end="11793" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="11799" end="11803" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="11809" end="11813" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="11820" end="11826" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="11836" end="11848" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="12256" end="12264" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q484458" start="12288" end="12303" title="Buddhas of Bamiyan" label="Bamiyan Buddhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="12405" end="12412" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="12417" end="12425" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q216798" start="12506" end="12518" title="lapis lazuli" label="lapis lazuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q43513" start="12565" end="12572" title="emerald" label="emerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q744589" start="13306" end="13328" title="early Buddhist schools" label="early Buddhist schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150429" start="13334" end="13346" title="Mahāsāṃghika" label="Mahāsāṃghika"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670635" start="13347" end="13360" title="Lokottaravāda" label="Lokottaravāda"/>
<link wikidata="Q42063" start="13426" end="13434" title="Xuanzang" label="Xuanzang"/>
<link wikidata="Q253671" start="13517" end="13526" title="Birchbark" label="Birchbark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641020" start="13531" end="13551" title="palm leaf manuscript" label="palm leaf manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191035" start="13609" end="13624" title="Mahayana sutras" label="Mahāyāna sūtras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380144" start="13707" end="13725" title="Schoyen Collection" label="Schøyen Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124623" start="13755" end="13772" title="Gāndhārī language" label="Gāndhārī language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161266" start="13777" end="13786" title="Kharosthi" label="Kharoṣṭhī"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="13815" end="13823" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992659" start="13852" end="13864" title="Gupta script" label="Gupta script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227551" start="13880" end="13894" title="Alfred Foucher" label="Alfred Foucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054850" start="14076" end="14087" title="Bactria-Margiana Archaeological Complex" label="Oxus valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934773" start="14183" end="14198" title="Richard Bulliet" label="Richard Bulliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41470" start="14298" end="14307" title="Kurdistan" label="Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="14342" end="14349" title="Abbasid" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955540" start="14407" end="14418" title="Hindu Shahi" label="Hindu Shahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q32853" start="14485" end="14495" title="Sabuktigin" label="Sabuktigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568049" start="14510" end="14518" title="Jayapala" label="Jayapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="14543" end="14551" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="14675" end="14683" title="Darius the Great" label="Darius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="14691" end="14708" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="14710" end="14719" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200795" start="14720" end="14751" title="Indian campaign of Alexander the Great" label="entered the Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432315" start="14778" end="14786" title="Ancient Macedonian army" label="his army"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="15071" end="15086" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="15124" end="15130" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="15201" end="15214" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25979" start="15263" end="15276" title="Kushan Empire" label="Kushan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q26576" start="15375" end="15386" title="Hephthalite Empire" label="Hephthalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="15541" end="15555" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="15557" end="15568" title="Manichaeism" label="Manichaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q168414" start="15574" end="15583" title="Nestorianism" label="Nestorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="15822" end="15834" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522081" start="16197" end="16201" title="Sind Division" label="Sind"/>
<link wikidata="Q61056" start="16229" end="16243" title="Al-Ma&amp;#x27;mun" label="Al-Ma&amp;#x27;mun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955540" start="16799" end="16810" title="Hindu Shahi" label="Hindu Shahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q32853" start="16849" end="16859" title="Sabuktigin" label="Sabuktigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568049" start="16876" end="16884" title="Jayapala" label="Jayapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="16909" end="16917" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="16920" end="16936" title="Mahmud of Ghazni" label="Mahmud of Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q173731" start="16965" end="16971" title="Ghazna" label="Ghazna"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="17702" end="17711" title="Al-Biruni" label="Al-Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q185442" start="18173" end="18189" title="Laghman Province" label="Laghman Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="19003" end="19010" title="Varanasi" label="Benares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647182" start="19112" end="19130" title="Mu&amp;#x27;izz al-Din" label="Mu&amp;#x27;izz al-Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="19194" end="19209" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q431177" start="19420" end="19461" title="Mongol invasion of the Khwarazmian Empire" label="Mongol invasion of the Khwarazmian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="19463" end="19475" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="19562" end="19575" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="19628" end="19643" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="19837" end="19842" title="Timur" label="Timur"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="20128" end="20133" title="Babur" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013469" start="20483" end="20490" title="Slavery in Asia" label="Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="20561" end="20573" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="20578" end="20588" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721082" start="21973" end="21983" title="Kafiristan" label="Kafiristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31649" start="22113" end="22130" title="Abdur Rahman Khan" label="Abdur Rahman Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="22201" end="22215" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q989092" start="22564" end="22595" title="First Anglo-Afghan War" label="British invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108532624" start="22694" end="22703" title="1842 retreat from Kabul" label="retreated"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="22911" end="22919" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="23002" end="23008" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="23051" end="23068" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="Afghan mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="23261" end="23267" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="23430" end="23462" title="September 11 attacks" label="11 September 2001 terror attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="23466" end="23479" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="23484" end="23499" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="23505" end="23513" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="23518" end="23522" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="ISAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q732240" start="24300" end="24314" title="growing season" label="growing season"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="24399" end="24412" title="precipitation" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469" start="24583" end="24592" title="Karakoram" label="Karakoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q161750" start="24602" end="24607" title="Pamir Mountains" label="Pamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q187871" start="24621" end="24627" title="Kunlun" label="Kunlun"/>
<link wikidata="Q211302" start="24752" end="24764" title="glacial lake" label="glacial lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="24838" end="24853" title="Paris Agreement" label="Paris Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314241" start="25250" end="25286" title="Representative Concentration Pathway" label="Representative Concentration Pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q179918" start="25766" end="25776" title="permafrost" label="permafrost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178021" start="25864" end="25869" title="CMIP5" label="CMIP5"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="25989" end="25996" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="27197" end="27207" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="27212" end="27222" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4524034" start="28695" end="28700" title="Shin of Hindukush" label="Shins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969342" start="28702" end="28710" title="Yashkuns" label="Yeshkuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098966" start="28712" end="28719" title="Chiliss" label="Chiliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642331" start="28780" end="28791" title="Mount Imeon" label="Mount Imeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21484455" start="28793" end="28814" title="Paropamisus Mountains" label="Paropamisus Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659484" start="28823" end="28853" title="A Short Walk in the Hindu Kush" label="A Short Walk in the Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637198" start="28861" end="28885" title="Geography of Afghanistan" label="Geography of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123475" start="28887" end="28908" title="Geography of Pakistan" label="Geography of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469" start="28910" end="28919" title="Karakoram" label="Karakoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q853968" start="28921" end="28930" title="Hindustan" label="Hindustan"/>
<link wikidata="Q669684" start="28932" end="28957" title="List of highest mountains" label="List of highest mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156053" start="28994" end="29017" title="List of mountain ranges" label="List of mountain ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982946" start="29019" end="29046" title="2002 Hindu Kush earthquakes" label="2002 Hindu Kush earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604385" start="29048" end="29074" title="2005 Hindu Kush earthquake" label="2005 Hindu Kush earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497680" start="29213" end="29227" title="Frederick Drew" label="Drew, Frederic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525083" start="29655" end="29668" title="T. E. Gordon" label="Gordon, T. E."/>
<link wikidata="Q389182" start="30328" end="30337" title="Dardistan" label="Dardistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q337462" start="30407" end="30418" title="Eric Newby" label="Newby, Eric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659484" start="30434" end="30464" title="A Short Walk in the Hindu Kush" label="A Short Walk in the Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="30696" end="30715" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749724" start="30822" end="30850" title="An Advanced History of India" label="An Advanced History of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289394" start="30861" end="30875" title="R. C. Majumdar" label="R. C. Majumdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710851" start="30877" end="30895" title="Hem Chandra Raychaudhuri" label="H. C. Raychaudhuri"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43568" wikidata="Q2263" url="?curid=43568" title="Tom Hanks">
<text>Thomas Jeffrey Hanks (born July 9, 1956) is an American actor and filmmaker. Known for both his comedic and dramatic roles, he is one of the most popular and recognizable film stars worldwide, and is regarded as an American cultural icon. Hanks is ranked as the fourth-highest-grossing American film actor. His numerous awards include two Academy Awards, seven Emmy Awards, and four Golden Globe Awards; he has also been nominated for five BAFTA Awards and a Tony Award. He received the AFI Life Achievement Award in 2002, the Kennedy Center Honor in 2014, the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2016, and the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2020.

Hanks rose to fame with leading roles in comedies: &quot;Splash&quot; (1984), &quot;The Money Pit&quot; (1986), &quot;Big&quot; (1988), and &quot;A League of Their Own&quot; (1992). He won two consecutive Academy Awards for Best Actor, playing a gay lawyer suffering from AIDS in &quot;Philadelphia&quot; (1993), then the title character in &quot;Forrest Gump&quot; (1994). Hanks has collaborated with Steven Spielberg on five films—&quot;Saving Private Ryan&quot; (1998), &quot;Catch Me If You Can&quot; (2002), &quot;The Terminal&quot; (2004), &quot;Bridge of Spies&quot; (2015), and &quot;The Post&quot; (2017)—and three World War II-themed miniseries: &quot;Band of Brothers&quot; (2001), &quot;The Pacific&quot; (2010), and &quot;Masters of the Air&quot; (2024). He has also frequently collaborated with directors Ron Howard, Nora Ephron, and Robert Zemeckis.

Hanks cemented his film stardom with lead roles in the romantic comedies &quot;Sleepless in Seattle&quot; (1993) and &quot;You&#x27;ve Got Mail&quot; (1998); the dramas &quot;Apollo 13&quot; (1995), &quot;The Green Mile&quot; (1999), &quot;Cast Away&quot; (2000), &quot;Road to Perdition&quot; (2002), &quot;Cloud Atlas&quot; (2012), and &quot;News of the World&quot; (2020); and the biographical dramas &quot;Charlie Wilson&#x27;s War&quot; (2007), &quot;Captain Phillips&quot; (2013), &quot;Saving Mr. Banks&quot; (2013), &quot;Sully&quot; (2016), &quot;A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood&quot; (2019), and &quot;Elvis&quot; (2022). He played the title character in the &quot;Robert Langdon&quot; series and voiced Sheriff Woody in the &quot;Toy Story&quot; franchise (1995–2019) and multiple roles in &quot;The Polar Express&quot; (2004). Hanks directed and acted in &quot;That Thing You Do!&quot; (1996) and &quot;Larry Crowne&quot; (2011).

His breakthrough television role was a co-lead in the ABC sitcom &quot;Bosom Buddies&quot; (1980–1982). He has hosted &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; ten times and launched a production company, Playtone, which has produced various limited series and television movies, including &quot;From the Earth to the Moon&quot; (1998), &quot;Band of Brothers&quot;, &quot;John Adams&quot; (2008), &quot;The Pacific&quot;, &quot;Game Change&quot; (2012), and &quot;Olive Kitteridge&quot; (2015). He made his Broadway debut in Nora Ephron&#x27;s &quot;Lucky Guy&quot; (2013), earning a nomination for the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play.

== Early life and family ==
Hanks was born in Concord, California, on July 9, 1956, to hospital worker Janet Marylyn () and itinerant cook Amos &quot;Bud&quot; Hanks. His mother was from a Portuguese family; their surname was originally &quot;Fraga&quot;. His father had English ancestry, and through his line, Hanks is a distant cousin of President Abraham Lincoln&lt;ref name=&quot;ancestry.com/tom-hanks-lincoln&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and children&#x27;s host Fred Rogers (whom many years later he would portray in a film role). His parents divorced in 1960.

Their three oldest children, Sandra (later Sandra Hanks Benoiton, a writer), Larry (who became an entomology professor at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign), and Tom, went with their father, while the youngest, Jim (who also became an actor and filmmaker), remained with their mother in Red Bluff, California. In his childhood, Hanks&#x27; family moved often; by age ten, he had lived in ten different houses. Although Hanks&#x27; family religious history was Catholic and Mormon, he converted to Greek Orthodox Christianity as an adult, after his marriage to Rita Wilson.

One journalist characterized Hanks&#x27; teenage self as being a &quot;Bible-toting evangelical&quot; for several years. In school, he was unpopular with students and teachers alike, later telling &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine, &quot;I was a geek, a spaz. I was horribly, painfully, terribly shy. At the same time, I was the guy who&#x27;d yell out funny captions during filmstrips. But I didn&#x27;t get into trouble. I was always a real good kid and pretty responsible.&quot; Hanks acted in school plays, including &quot;South Pacific&quot;, while attending Skyline High School in Oakland, California.

Having grown up in the Bay Area, Hanks says that some of his first movie memories were seeing movies in the Alameda Theatre. Hanks studied theater at Chabot College in Hayward, California, and transferred to California State University, Sacramento after two years. During a 2001 interview with sportscaster Bob Costas, Hanks was asked whether he would rather have an Oscar or a Heisman Trophy. He replied that he would rather win a Heisman by playing halfback for the California Golden Bears. He told &quot;New York&quot; magazine in 1986, &quot;Acting classes looked like the best place for a guy who liked to make a lot of noise and be rather flamboyant. I spent a lot of time going to plays. I wouldn&#x27;t take dates with me. I&#x27;d just drive to a theater, buy myself a ticket, sit in the seat and read the program, and then get into the play completely. I spent a lot of time like that, seeing Brecht, Tennessee Williams, Ibsen, and all that.&quot;

During his years studying theater, Hanks met Vincent Dowling, head of the Great Lakes Theater Festival in Cleveland, Ohio. At Dowling&#x27;s suggestion, Hanks became an intern at the festival. His internship stretched into a three-year experience that covered most aspects of theater production, including lighting, set design, and stage management, prompting Hanks to drop out of college. During the same time, Hanks won the Cleveland Critics Circle Award for Best Actor for his 1978 performance as Proteus in Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;The Two Gentlemen of Verona&quot;, one of the few times he played a villain.

== Career ==
=== 1980–1989: Early work, sitcom and comedy films ===

In 1979, Hanks moved to New York City, where he made his film debut in the low-budget slasher film &quot;He Knows You&#x27;re Alone&quot; (1980) and landed a starring role in the television movie &quot;Mazes and Monsters&quot; (1982). Early that year, he was cast as the lead, Callimaco, in the Riverside Shakespeare Company&#x27;s production of Niccolò Machiavelli&#x27;s &quot;The Mandrake&quot;, directed by Daniel Southern. The following year, Hanks landed one of the lead roles, that of character Kip Wilson, on the ABC television pilot of &quot;Bosom Buddies&quot;. He and Peter Scolari played a pair of young advertising men forced to dress as women so they could live in an inexpensive all-female hotel. Hanks had previously partnered with Scolari on the 1970s game show &quot;Make Me Laugh&quot;. After landing the role, Hanks moved to Los Angeles. &quot;Bosom Buddies&quot; ran for two seasons, and, although the ratings were never strong, television critics gave the program high marks. &quot;The first day I saw him on the set,&quot; co-producer Ian Praiser told &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, &quot;I thought, &#x27;Too bad he won&#x27;t be in television for long.&#x27; I knew he&#x27;d be a movie star in two years.&quot;

Hanks made a guest appearance on a 1982 episode of &quot;Happy Days&quot; (&quot;A Case of Revenge&quot;, in which he played a disgruntled former classmate of Fonzie) where he met writers Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel who were writing the film &quot;Splash&quot; (1984), a romantic comedy fantasy about a mermaid who falls in love with a human, to be directed by former &quot;Happy Days&quot; star Ron Howard. Ganz and Mandel suggested Howard consider Hanks for the film. At first, Howard considered Hanks for the role of the main character&#x27;s wisecracking brother, a role that eventually went to John Candy. Instead, Hanks landed the lead role in &quot;Splash&quot;, which went on to become a surprise box office hit, grossing more than US$69 million. He had a sizable hit with the sex comedy &quot;Bachelor Party&quot;, also in 1984. In 1983–84, Hanks made three guest appearances on &quot;Family Ties&quot; as Elyse Keaton&#x27;s alcoholic brother Ned Donnelly.

With &quot;Nothing in Common&quot; (1986)—a story of a young man alienated from his father (Jackie Gleason)—Hanks began to extend himself from comedic roles to dramatic. In an interview with &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, Hanks commented on his experience: &quot;It changed my desires about working in movies. Part of it was the nature of the material, what we were trying to say. But besides that, it focused on people&#x27;s relationships. The story was about a guy and his father, unlike, say, &quot;The Money Pit&quot;, where the story is really about a guy and his house.&quot; In 1987, he had signed an agreement with The Walt Disney Studios where he had starred to a talent pool in an acting/producing pact. After a few more flops and a moderate success with the comedy &quot;Dragnet&quot; (1987), Hanks&#x27; stature in the film industry rose.
The broad success of the fantasy comedy &quot;Big&quot; (1988) established Hanks as a major Hollywood talent, both as a box office draw and within the industry as an actor. For his performance in the film, Hanks earned his first nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor. &quot;Big&quot; was followed later that year by &quot;Punchline&quot;, in which he and Sally Field co-starred as struggling comedians. Hanks then suffered a run of box-office underperformers: &quot;The &#x27;Burbs&quot; (1989), &quot;Joe Versus the Volcano&quot; (1990) and &quot;The Bonfire of the Vanities&quot; (1990). In the last, he portrayed a greedy Wall Street figure who gets enmeshed in a hit-and-run accident. &quot;Turner &amp; Hooch&quot; (1989) was Hanks&#x27; only financially successful film of the period.

=== 1990–1999: Leading man and acclaim ===
Hanks climbed back to the top again with his portrayal of a washed-up baseball legend turned manager in Penny Marshall&#x27;s &quot;A League of Their Own&quot; (1992). Hanks has said that his acting in earlier roles had not been great, but that he later improved. In an interview with &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, Hanks called attention to what he called his &quot;modern era of moviemaking ... because enough self-discovery has gone on ... My work has become less pretentiously fake and over the top&quot;. This &quot;modern era&quot; began in 1993 for Hanks, first with Nora Ephron&#x27;s &quot;Sleepless in Seattle&quot; and then with Jonathan Demme&#x27;s &quot;Philadelphia&quot;.

&quot;Sleepless in Seattle&quot; is a romantic comedy about a widower who finds true love over the radio airwaves. Hanks co-starred with Meg Ryan. Richard Schickel of &quot;TIME&quot; called his performance &quot;charming&quot;, and most critics agreed that Hanks&#x27; portrayal ensured him a place among the premier romantic-comedy stars of his generation. In &quot;Philadelphia&quot;, he played a gay lawyer with AIDS who sues his firm for discrimination. Hanks lost and thinned his hair in order to appear sickly for the role. In a review for &quot;People&quot;, Leah Rozen stated, &quot;Above all, credit for &quot;Philadelphia&quot;″s success belongs to Hanks, who makes sure that he plays a character, not a saint. He is flat-out terrific, giving a deeply felt, carefully nuanced performance that deserves an Oscar.&quot; Hanks won the 1993 Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in &quot;Philadelphia&quot;. During his acceptance speech, he revealed that two people with whom he was close, his high school drama teacher Rawley Farnsworth and his former classmate John Gilkerson, were gay.
Hanks followed &quot;Philadelphia&quot; with Robert Zemeckis&#x27;s &quot;Forrest Gump&quot; (1994), playing the title character, a man with an IQ of 75 who happens to find himself involved with some of the major events in recent American history. It grossed a worldwide total of over $600 million. Hanks remarked, &quot;When I read the script for &quot;Gump&quot;, I saw it as one of those kind of grand, hopeful movies that the audience can go to and feel ... some hope for their lot and their position in life ... I got that from the movies a hundred million times when I was a kid. I still do.&quot; Hanks won his second Best Actor Academy Award for his role in &quot;Forrest Gump&quot;, becoming only the second actor to have accomplished the feat of winning consecutive Best Actor Oscars. (Spencer Tracy was the first, winning in 1937 and ‘38 for &quot;Captains Courageous&quot; and &quot;Boys Town&quot;. Hanks and Tracy were the same age at the time they received their Academy Awards: 37 years old when they won their first and 38 when they won their second.)

Hanks reunited with Ron Howard to play astronaut and commander Jim Lovell in &quot;Apollo 13&quot; (1995). Critics generally applauded the film and the performances of the entire cast, which included Kevin Bacon, Bill Paxton, Gary Sinise, Ed Harris and Kathleen Quinlan. The movie earned nine Academy Award nominations, winning two. Hanks also starred in Pixar&#x27;s &quot;Toy Story&quot; (1995) as the voice of Sheriff Woody. Hanks made his directing debut with &quot;That Thing You Do!&quot; (1996), about a 1960s pop group; he also played the role of a music producer in the film. Hanks and producer Gary Goetzman went on to create Playtone, a record and film production company named after the record company in the film.

Hanks then executive produced, co-wrote and co-directed the HBO docudrama &quot;From the Earth to the Moon&quot; (1998). The 12-part series chronicled the space program from its inception, through the familiar flights of Neil Armstrong and Jim Lovell, to the personal feelings surrounding the reality of Moon landings. The Emmy Award–winning project was, at $68 million (equivalent to $ million in ), one of the most expensive ventures undertaken for television.

His next project was no less expensive. For &quot;Saving Private Ryan&quot; (1998), he worked with Steven Spielberg to make a film about a search through war-torn France after D-Day to bring home a soldier. It earned the praise and respect of the film community, critics and the general public. Hailed as one of the finest war films ever made, it earned Spielberg his second Academy Award for direction, and Hanks another Best Actor nomination. Later that year, Hanks re-teamed with Ephron and Ryan for &quot;You&#x27;ve Got Mail&quot;, a remake of Ernst Lubitsch&#x27;s &quot;The Shop Around the Corner&quot; (1940). He starred in Frank Darabont&#x27;s &quot;The Green Mile&quot; (1999), based on the novel of the same name by Stephen King. He reprised the role of Woody in &quot;Toy Story 2&quot; (1999).

===2000–2009: Established star and expansion ===

Hanks reunited with Zemeckis for &quot;Cast Away&quot; (2000), playing a marooned FedEx systems analyst. Roger Ebert of &quot;The Chicago Sun-Times&quot; wrote: &quot;Hanks proves here again what an effective actor he is, never straining for an effect, always persuasive even in this unlikely situation, winning our sympathy with his eyes and his body language when there&#x27;s no one else on the screen.&quot; Hanks co-directed and produced the Emmy Award-winning HBO miniseries &quot;Band of Brothers&quot; (2001). He also appeared in the September 11 television special &quot;&quot; and the documentary &quot;Rescued From the Closet&quot;. In 2002, he teamed up with Sam Mendes for &quot;Road to Perdition&quot;, an adaptation of the adaptation of Max Allan Collins&#x27;s and Richard Piers Rayner&#x27;s comics, in which he played an anti-hero role as a hitman on the run with his son. Hanks reunited with Spielberg, starring opposite Leonardo DiCaprio in &quot;Catch Me If You Can&quot; (2002), based on the true story of conman Frank Abagnale, Jr. Hanks and his wife Rita Wilson produced &quot;My Big Fat Greek Wedding&quot; (2002). In August 2007, Hanks, along with co-producers Wilson and Gary Goetzman and writer and star Nia Vardalos, initiated a legal action against the production company Gold Circle Films for their share of profits from the movie. At the age of 45, Hanks became the youngest-ever recipient of the American Film Institute&#x27;s Life Achievement Award on June 12, 2002.
In 2004, he appeared in three films: The Coen brothers&#x27; &quot;The Ladykillers&quot;, Spielberg&#x27;s &quot;The Terminal&quot; and Zemeckis&#x27;s &quot;The Polar Express&quot;, a family film for which Hanks played multiple motion capture roles. In a &quot;USA Weekend&quot; interview, Hanks discussed how he chooses projects: &quot;[Since] &quot;A League of Their Own&quot;, it can&#x27;t be just another movie for me. It has to get me going somehow ... There has to be some all-encompassing desire or feeling about wanting to do that particular movie. I&#x27;d like to assume that I&#x27;m willing to go down any avenue in order to do it right&quot;. In August 2005, Hanks was voted in as vice president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Hanks next starred in &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot; (2006), which grossed over US$750 million worldwide. In 2006, Hanks topped a 1,500-strong list of &quot;most trusted celebrities&quot; compiled by &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine. He produced the animated children&#x27;s movie &quot;The Ant Bully&quot; and &quot;Starter for Ten&quot;, a comedy about working-class students attempting to win on &quot;University Challenge&quot;.

Hanks did voice work for Ken Burns&#x27;s documentary &quot;The War&quot; (2007), reading excerpts from World War II-era columns by Al McIntosh. Hanks voiced himself in &quot;The Simpsons Movie&quot; (2007), in which he appeared in an announcement claiming that the U.S. government has lost its credibility and is hence buying some of his. He also made an appearance in the credits, expressing a desire to be left alone when he is out in public. He starred in Mike Nichols&#x27;s &quot;Charlie Wilson&#x27;s War&quot; (2007) as Democratic Texas Congressman Charles Wilson. In the comedy-drama film &quot;The Great Buck Howard&quot; (2008), Hanks played the on-screen father of a young man (played by Hanks&#x27; real-life son Colin) who chooses to work as road manager for a fading mentalist (John Malkovich). His character was less than thrilled about his son&#x27;s career decision. In the same year, he executive produced the musical comedy &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; and the miniseries &quot;John Adams&quot;.

Hanks&#x27; next endeavor was &quot;Angels &amp; Demons&quot; (2009). Its April 11, 2007, announcement revealed that Hanks would reprise his role as Robert Langdon, and that he would reportedly receive the highest salary ever for an actor. The following day he made his 10th appearance on NBC&#x27;s &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;, impersonating himself for the &quot;Celebrity Jeopardy&quot; sketch. Hanks produced Spike Jonze&#x27;s &quot;Where The Wild Things Are&quot; (2009), based on the children&#x27;s book by Maurice Sendak.

=== 2010–2019: Broadway debut and other roles ===

Hanks reprised his role of Woody in &quot;Toy Story 3&quot; (2010) after he, Tim Allen and John Ratzenberger were invited to a movie theater to see a complete story reel of the movie. The film went on to become the highest-grossing animated film at the time. He executive produced the miniseries &quot;The Pacific&quot; (2010). In 2011, he directed and starred opposite Julia Roberts in the title role in the romantic comedy &quot;Larry Crowne&quot;. The movie received poor reviews, with only 35% of the 175 Rotten Tomatoes reviews giving it high ratings. Also in 2011, he starred in the drama &quot;Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close&quot;. In 2012, he voiced the character Cleveland Carr for a web series he created, &quot;Electric City&quot;. He played multiple parts in &quot;Cloud Atlas&quot; (2012), based on the novel of the same name by David Mitchell, and was executive producer of the miniseries &quot;Game Change&quot;.

In 2013, Hanks starred in two critically acclaimed films—Paul Greengrass&#x27;s &quot;Captain Phillips&quot; and John Lee Hancock&#x27;s &quot;Saving Mr. Banks&quot;—which earned him praise, including nominations for the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama for the former role. In &quot;Captain Phillips&quot;, he starred as Captain Richard Phillips with Barkhad Abdi, which was based on the Maersk Alabama hijacking. In &quot;Saving Mr. Banks&quot;, co-starring Emma Thompson, he was the first actor to portray Walt Disney in a mainstream film. That same year, Hanks made his Broadway debut, starring in Nora Ephron&#x27;s &quot;Lucky Guy&quot;, for which he was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play.
In 2014, Hanks&#x27; short story &quot;Alan Bean Plus Four&quot; was published in &quot;The New Yorker&quot;. Revolving around four friends who make a voyage to the moon, the short story is titled after the Apollo 12 astronaut Alan Bean. &quot;Slate&quot; magazine&#x27;s Katy Waldman found his first published short story &quot;mediocre&quot;, writing that &quot;Hanks&#x27; shopworn ideas about technology might have yet sung if they hadn&#x27;t been wrapped in too-clever lit mag-ese&quot;. In an interview with &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, Hanks said he has always been fascinated by space. He told the magazine that he built plastic models of rockets when he was a child and watched live broadcasts of space missions back in the 1960s.

In March 2015, Hanks appeared in the music video for Carly Rae Jepsen&#x27;s &quot;I Really Like You&quot;, lip-syncing most of the song&#x27;s lyrics as he goes through his daily routine. His next film was Steven Spielberg&#x27;s &quot;Bridge of Spies&quot; (2015), in which he played lawyer James B. Donovan, who negotiated for the release of pilot Francis Gary Powers by the Soviet Union in exchange for KGB spy Rudolf Abel. In April 2016, Hanks starred as Alan Clay in the comedy-drama &quot;A Hologram for the King&quot;, an adaptation of the 2012 novel of the same name. It is the second time he was directed by Tom Tykwer after &quot;Cloud Atlas&quot;.

Hanks starred as airline captain Chesley Sullenberger in Clint Eastwood&#x27;s &quot;Sully&quot; (2016). He next reprised his role as Robert Langdon in &quot;Inferno&quot; (2016), and co-starred alongside Emma Watson in the 2017 science fiction drama &quot;The Circle&quot;. He voiced David S. Pumpkins in &quot;The David S. Pumpkins Halloween Special&quot;, which aired October 28, 2017, on NBC, a character he had portrayed in episodes of &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;.

Hanks reprised his role as Sheriff Woody in Pixar&#x27;s &quot;Toy Story 4&quot; (2019). Hanks portrayed Fred Rogers in Marielle Heller&#x27;s biographical film &quot;A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood&quot; (2019), for which he was nominated for his first Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.

=== 2020–present ===

On April 11, 2020, Hanks made his first television appearance since his COVID-19 diagnosis by hosting &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;. Hanks delivered an opening monolog via his house but did not appear in any of the sketches. This is the first episode of &quot;SNL&quot; to debut after the show&#x27;s hiatus due to the COVID-19 pandemic; it features different sketches filmed remotely from the cast members&#x27; homes. This is also a first in &quot;SNL&quot; history, for the show to be made up entirely of prerecorded content before airing, and the second to not be filmed at Studio 8H. Hanks had two films released in 2020. Hanks starred in &quot;Greyhound&quot;, a war film which he also wrote the screenplay for. Initially set to be theatrically released in June 2020 by Sony Pictures, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, distribution rights to the film were bought by Apple TV+, where it was released in July 2020. He reunited with Paul Greengrass for the Western &quot;News of the World&quot;. David Rooney of &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; praised Hanks&#x27; performance: &quot;Hanks has built a career out of playing thoroughly decent men, so his casting here is entirely to type. But the soulfulness and sorrow, the innate compassion that ripple through his characterization make this an enormously pleasurable performance to watch, with new depths of both kindness and regret that keep revealing themselves.&quot;

In 2021, Hanks starred in the science fiction drama &quot;Finch&quot;, directed by Miguel Sapochnik, and released by Apple TV+. On March 2, 2022, Connor Ratliff appeared as a guest on &quot;Late Night With Seth Meyers,&quot; where he revealed that Hanks would at last be interviewed for the season three finale of Ratliff&#x27;s podcast &quot;Dead Eyes&quot;. The conversation between Hanks and Ratliff took place 22 years after Ratliff was about to begin filming an episode of &quot;Band of Brothers&quot;, when he was subsequently fired, allegedly because Hanks believed Ratliff had &quot;dead eyes&quot;. The 90 minute interview was hailed as a momentous achievement in podcasting, a &quot;rare show that gives you a perfect conclusion&quot;, &quot;surprisingly funny and empathetic&quot;, and an event Paul Scheer called &quot;thrilling&quot;.
Hanks had three films released in 2022. He first starred as Tom Parker, the manager of Elvis Presley, in Baz Luhrmann&#x27;s &quot;Elvis&quot;. Shooting commenced in the beginning of 2020 in Queensland, Australia, and the film was released in June 2022. Hanks next film was portraying Geppetto in Walt Disney Studios&#x27; live-action adaptation of &quot;Pinocchio&quot;. His involvement in the film, which was directed by his longtime collaborator Zemeckis, was officially confirmed in December 2020, and released on September 8, 2022, by Disney+. Hanks&#x27; final film of the year was &quot;A Man Called Otto&quot;, an English-language remake of the Swedish film &quot;A Man Called Ove&quot;. In 2023, Hanks appeared in Wes Anderson&#x27;s &quot;Asteroid City&quot;, starring alongside Jason Schwartzman, Scarlett Johansson, Adrien Brody, Jeffrey Wright and Bryan Cranston. The film premiered at the 2023 Cannes Film Festival to mixed reviews, and was released in June 2023.

HBO confirmed in January 2013 that it was developing a third World War II miniseries based on the book &quot;Masters of the Air&quot; by Donald L. Miller with Hanks and Spielberg, to follow &quot;Band of Brothers&quot; and &quot;The Pacific&quot;. &quot;NME&quot; reported in March 2017 that production was progressing under the working title &quot;The Mighty Eighth&quot;. On October 11, 2019, it was announced that the series would keep the title from the book and that the miniseries would stream on Apple TV+ due to budget constraints at HBO. &quot;Masters of the Air&quot; was expected to cost $200 million with a duration of at least eight hours. The series premiered on January 26, 2024. In October 2024, a feature adaptation of Richard McGuire&#x27;s graphic novel &quot;Here&quot; was released reuniting Hanks with &quot;Forrest Gump&quot; co-star Robin Wright and director Robert Zemeckis. Hanks attended the &quot;Saturday Night Live 50th Anniversary Special&quot; where he acted in the Black Jeopardy sketch reprising his role as Doug.

Hanks is attached to star in an adaptation of the 2011 non fiction book &quot;In the Garden of Beasts&quot; from director Joe Wright about American diplomat William Dodd&#x27;s time in Nazi Germany.

== Filmography ==

As an actor
==Awards and honors==

In Hanks&#x27; career as an actor and producer, he has received many award nominations. Hanks has received six Academy Award nominations including two consecutive wins for Best Actor for &quot;Philadelphia&quot; and &quot;Forrest Gump&quot; in 1993 and 1994 respectively. Hanks also received a Tony Award nomination for Best Actor in a Play for his performance in Nora Ephron&#x27;s play &quot;Lucky Guy&quot; in 2013. Hanks has also received 12 Primetime Emmy Award nominations for his work on television which includes 7 wins for his work as a producer on various limited series and television films including &quot;From the Earth to the Moon&quot; (1998), &quot;Band of Brothers&quot; (2002), &quot;John Adams&quot; (2008), &quot;The Pacific&quot; (2010), &quot;Game Change&quot; (2012), and &quot;Olive Kitteridge&quot; (2015).

Honors
* 2002: AFI Life Achievement Award
* 2006: Douglas S. Morrow Public Outreach Award
* 2014: Kennedy Center Honors Medallion
* 2016: Presidential Medal of Freedom
* 2016: French Legion of Honor, at the rank of &quot;Chevalier&quot; (Knight), for his presentation of World War II and support of World War II veterans, along with Tom Brokaw, retired NBC anchor, and Gordon H. Mueller, president and co-founder of the National WWII Museum, New Orleans.
* 2019: Honorary citizen of Greece.
* 2020: Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award

== Reputation and legacy ==
Hanks is often compared to James Stewart, and has also frequently been referred to as &quot;America&#x27;s Dad&quot;. In 2013, when he was starring in Nora Ephron&#x27;s &quot;Lucky Guy&quot; on Broadway, he had crowds of 300 fans waiting for a glimpse of him after every performance. This is the highest number of expectant fans post-show of any Broadway performance.

Hanks is ranked as the fifth-highest all-time box office star in North America, with a total gross of over $4.9 billion at the North American box office, an average of $100.8 million per film. Worldwide, his films have grossed over $9.96 billion. Asteroid 12818 Tomhanks is named after him.

In 2003, Hanks was voted Number 3 in Channel 4&#x27;s countdown of the 100 Greatest Movie Stars of All Time, and he is number 22 on VH1&#x27;s list of the &quot;200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons of All Time&quot;. He was included on &quot;Forbes&quot;″ list of the top ten most powerful celebrities in the world, in 2000, 2002, and 2003. Hanks was the guest on BBC Radio 4&#x27;s &quot;Desert Island Discs&quot; on May 8, 2016. In the process in the final minutes of the program, in which the guest chooses his/her favorite of the eight discs (pieces of music) just played, a book, and a luxury item, he chose Richard Strauss&#x27; &quot;Also sprach Zarathustra&quot; by the Vienna Philharmonic, &quot;A World Lit Only by Fire&quot; by William Manchester, and a Hermes 3000 typewriter and paper, respectively.

Hanks was interviewed five times on WHYY-FM by Terry Gross on the radio show &quot;Fresh Air&quot; in Philadelphia. Topics included two segments on his lead role in &quot;Captain Phillips&quot;, a movie about the real life story of a ship&#x27;s captain hijacked by Somali pirates. Two interviews are about the 12 part miniseries &quot;From Earth to the Moon&quot;, for which Hanks was executive producer and which was nominated for 17 Emmy Awards. The last interview segment comprises anecdotes shared by Hanks about his acting career.

Roger Ebert wrote &quot;of actors who are not &#x27;bigger than life,&#x27; but somehow just like life—people who we feel we know and understand, and are comfortable with. We sense that these actors embody not our fantasies, but our lives. Watching them we feel congratulated, because we are watching ourselves. They reassure us that in our ordinariness we also have a kind of importance. The actors who can do that—Buster Keaton, Spencer Tracy, James Stewart, Henry Fonda, Robert Duvall, Gene Hackman, and Tom Hanks, occupy a special category... The central triumph of Tom Hanks as a movie actor is that, most of the time, we believe he thinks a lot like us, and does more or less what we would do, but that he somehow does it on a larger or more ennobling scale. It is the James Stewart quality. But few actors can obtain it; with most, you see their egos peeking through, or you catch them trying too hard. The camera is a lie detector, and Hanks must be a fundamentally good person to play such roles—either that, or he is an even better actor than we think.&quot;

==Personal life==
=== Marriage and family ===

Hanks married American actress Samantha Lewes (1952–2002) in 1978. They had one son, actor Colin (b. 1977), and one daughter, Elizabeth (b. 1982). Hanks and Lewes divorced in 1987. Lewes died in 2002 at the age of 49 from bone cancer. 

In 1981, Hanks met actress Rita Wilson on the set of TV comedy &quot;Bosom Buddies&quot; (1980–1982). They were reunited in 1985 on the set of &quot;Volunteers&quot;. Wilson is of Greek and Bulgarian descent, and a member of the Greek Orthodox Church. Before marrying her, Hanks converted to her faith. He actively attends church and has commented, &quot;I must say that when I go to church—and I do go to church—I ponder the mystery. I meditate on the &#x27;why?&#x27; of &#x27;why people are as they are&#x27; and &#x27;why bad things happen to good people,&#x27; and &#x27;why good things happen to bad people&#x27;... The mystery is what I think is, almost, the grand unifying theory of all mankind.&quot; Hanks and Wilson married in 1988 and have two sons. Their older son, Chet, released a rap song in 2011 and had recurring roles in &quot;Empire&quot; and &quot;Shameless&quot;. Their younger son, Truman, was born in 1995, and portrayed the younger version of his father&#x27;s character in &quot;A Man Called Otto&quot; (2022). Hanks lives with his family in Los Angeles, California, and Ketchum, Idaho.

In October 2013, on &quot;Late Show with David Letterman&quot; Hanks said he has type 2 diabetes. The CBS News medical contributor said significant weight fluctuations for various film roles such as &quot;A League of Their Own&quot; and &quot;Cast Away&quot; might have contributed to the diagnosis. In a 2018 interview, Hanks further attributed his condition to a combination of genetics and lifestyle choices. He has since made lifestyle changes to manage his condition, such as maintaining a healthier diet and avoiding film roles that require drastic weight changes.

Despite being a fan of the Oakland Athletics and the Raiders when they were based in Oakland, Hanks stated in April 2017 he would boycott the NFL for two years after the Raiders filed for relocation to Las Vegas. Since 1984, Hanks has been a fan of the English Premier League club Aston Villa.

In November 2019, shortly before the release of &quot;A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood&quot;, a drama film in which Hanks portrays Fred Rogers, he learned through Ancestry.com that he and Rogers were sixth cousins, both descendants of Johannes Meffert (1732–1795), who was born in Schöneck, Hesse, Germany (then part of the Holy Roman Empire) and emigrated to the United States in the 18th century, settling in Kentucky and changing his last name to Mefford. Hanks is also a relative of the 16th US president, Abraham Lincoln. Hanks narrated the 2011 television program &quot;Killing Lincoln&quot;.

On December 27, 2019, the President of Greece, Prokopis Pavlopoulos, signed an honorary naturalization order for Hanks and his family, citing their &quot;exceptional services to Greece&quot;, thus making him and his immediate family Greek citizens. Hanks, along with Wilson and their children, were conferred honorary citizenship for their role in bringing global attention and appealing for aid after a devastating wildfire that ripped through the seaside village of Mati, near Athens, in July 2018, which killed more than 100 people. Greece&#x27;s Interior Minister Takis Theodorikakos said Hanks &quot;showed real interest in the people who suffered from the fire in Mati and promoted this issue in the global media&quot;. In July 2020, Hanks and Wilson were photographed with their Greek passports alongside the Prime Minister of Greece, Kyriakos Mitsotakis and his wife.

=== Political views and activism ===

Hanks has donated to many Democratic politicians, and during the 2008 United States presidential election uploaded a video to his MySpace account endorsing Barack Obama. He also narrated a 2012 documentary, &quot;The Road We&#x27;ve Traveled,&quot; created by Obama for America. In 2016, Hanks endorsed former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in the 2016 presidential election.

Hanks was outspoken about his opposition to the 2008 Proposition8, an amendment to the California constitution that defined marriage as a union only between a man and a woman. Hanks and others raised over US$44 million to campaign against the proposition. While premiering a TV series in January 2009, Hanks called supporters of Proposition8 &quot;un-American&quot; and criticized LDS Church members, who were major proponents of the bill, for their views on marriage and role in supporting the bill. About a week later, he apologized for the remark, saying that nothing is more American than voting one&#x27;s conscience.

A proponent of environmentalism, Hanks is an investor in electric vehicles and owns a Toyota RAV4 EV and the first production AC Propulsion eBox. He was a lessee of an EV1 before it was recalled, as chronicled in the documentary &quot;Who Killed the Electric Car?&quot; He was on the waiting list for an Aptera2 Series. Hanks serves as campaign chair of the Hidden Heroes Campaign of the Elizabeth Dole Foundation. The stated mission of the campaign is to inspire a national movement to more effectively support the military and veteran caregivers.

In 2004, while touring the White House, Hanks learned that the press corps did not have a coffee pot, and shortly thereafter he donated an espresso machine. He again donated new machines in 2010 and 2017. His 2017 donation was accompanied by a note that read &quot;To the White House Press Corps, Keep up the good fight for Truth, Justice, and the American Way. Especially for the truth part.&quot; He endorsed former Vice President Joe Biden in the 2020 presidential election.

=== Ventures and interests ===

A supporter of NASA&#x27;s crewed space program, Hanks said he originally wanted to be an astronaut. Hanks is a member of the National Space Society, serving on the Board of governors of the nonprofit educational space advocacy organization founded by Wernher von Braun. He also produced the HBO miniseries &quot;From the Earth to the Moon&quot; about the Apollo program to send astronauts to the Moon. In addition, Hanks co-wrote and co-produced &quot;Magnificent Desolation: Walking on the Moon 3D&quot;, an IMAX film about the Moon landings. Hanks provided the voice-over for the premiere of the show &quot;Passport to the Universe&quot; at the Rose Center for Earth and Space in the Hayden Planetarium at the American Museum of Natural History in New York.

In 2006, the Space Foundation awarded Hanks the Douglas S. Morrow Public Outreach Award, given annually to an individual or organization that has made significant contributions to public awareness of space programs.

In June 2006, Hanks was inducted as an honorary member of the United States Army Rangers Hall of Fame for his accurate portrayal of a captain in the movie &quot;Saving Private Ryan&quot;; Hanks, who was unable to attend the induction ceremony, was the first actor to receive such an honor. In addition to his role in &quot;Saving Private Ryan&quot;, Hanks was cited for serving as the national spokesperson for the World War II Memorial Campaign, for being the honorary chairperson of the D-Day Museum Capital Campaign, and for his role in writing and helping to produce the Emmy Award-winning miniseries, &quot;Band of Brothers&quot;. On March 10, 2008, Hanks was on hand at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame to induct The Dave Clark Five.

Hanks is a collector of manual typewriters and uses them almost daily. In August 2014, Hanks released Hanx Writer, an iOS app meant to emulate the experience of using a typewriter; within days the free app reached number one on the App Store. After contracting and recovering from a COVID-19 infection early in the pandemic, Hanks and his wife donated their blood antibodies for virus research. Hanks is an ordained minister, and on March 24, 2022, CBS News reported that he had recently officiated a wedding in Pittsburgh. In 2023, Hanks founded Hanx for the Troops, a coffee company that supports veterans and military families through a portion of its profits and various initiatives.

== Bibliography ==
Hanks wrote a collection of short stories inspired by his typewriter collection, &quot;Uncommon Type&quot;, which was published in 2017. &quot;The Making of Another Major Motion Picture Masterpiece&quot;, his debut novel, was published in May 2023.

== Further reading ==
* Gardner, David (1999), &quot;Tom Hanks: The Unauthorized Biography&quot;, London, 
* Gardner, David (2007), &quot;Tom Hanks: Enigma&quot;, 
* Pfeiffer, Lee (1996), &quot;The Films of Tom Hanks&quot;, Secaucus, New Jersey, 
* Salamon, Julie (1991), &quot;The Devil&#x27;s Candy: The Bonfire of the Vanities Goes to Hollywood&quot;, Boston, 
* Trakin, Roy (1995), &quot;Tom Hanks: Journey to Stardom&quot;, 
* Wallner, Rosemary (1994), &quot;Tom Hanks: Academy Award-Winning Actor&quot;, Edina, Minnesota

== See also ==
*List of film roles for which Tom Hanks was considered

== References ==
==External links==
* 
* 
* Archive of five Interviews of Hanks by Terry Gross on Fresh Air</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="0" end="20" title="Tom Hanks" label="Thomas Jeffrey Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606947" start="311" end="326" title="List of awards and nominations received by Tom Hanks" label="numerous awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="339" end="353" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="361" end="372" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="383" end="402" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="440" end="452" title="BAFTA Awards" label="BAFTA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="459" end="469" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q292044" start="487" end="513" title="AFI Life Achievement Award" label="AFI Life Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738793" start="527" end="547" title="Kennedy Center Honors" label="Kennedy Center Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="561" end="590" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q640353" start="608" end="643" title="Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award" label="Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127184" start="711" end="717" title="Splash (film)" label="Splash"/>
<link wikidata="Q969651" start="738" end="751" title="The Money Pit" label="The Money Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q858467" start="772" end="775" title="Big (film)" label="Big"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306472" start="800" end="821" title="A League of Their Own" label="A League of Their Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="859" end="873" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="878" end="888" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q204057" start="940" end="952" title="Philadelphia (film)" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134773" start="976" end="991" title="Forrest Gump (character)" label="title character"/>
<link wikidata="Q134773" start="1001" end="1013" title="Forrest Gump" label="Forrest Gump"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="1056" end="1072" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q165817" start="1093" end="1112" title="Saving Private Ryan" label="Saving Private Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208108" start="1133" end="1152" title="Catch Me If You Can" label="Catch Me If You Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q318766" start="1173" end="1185" title="The Terminal" label="The Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18067135" start="1206" end="1221" title="Bridge of Spies (film)" label="Bridge of Spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q30203425" start="1246" end="1254" title="The Post (film)" label="The Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1278" end="1290" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="1298" end="1308" title="miniseries" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q208048" start="1316" end="1332" title="Band of Brothers (miniseries)" label="Band of Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q598499" start="1353" end="1364" title="The Pacific (miniseries)" label="The Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q72638293" start="1389" end="1407" title="Masters of the Air" label="Masters of the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q103646" start="1473" end="1483" title="Ron Howard" label="Ron Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q214677" start="1485" end="1496" title="Nora Ephron" label="Nora Ephron"/>
<link wikidata="Q187364" start="1502" end="1517" title="Robert Zemeckis" label="Robert Zemeckis"/>
<link wikidata="Q107167" start="1599" end="1619" title="Sleepless in Seattle" label="Sleepless in Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q284229" start="1643" end="1663" title="You&amp;#x27;ve Got Mail" label="You&amp;#x27;ve Got Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q106428" start="1695" end="1704" title="Apollo 13 (film)" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q208263" start="1725" end="1739" title="The Green Mile (film)" label="The Green Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q213411" start="1760" end="1769" title="Cast Away" label="Cast Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q468033" start="1790" end="1807" title="Road to Perdition" label="Road to Perdition"/>
<link wikidata="Q28936" start="1828" end="1839" title="Cloud Atlas (film)" label="Cloud Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q73537408" start="1864" end="1881" title="News of the World (film)" label="News of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q273568" start="1930" end="1955" title="Charlie Wilson&amp;#x27;s War (film)" label="Charlie Wilson&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937646" start="1976" end="1992" title="Captain Phillips (film)" label="Captain Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474574" start="2013" end="2029" title="Saving Mr. Banks" label="Saving Mr. Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062112" start="2050" end="2055" title="Sully (film)" label="Sully"/>
<link wikidata="Q56703347" start="2076" end="2111" title="A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood" label="A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q84362533" start="2136" end="2141" title="Elvis (2022 film)" label="Elvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q210548" start="2166" end="2185" title="Robert Langdon" label="the title character"/>
<link wikidata="Q27962582" start="2193" end="2226" title="Robert Langdon (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Robert Langdon&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290907" start="2238" end="2251" title="Sheriff Woody" label="Sheriff Woody"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316015" start="2259" end="2290" title="Toy Story (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Toy Story&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q862197" start="2331" end="2348" title="The Polar Express (film)" label="The Polar Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q642410" start="2397" end="2415" title="That Thing You Do!" label="That Thing You Do!"/>
<link wikidata="Q382864" start="2439" end="2451" title="Larry Crowne" label="Larry Crowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="2521" end="2524" title="American Broadcast Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015828" start="2538" end="2551" title="Bosom Buddies" label="Bosom Buddies"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="2591" end="2610" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626895" start="2662" end="2670" title="Playtone" label="Playtone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467607" start="2753" end="2779" title="From the Earth to the Moon (miniseries)" label="From the Earth to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516431" start="2830" end="2840" title="John Adams (miniseries)" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q655980" start="2886" end="2897" title="Game Change (film)" label="Game Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q18601923" start="2922" end="2938" title="Olive Kitteridge (miniseries)" label="Olive Kitteridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="2965" end="2973" title="Broadway (theatre)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981535" start="3008" end="3017" title="Lucky Guy (play)" label="Lucky Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445521" start="3061" end="3096" title="Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play" label="Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q490441" start="3145" end="3164" title="Concord, California" label="Concord, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="3288" end="3298" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="3449" end="3464" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275768" start="3561" end="3572" title="Fred Rogers" label="Fred Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29642811" start="3738" end="3743" title="Larry Hanks" label="Larry"/>
<link wikidata="Q39286" start="3759" end="3769" title="entomology" label="entomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="3787" end="3826" title="University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign" label="University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q725250" start="3882" end="3885" title="Jim Hanks" label="Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q546468" start="3958" end="3979" title="Red Bluff, California" label="Red Bluff, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4131" end="4139" title="Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q747802" start="4144" end="4150" title="Mormonism" label="Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="4168" end="4195" title="Greek Orthodoxy" label="Greek Orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q234144" start="4231" end="4242" title="Rita Wilson" label="Rita Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="4329" end="4340" title="Evangelicalism" label="evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="4448" end="4461" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535240" start="4773" end="4786" title="South Pacific (musical)" label="South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537910" start="4810" end="4829" title="Skyline High School (Oakland, California)" label="Skyline High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="4833" end="4852" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="4878" end="4886" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705884" start="4963" end="4978" title="Alameda Theatre (Alameda, California)" label="Alameda Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066011" start="5005" end="5019" title="Chabot College" label="Chabot College"/>
<link wikidata="Q491114" start="5023" end="5042" title="Hayward, California" label="Hayward, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026941" start="5063" end="5102" title="California State University, Sacramento" label="California State University, Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458861" start="5162" end="5172" title="Bob Costas" label="Bob Costas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="5222" end="5227" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035067" start="5233" end="5247" title="Heisman Trophy" label="Heisman Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650742" start="5323" end="5346" title="California Golden Bears football" label="California Golden Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="5362" end="5370" title="New York (magazine)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="5758" end="5764" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q134262" start="5766" end="5784" title="Tennessee Williams" label="Tennessee Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q36661" start="5786" end="5791" title="Henrik Ibsen" label="Ibsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931767" start="5859" end="5874" title="Vincent Dowling" label="Vincent Dowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599486" start="5888" end="5916" title="Great Lakes Theater Festival" label="Great Lakes Theater Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="5920" end="5929" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q232042" start="6314" end="6321" title="Proteus (The Two Gentlemen of Verona)" label="Proteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="6325" end="6336" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q232042" start="6350" end="6377" title="The Two Gentlemen of Verona" label="The Two Gentlemen of Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q853630" start="6583" end="6595" title="slasher film" label="slasher film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029511" start="6602" end="6628" title="He Knows You&amp;#x27;re Alone" label="He Knows You&amp;#x27;re Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q520191" start="6699" end="6717" title="Mazes and Monsters" label="Mazes and Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338604" start="6792" end="6821" title="Riverside Shakespeare Company" label="Riverside Shakespeare Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="6843" end="6862" title="Niccolò Machiavelli" label="Niccolò Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245589" start="6876" end="6888" title="The Mandrake" label="The Mandrake"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="7018" end="7021" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015828" start="7048" end="7061" title="Bosom Buddies" label="Bosom Buddies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740243" start="7076" end="7089" title="Peter Scolari" label="Peter Scolari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390440" start="7282" end="7295" title="Make Me Laugh" label="Make Me Laugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q518589" start="7788" end="7798" title="Happy Days" label="Happy Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435927" start="7890" end="7896" title="Fonzie" label="Fonzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872575" start="7919" end="7930" title="Lowell Ganz" label="Lowell Ganz"/>
<link wikidata="Q179555" start="7935" end="7949" title="Babaloo Mandel" label="Babaloo Mandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127184" start="7982" end="7988" title="Splash (film)" label="Splash"/>
<link wikidata="Q182559" start="8037" end="8044" title="mermaid" label="mermaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q103646" start="8130" end="8140" title="Ron Howard" label="Ron Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q218532" start="8333" end="8343" title="John Candy" label="John Candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q798133" start="8536" end="8550" title="Bachelor Party (1984 film)" label="Bachelor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144624" start="8628" end="8639" title="Family Ties" label="Family Ties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781116" start="8713" end="8730" title="Nothing in Common" label="Nothing in Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q454200" start="8794" end="8808" title="Jackie Gleason" label="Jackie Gleason"/>
<link wikidata="Q969651" start="9201" end="9214" title="The Money Pit" label="The Money Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216535" start="9322" end="9345" title="Walt Disney Studios (division)" label="The Walt Disney Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q389014" start="9481" end="9488" title="Dragnet (1987 film)" label="Dragnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q858467" start="9596" end="9599" title="Big (film)" label="Big"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961600" start="9882" end="9891" title="Punchline (film)" label="Punchline"/>
<link wikidata="Q187033" start="9915" end="9926" title="Sally Field" label="Sally Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740544" start="10026" end="10041" title="The &amp;#x27;Burbs" label="The &amp;#x27;Burbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740645" start="10062" end="10084" title="Joe Versus the Volcano" label="Joe Versus the Volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q730473" start="10108" end="10135" title="The Bonfire of the Vanities (film)" label="The Bonfire of the Vanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="10185" end="10196" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537568" start="10255" end="10273" title="Turner &amp;amp; Hooch" label="Turner &amp;amp; Hooch"/>
<link wikidata="Q237659" start="10499" end="10513" title="Penny Marshall" label="Penny Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306472" start="10527" end="10548" title="A League of Their Own" label="A League of Their Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="10686" end="10697" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q214677" start="10963" end="10974" title="Nora Ephron" label="Nora Ephron"/>
<link wikidata="Q107167" start="10988" end="11008" title="Sleepless in Seattle" label="Sleepless in Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48987" start="11029" end="11043" title="Jonathan Demme" label="Jonathan Demme"/>
<link wikidata="Q204057" start="11057" end="11069" title="Philadelphia (film)" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167498" start="11215" end="11223" title="Meg Ryan" label="Meg Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454098" start="11225" end="11241" title="Richard Schickel" label="Richard Schickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="11245" end="11261" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;TIME&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="11478" end="11481" title="Homosexuality" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="11494" end="11498" title="HIV/AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="11631" end="11637" title="People (American magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="11926" end="11939" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q187364" start="12223" end="12238" title="Robert Zemeckis" label="Robert Zemeckis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134773" start="12252" end="12264" title="Forrest Gump" label="Forrest Gump"/>
<link wikidata="Q71275" start="12974" end="12987" title="Spencer Tracy" label="Spencer Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q241876" start="13037" end="13056" title="Captains Courageous (1937 film)" label="Captains Courageous"/>
<link wikidata="Q727016" start="13073" end="13082" title="Boys Town (film)" label="Boys Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q103646" start="13268" end="13278" title="Ron Howard" label="Ron Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="13287" end="13296" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q111240" start="13311" end="13321" title="Jim Lovell" label="Jim Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q106428" start="13331" end="13340" title="Apollo 13 (film)" label="Apollo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454165" start="13448" end="13459" title="Kevin Bacon" label="Kevin Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q110374" start="13461" end="13472" title="Bill Paxton" label="Bill Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q180272" start="13474" end="13485" title="Gary Sinise" label="Gary Sinise"/>
<link wikidata="Q104791" start="13487" end="13496" title="Ed Harris" label="Ed Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q236696" start="13501" end="13517" title="Kathleen Quinlan" label="Kathleen Quinlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="13603" end="13608" title="Pixar" label="Pixar"/>
<link wikidata="Q171048" start="13622" end="13631" title="Toy Story" label="Toy Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290907" start="13661" end="13674" title="Sheriff Woody" label="Sheriff Woody"/>
<link wikidata="Q642410" start="13718" end="13736" title="That Thing You Do!" label="That Thing You Do!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098559" start="13852" end="13865" title="Gary Goetzman" label="Gary Goetzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626895" start="13884" end="13892" title="Playtone" label="Playtone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="14036" end="14039" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467607" start="14056" end="14082" title="From the Earth to the Moon (miniseries)" label="From the Earth to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="14197" end="14211" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q111240" start="14216" end="14226" title="Jim Lovell" label="Jim Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="14299" end="14309" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q165817" start="14490" end="14509" title="Saving Private Ryan" label="Saving Private Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="14539" end="14555" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="14616" end="14621" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q284229" start="14949" end="14969" title="You&amp;#x27;ve Got Mail" label="You&amp;#x27;ve Got Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q51562" start="14989" end="15003" title="Ernst Lubitsch" label="Ernst Lubitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q782751" start="15017" end="15043" title="The Shop Around the Corner" label="The Shop Around the Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q295445" start="15072" end="15086" title="Frank Darabont" label="Frank Darabont"/>
<link wikidata="Q208263" start="15100" end="15114" title="The Green Mile (film)" label="The Green Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q466288" start="15142" end="15164" title="The Green Mile (novel)" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="15168" end="15180" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q187266" start="15221" end="15232" title="Toy Story 2" label="Toy Story 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q213411" start="15337" end="15346" title="Cast Away" label="Cast Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q459477" start="15380" end="15385" title="FedEx" label="FedEx"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="15403" end="15414" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="15424" end="15445" title="The Chicago Sun-Times" label="The Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q208048" start="15785" end="15801" title="Band of Brothers (TV miniseries)" label="Band of Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q223233" start="15969" end="15979" title="Sam Mendes" label="Sam Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q468033" start="15990" end="16007" title="Road to Perdition" label="Road to Perdition"/>
<link wikidata="Q690233" start="16050" end="16067" title="Max Allan Collins" label="Max Allan Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328424" start="16079" end="16099" title="Richard Piers Rayner" label="Richard Piers Rayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235421" start="16107" end="16113" title="Road to Perdition (comics)" label="comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="16137" end="16146" title="Antihero" label="anti-hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q17197559" start="16157" end="16163" title="Contract killing" label="hitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="16238" end="16255" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q208108" start="16265" end="16284" title="Catch Me If You Can" label="Catch Me If You Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q116774" start="16333" end="16352" title="Frank Abagnale, Jr." label="Frank Abagnale, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q234144" start="16372" end="16383" title="Rita Wilson" label="Rita Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q525415" start="16399" end="16423" title="My Big Fat Greek Wedding" label="My Big Fat Greek Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098559" start="16496" end="16509" title="Gary Goetzman" label="Gary Goetzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q32335" start="16530" end="16542" title="Nia Vardalos" label="Nia Vardalos"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="16727" end="16750" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="16840" end="16853" title="Coen brothers" label="Coen brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q83739" start="16866" end="16881" title="The Ladykillers (2004 film)" label="The Ladykillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q318766" start="16912" end="16924" title="The Terminal" label="The Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q862197" start="16957" end="16974" title="The Polar Express (film)" label="The Polar Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="17028" end="17042" title="motion capture" label="motion capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865872" start="17061" end="17072" title="USA Weekend" label="USA Weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q212329" start="17517" end="17560" title="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences" label="Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q160560" start="17590" end="17607" title="The Da Vinci Code (film)" label="The Da Vinci Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="17767" end="17773" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q622758" start="17843" end="17856" title="The Ant Bully (film)" label="The Ant Bully"/>
<link wikidata="Q926238" start="17873" end="17888" title="Starter for 10 (film)" label="Starter for Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q287137" start="17961" end="17981" title="University Challenge" label="University Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q616886" start="18015" end="18024" title="Ken Burns" label="Ken Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q490194" start="18050" end="18057" title="The War (documentary)" label="The War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18094" end="18106" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607518" start="18122" end="18133" title="Al McIntosh" label="Al McIntosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q182254" start="18165" end="18183" title="The Simpsons Movie" label="The Simpsons Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q51537" start="18450" end="18462" title="Mike Nichols" label="Mike Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q273568" start="18476" end="18501" title="Charlie Wilson&amp;#x27;s War (film)" label="Charlie Wilson&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="18518" end="18528" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q333430" start="18547" end="18561" title="Charles Wilson (Texas politician)" label="Charles Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747149" start="18594" end="18615" title="The Great Buck Howard" label="The Great Buck Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q318134" start="18716" end="18721" title="Colin Hanks" label="Colin"/>
<link wikidata="Q828524" start="18772" end="18781" title="mentalism" label="mentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q172261" start="18783" end="18797" title="John Malkovich" label="John Malkovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="18919" end="18933" title="musical comedy" label="musical comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188850" start="18940" end="18950" title="Mamma Mia! (film)" label="Mamma Mia!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516431" start="18982" end="18992" title="John Adams (miniseries)" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q192934" start="19037" end="19056" title="Angels &amp;amp; Demons (film)" label="Angels &amp;amp; Demons"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="19290" end="19293" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="19307" end="19326" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057741" start="19370" end="19388" title="Celebrity Jeopardy! (Saturday Night Live)" label="Celebrity Jeopardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q259913" start="19418" end="19429" title="Spike Jonze" label="Spike Jonze"/>
<link wikidata="Q622742" start="19443" end="19468" title="Where The Wild Things Are (film)" label="Where The Wild Things Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q13912" start="19496" end="19516" title="Where The Wild Things Are" label="children&amp;#x27;s book"/>
<link wikidata="Q314771" start="19520" end="19534" title="Maurice Sendak" label="Maurice Sendak"/>
<link wikidata="Q187278" start="19630" end="19641" title="Toy Story 3" label="Toy Story 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q208408" start="19665" end="19674" title="Tim Allen" label="Tim Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q374093" start="19679" end="19696" title="John Ratzenberger" label="John Ratzenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745403" start="19803" end="19845" title="List of highest-grossing animated films" label="highest-grossing animated film at the time"/>
<link wikidata="Q598499" start="19890" end="19901" title="The Pacific (miniseries)" label="The Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q40523" start="19958" end="19971" title="Julia Roberts" label="Julia Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q382864" start="20019" end="20031" title="Larry Crowne" label="Larry Crowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="20097" end="20112" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q918769" start="20189" end="20224" title="Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close (film)" label="Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357336" start="20315" end="20328" title="Electric City (web series)" label="Electric City"/>
<link wikidata="Q28936" start="20370" end="20381" title="Cloud Atlas (film)" label="Cloud Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40205" start="20409" end="20431" title="Cloud Atlas (novel)" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q40479" start="20435" end="20449" title="David Mitchell (author)" label="David Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q655980" start="20502" end="20513" title="Game Change (film)" label="Game Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q356275" start="20579" end="20594" title="Paul Greengrass" label="Paul Greengrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937646" start="20608" end="20624" title="Captain Phillips (film)" label="Captain Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361200" start="20635" end="20651" title="John Lee Hancock" label="John Lee Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474574" start="20665" end="20681" title="Saving Mr. Banks" label="Saving Mr. Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q400007" start="20743" end="20787" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role" label="BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q593098" start="20796" end="20852" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q14880810" start="20921" end="20945" title="Captain Richard Phillips" label="Captain Richard Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q15381644" start="20951" end="20963" title="Barkhad Abdi" label="Barkhad Abdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818072" start="20988" end="21012" title="Maersk Alabama hijacking" label="Maersk Alabama hijacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q168724" start="21059" end="21072" title="Emma Thompson" label="Emma Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="21108" end="21119" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q214677" start="21201" end="21212" title="Nora Ephron" label="Nora Ephron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981535" start="21226" end="21235" title="Lucky Guy (play)" label="Lucky Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445521" start="21278" end="21313" title="Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play" label="Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="21403" end="21417" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q188433" start="21522" end="21531" title="Apollo 12" label="Apollo 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q310924" start="21542" end="21551" title="Alan Bean" label="Alan Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q60497" start="21559" end="21564" title="Slate (magazine)" label="Slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q52583" start="22109" end="22125" title="Carly Rae Jepsen" label="Carly Rae Jepsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19403379" start="22139" end="22156" title="I Really Like You" label="I Really Like You"/>
<link wikidata="Q18067135" start="22293" end="22308" title="Bridge of Spies (film)" label="Bridge of Spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16006746" start="22349" end="22365" title="James B. Donovan" label="James B. Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q309840" start="22407" end="22426" title="Francis Gary Powers" label="Francis Gary Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="22463" end="22466" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q181538" start="22471" end="22482" title="Rudolf Abel" label="Rudolf Abel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251439" start="22552" end="22575" title="A Hologram for the King (film)" label="A Hologram for the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q16583894" start="22609" end="22631" title="A Hologram for the King" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q463124" start="22750" end="22770" title="Chesley Sullenberger" label="Chesley Sullenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="22774" end="22788" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062112" start="22802" end="22807" title="Sully (film)" label="Sully"/>
<link wikidata="Q18192306" start="22875" end="22882" title="Inferno (2016 film)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q39476" start="22922" end="22933" title="Emma Watson" label="Emma Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010849" start="22974" end="22984" title="The Circle (2016 film)" label="The Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q30674249" start="23002" end="23019" title="David S. Pumpkins" label="David S. Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q42402580" start="23029" end="23068" title="The David S. Pumpkins Halloween Special" label="The David S. Pumpkins Halloween Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q18517638" start="23255" end="23266" title="Toy Story 4" label="Toy Story 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275768" start="23297" end="23308" title="Fred Rogers" label="Fred Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q21032133" start="23312" end="23327" title="Marielle Heller" label="Marielle Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q56703347" start="23359" end="23394" title="A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood" label="A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="23450" end="23489" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="23586" end="23594" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="23622" end="23641" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="23835" end="23852" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004498" start="24094" end="24103" title="Studio 8H" label="Studio 8H"/>
<link wikidata="Q50404285" start="24166" end="24175" title="Greyhound (film)" label="Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q822314" start="24292" end="24305" title="Sony Pictures" label="Sony Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="24384" end="24393" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="24472" end="24479" title="Western (genre)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q73537408" start="24486" end="24503" title="News of the World (film)" label="News of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="24533" end="24555" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605492" start="24999" end="25004" title="Finch (film)" label="Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844804" start="25024" end="25040" title="Miguel Sapochnik" label="Miguel Sapochnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="25058" end="25067" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q104863946" start="25087" end="25101" title="Connor Ratliff" label="Connor Ratliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q15274593" start="25131" end="25158" title="Late Night with Seth Meyers" label="Late Night With Seth Meyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q110568734" start="25284" end="25293" title="Dead Eyes" label="Dead Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153461" start="25747" end="25758" title="Paul Scheer" label="Paul Scheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q533864" start="25849" end="25859" title="Colonel Tom Parker" label="Tom Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="25876" end="25889" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q250545" start="25894" end="25906" title="Baz Luhrmann" label="Baz Luhrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q84362533" start="25920" end="25925" title="Elvis (2021 film)" label="Elvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="25980" end="26001" title="Queensland, Australia" label="Queensland, Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428120" start="26074" end="26082" title="Geppetto" label="Geppetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216535" start="26086" end="26111" title="Walt Disney Studios (division)" label="Walt Disney Studios&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q105482844" start="26112" end="26134" title="Pinocchio (2022 live-action film)" label="live-action adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4341553" start="26144" end="26153" title="Pinocchio (1940 film)" label="Pinocchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958752" start="26329" end="26336" title="Disney+" label="Disney+"/>
<link wikidata="Q111608782" start="26383" end="26400" title="A Man Called Otto" label="A Man Called Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q21935502" start="26461" end="26477" title="A Man Called Ove (film)" label="A Man Called Ove"/>
<link wikidata="Q223687" start="26512" end="26524" title="Wes Anderson" label="Wes Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q108086029" start="26538" end="26551" title="Asteroid City" label="Asteroid City"/>
<link wikidata="Q313705" start="26578" end="26595" title="Jason Schwartzman" label="Jason Schwartzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34436" start="26597" end="26615" title="Scarlett Johansson" label="Scarlett Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q104514" start="26617" end="26629" title="Adrien Brody" label="Adrien Brody"/>
<link wikidata="Q343059" start="26631" end="26645" title="Jeffrey Wright" label="Jeffrey Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q23547" start="26650" end="26664" title="Bryan Cranston" label="Bryan Cranston"/>
<link wikidata="Q115484744" start="26692" end="26717" title="2023 Cannes Film Festival" label="2023 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q72638293" start="26842" end="26852" title="Masters of the Air" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732606" start="26905" end="26921" title="Donald L. Miller" label="Donald L. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="27022" end="27025" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27117" end="27134" title="Donald L. Miller#Masters of the Air" label="The Mighty Eighth"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="27271" end="27280" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q18694173" start="27504" end="27519" title="Richard McGuire" label="Richard McGuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q112054756" start="27547" end="27551" title="Here (2024 film)" label="Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q272972" start="27625" end="27637" title="Robin Wright" label="Robin Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q187364" start="27651" end="27666" title="Robert Zemeckis" label="Robert Zemeckis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131806449" start="27693" end="27737" title="Saturday Night Live 50th Anniversary Special" label="Saturday Night Live 50th Anniversary Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077794" start="27766" end="27780" title="Black Jeopardy" label="Black Jeopardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3794130" start="27895" end="27918" title="In the Garden of Beasts" label="In the Garden of Beasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q118817" start="27939" end="27949" title="Joe Wright" label="Joe Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q324713" start="27974" end="27986" title="William Dodd (ambassador)" label="William Dodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="28182" end="28195" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="28243" end="28253" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q204057" start="28264" end="28276" title="Philadelphia (film)" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134773" start="28293" end="28305" title="Forrest Gump" label="Forrest Gump"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="28365" end="28375" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445521" start="28391" end="28411" title="Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play" label="Best Actor in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q214677" start="28435" end="28446" title="Nora Ephron" label="Nora Ephron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981535" start="28465" end="28474" title="Lucky Guy (play)" label="Lucky Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="28517" end="28537" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467607" start="28689" end="28715" title="From the Earth to the Moon (miniseries)" label="From the Earth to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208048" start="28736" end="28752" title="Band of Brothers (miniseries)" label="Band of Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516431" start="28773" end="28783" title="John Adams (miniseries)" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q598499" start="28804" end="28815" title="The Pacific (miniseries)" label="The Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q655980" start="28836" end="28847" title="Game Change (film)" label="Game Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q18601923" start="28872" end="28888" title="Olive Kitteridge (miniseries)" label="Olive Kitteridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q292044" start="28919" end="28945" title="AFI Life Achievement Award" label="AFI Life Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738793" start="29002" end="29023" title="Kennedy Center Honors" label="Kennedy Center Honors"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="29042" end="29071" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="29087" end="29102" title="Legion of Honor" label="Legion of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q919527" start="29237" end="29247" title="Tom Brokaw" label="Tom Brokaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q47493125" start="29273" end="29290" title="Gordon H. Mueller" label="Gordon H. Mueller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477833" start="29320" end="29344" title="the National WWII Museum" label="the National WWII Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q640353" start="29403" end="29438" title="Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award" label="Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q102462" start="29495" end="29508" title="James Stewart" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981535" start="29644" end="29653" title="Lucky Guy (play)" label="Lucky Guy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30094" end="30108" title="List of minor planets: 12001–13000" label="12818 Tomhanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="30167" end="30176" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="30262" end="30265" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="30366" end="30372" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467229" start="30400" end="30425" title="Forbes Celebrity 100" label="most powerful celebrities"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="30488" end="30499" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200587" start="30513" end="30532" title="Desert Island Discs" label="Desert Island Discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894" start="30737" end="30752" title="Richard Strauss" label="Richard Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q35720" start="30765" end="30788" title="Also sprach Zarathustra" label="Also sprach Zarathustra"/>
<link wikidata="Q154685" start="30802" end="30821" title="Vienna Philharmonic" label="Vienna Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660801" start="30829" end="30853" title="A World Lit Only by Fire" label="A World Lit Only by Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q354125" start="30863" end="30881" title="William Manchester" label="William Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q60756531" start="30889" end="30900" title="Hermes 3000" label="Hermes 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950522" start="30974" end="30981" title="WHYY-FM" label="WHYY-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492117" start="30985" end="30996" title="Terry Gross" label="Terry Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502930" start="31021" end="31030" title="Fresh Air" label="Fresh Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937646" start="31109" end="31125" title="Captain Phillips (film)" label="Captain Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467607" start="31274" end="31296" title="From the Earth to the Moon (miniseries)" label="From Earth to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="31476" end="31487" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q103949" start="31892" end="31905" title="Buster Keaton" label="Buster Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q71275" start="31907" end="31920" title="Spencer Tracy" label="Spencer Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q102462" start="31922" end="31935" title="James Stewart" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q19155" start="31937" end="31948" title="Henry Fonda" label="Henry Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q171736" start="31950" end="31963" title="Robert Duvall" label="Robert Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q150943" start="31965" end="31977" title="Gene Hackman" label="Gene Hackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q318134" start="32684" end="32689" title="Colin Hanks" label="Colin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328805" start="32815" end="32826" title="bone cancer" label="bone cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q234144" start="32857" end="32868" title="Rita Wilson" label="Rita Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015828" start="32899" end="32912" title="Bosom Buddies" label="Bosom Buddies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786324" start="32979" end="32989" title="Volunteers (1985 film)" label="Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="33059" end="33080" title="Greek Orthodox Church" label="Greek Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q20993895" start="33609" end="33613" title="Chet Hanks" label="Chet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992512" start="33676" end="33682" title="Empire (2015 TV series)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23599" start="33699" end="33708" title="Shameless (American TV series)" label="Shameless"/>
<link wikidata="Q20993896" start="33735" end="33741" title="Truman Hanks" label="Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q111608782" start="33835" end="33852" title="A Man Called Otto" label="A Man Called Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519069" start="33927" end="33941" title="Ketchum, Idaho" label="Ketchum, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q858778" start="33970" end="34000" title="Late Show with David Letterman" label="Late Show with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="34025" end="34040" title="type 2 diabetes" label="type 2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306472" start="34149" end="34170" title="A League of Their Own" label="A League of Their Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q213411" start="34187" end="34196" title="Cast Away" label="Cast Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="34543" end="34560" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q324523" start="34569" end="34576" title="Las Vegas Raiders" label="Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="34777" end="34791" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="34797" end="34808" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q56703347" start="34865" end="34900" title="A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood" label="A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275768" start="34945" end="34956" title="Fred Rogers" label="Fred Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752572" start="34977" end="34989" title="Ancestry.com" label="Ancestry.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q594284" start="35095" end="35119" title="Schöneck, Hesse" label="Schöneck, Hesse, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="35138" end="35155" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="35225" end="35233" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="35324" end="35339" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125363" start="35384" end="35411" title="Killing Lincoln (film)" label="&amp;quot;Killing Lincoln&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409203" start="35440" end="35459" title="President of Greece" label="President of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407316" start="35461" end="35481" title="Prokopis Pavlopoulos" label="Prokopis Pavlopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="35647" end="35652" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555550" start="35950" end="35981" title="Interior Minister of Greece" label="Greece&amp;#x27;s Interior Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377230" start="36230" end="36254" title="Prime Minister of Greece" label="Prime Minister of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q552751" start="36256" end="36275" title="Kyriakos Mitsotakis" label="Kyriakos Mitsotakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="36355" end="36365" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="36394" end="36434" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q40629" start="36459" end="36466" title="MySpace" label="MySpace"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="36485" end="36497" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761093" start="36542" end="36570" title="The Road We&amp;#x27;ve Traveled" label="The Road We&amp;#x27;ve Traveled"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858123" start="36589" end="36606" title="Barack Obama 2012 presidential campaign" label="Obama for America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="36658" end="36673" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="36681" end="36707" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q589889" start="36763" end="36775" title="California Proposition 8 (2008)" label="Proposition8"/>
<link wikidata="Q196195" start="36797" end="36820" title="Constitution of California" label="California constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="37091" end="37101" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="LDS Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629441" start="37391" end="37407" title="electric vehicle" label="electric vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655621" start="37420" end="37434" title="Toyota RAV4 EV" label="Toyota RAV4 EV"/>
<link wikidata="Q289637" start="37460" end="37478" title="AC Propulsion eBox" label="AC Propulsion eBox"/>
<link wikidata="Q152013" start="37502" end="37505" title="EV1" label="EV1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514392" start="37569" end="37597" title="Who Killed the Electric Car?" label="Who Killed the Electric Car?"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782224" start="37638" end="37652" title="Aptera 2 Series" label="Aptera2 Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q239571" start="37722" end="37736" title="Elizabeth Dole" label="Elizabeth Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="37911" end="37922" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563196" start="37947" end="37958" title="White House press corps" label="press corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210743" start="38023" end="38039" title="espresso machine" label="espresso machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="38317" end="38326" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="38334" end="38361" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 presidential election."/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="38410" end="38414" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903998" start="38521" end="38543" title="National Space Society" label="National Space Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="38560" end="38578" title="Board of governors" label="Board of governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572553" start="38608" end="38622" title="space advocacy" label="space advocacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57384" start="38647" end="38664" title="Wernher von Braun" label="Wernher von Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="38687" end="38690" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467607" start="38708" end="38734" title="From the Earth to the Moon (miniseries)" label="From the Earth to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="38751" end="38765" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38848" end="38894" title="Magnificent Desolation: Walking on the Moon 3D" label="Magnificent Desolation: Walking on the Moon 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q188575" start="38905" end="38909" title="IMAX" label="IMAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146822" start="38959" end="38969" title="voice-over" label="voice-over"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397171" start="39043" end="39074" title="Rose Center for Earth and Space" label="Rose Center for Earth and Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397171" start="39082" end="39100" title="Hayden Planetarium" label="Hayden Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q217717" start="39108" end="39142" title="American Museum of Natural History" label="American Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572360" start="39170" end="39186" title="Space Foundation" label="Space Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501784" start="39436" end="39462" title="United States Army Rangers" label="United States Army Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036511" start="39508" end="39515" title="Captain (United States O-3)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477833" start="39863" end="39875" title="The National WWII Museum" label="D-Day Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="40054" end="40080" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141454" start="40091" end="40110" title="The Dave Clark Five" label="The Dave Clark Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="40144" end="40154" title="typewriter" label="typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="40231" end="40234" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="40235" end="40238" title="Mobile app" label="app"/>
<link wikidata="Q368215" start="40345" end="40354" title="App Store (iOS)" label="App Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="40396" end="40404" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="40428" end="40436" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="40625" end="40635" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41615" end="41668" title="List of film roles for which Tom Hanks was considered" label="List of film roles for which Tom Hanks was considered"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43569" wikidata="Q74047" url="?curid=43569" title="Ghost town">
<text>A ghost town, deserted city, extinct town, or abandoned city is an abandoned settlement, usually one that contains substantial visible remaining buildings and infrastructure such as roads. A town often becomes a ghost town because the economic activity that supported it (usually industrial or agricultural) has failed or ended for any reason (e.g. a host ore deposit exhausted by mining). The town may have also declined because of natural or human-caused disasters such as floods, prolonged droughts, extreme heat or extreme cold, government actions, uncontrolled lawlessness, war, pollution, or nuclear and radiation-related accidents and incidents. The term can sometimes refer to cities, towns, and neighborhoods that, though still populated, are significantly less so than in past years; for example, those affected by high levels of unemployment and dereliction.

Some ghost towns, especially those that preserve period-specific architecture, have become tourist attractions. Some examples are Bannack, Montana and Oatman, Arizona in the United States; Barkerville, British Columbia in Canada; Craco and Pompeii in Italy; Aghdam in Azerbaijan; Kolmanskop in Namibia; Pripyat and Chernobyl in Ukraine; Dhanushkodi in India; Fordlândia in Brazil and Villa Epecuén in Argentina.

==Definition==
T. Lindsey Baker, author of &quot;Ghost Towns of Texas&quot;, defines a ghost town as &quot;a town for which the reason for being no longer exists.&quot; Some writers discount settlements that were abandoned as a result of a natural or human-made disaster or other causes; they restrict the term to settlements that were deserted because they were no longer economically viable. Some believe that any settlement with visible tangible remains should not be called a ghost town; others say, conversely, that a ghost town should contain the tangible remains of buildings. Whether or not the settlement must be completely deserted, or may contain a small population, is also a matter for debate. Generally, though, the term is used in a looser sense, encompassing any and all of these definitions. American author Lambert Florin defined a ghost town as &quot;a shadowy semblance of a former self.&quot;

==Reasons for abandonment==
Factors leading to the abandonment of towns include depleted natural resources, economic activity shifting elsewhere, railroads and roads bypassing or no longer accessing the town, human intervention, disasters, massacres, wars, the shifting of politics or fall of empires, and volcanic eruptions. A town can also be abandoned when it is part of an exclusion zone due to natural or human-made causes.

=== Economic decline ===
Ghost towns may result when the single activity or resource that created a boomtown (e.g., nearby mine, mill or resort) is depleted or the resource economy undergoes a &quot;bust&quot; (e.g., catastrophic resource price collapse). A gold rush often brought intensive but short-lived economic activity to a remote village, only to leave a ghost town once the resource was depleted.

Boomtowns can often decrease in size as quickly as they grew. Sometimes, all, or nearly all, of the population can desert the town, resulting in a ghost town. The dismantling of a boomtown can often occur on a planned basis. Mining companies nowadays will create a temporary company town to service a mine site, building all the accommodations, shops and services required, and then remove them once the resource has been extracted. Modular buildings can be used to facilitate the process.

In some cases, multiple factors may remove the economic basis for a community; some former mining towns on U.S. Route 66 suffered both mine closures when the resources were depleted and loss of highway traffic as US 66 was diverted from places like Oatman, Arizona, onto a more direct path. Mine and pulp mill closures have led to many ghost towns in British Columbia, Canada, including several relatively recent ones: Ocean Falls, which closed in 1973 after the pulp mill was decommissioned; Kitsault, whose molybdenum mine shut down after only 18 months in 1982; and Cassiar, whose asbestos mine operated from 1952 to 1992.

In other cases, the reason for abandonment can arise from a town&#x27;s intended economic function shifting to another, nearby place. This happened to Collingwood, Queensland, in Outback Australia when nearby Winton outperformed Collingwood as a regional centre for the livestock-raising industry. The railway reached Winton in 1899, linking it with the rest of Queensland, and Collingwood was a ghost town by the following year. More broadly across Australia, there has been a shift towards fly-in fly-out arrangements over building a company town, in order to avoid the development of ghost towns once a mining resource has been fully extracted.

The Middle East has many ghost towns and ruins that were created when the shifting of politics or the fall of empires caused capital cities to be socially or economically unviable, such as Ctesiphon.

The rise of real-estate speculation and the resulting possibility of real-estate bubbles (sometimes due to outright overbuilding by land developers) may also trigger the appearance of certain elements of a ghost town, as real-estate prices initially rise (whereupon affordable housing becomes less available) and then later fall for a variety of reasons that are often tied to economic cycles and/or marketing hubris. This has been observed to occur in various countries, including Spain, China, the United States, and Canada, where housing is often used as an investment rather than for habitation.

=== Human intervention and infrastructures ===
Railroads and roads bypassing or no longer reaching a town can also create a ghost town. This was the case in many of the ghost towns along Ontario&#x27;s historic Opeongo Line, and along U.S. Route 66 after motorists bypassed the latter on the faster moving highways I-44 and I-40. Some ghost towns were founded along railways where steam trains would stop at periodic intervals for repairs or to take on water, but dieselization or electrification negated the need for the trains to stop. Amboy, California, was part of one such series of villages along the Atlantic and Pacific Railroad across the Mojave Desert. In other cases, railroads replaced rivers or canals as the primary means of overland transport, causing the decline of towns that depended on river or canal traffic; one such town was Granville, Indiana, located on the Wabash and Erie Canal. 

River re-routing is another factor, one example being the towns along the Aral Sea.

Ghost towns may be created when land is expropriated by a government, and residents are required to relocate. One example is the village of Tyneham in Dorset, England, acquired during World War II to build an artillery range.

A similar situation occurred in the U.S. when NASA acquired land to construct the John C. Stennis Space Center (SSC), a rocket testing facility in Hancock County, Mississippi (on the Mississippi side of the Pearl River, which is the Mississippi–Louisiana state line). This required NASA to acquire a large (approximately ) buffer zone because of the loud noise and potential dangers associated with testing such rockets. Five thinly populated rural Mississippi communities (Gainesville, Logtown, Napoleon, Santa Rosa, and Westonia), plus the northern portion of a sixth (Pearlington), along with 700 families in residence, had to be completely relocated away from the facility.
Sometimes the town might cease to officially exist, but the physical infrastructure remains. For example, the five Mississippi communities that had to be abandoned to build SSC still have remnants of those communities within the facility itself. These include city streets, now overgrown with forest flora and fauna, and a one-room schoolhouse. Another example of infrastructure remaining is the former town of Weston, Illinois, that voted itself out of existence and turned the land over for construction of the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory. Many houses and even a few barns remain, used for housing visiting scientists and storing maintenance equipment, while roads that used to cross through the site have been blocked off at the edges of the property, with gatehouses or barricades to prevent unsupervised access.

====Flooding by dams====
Construction of dams has produced ghost towns that have been left underwater. Examples include:
* Kensico, New York was replaced by the Kensico Reservoir.
* Loyston, Tennessee, U.S., inundated by the creation of Norris Dam and reconstructed on nearby higher ground.
* St. Thomas, Nevada, U.S., flooded by up to 70 feet of water by Lake Mead following construction of the Hoover Dam.
* Stiltner, West Virginia, inundated by the creation of East Lynn Lake in 1969.
* The Lost Villages of Ontario, flooded by Saint Lawrence Seaway construction in 1958.
* Nether Hambleton and Middle Hambleton in Rutland, England, which were flooded to create Rutland Water.
* Ashopton and Derwent, England, flooded during the construction of the Ladybower Reservoir.
* The Tignes Dam flooded the village of Tignes in France, displacing 78 families.
* Mologa in Russia was flooded by the creation of Rybinsk reservoir in 1940. 
* Many ancient villages were abandoned during construction of the Three Gorges Dam in China, leading to the displacement of many rural people.
* In Guanacaste Province, Costa Rica, inhabitants of Arenal and Tronadora were forced to relocate in 1978 to make room for the human-made Lake Arenal.
* Old Adaminaby in New South Wales, Australia, was flooded by a dam of the Snowy River Scheme.
* Construction of the Aswan High Dam on the Nile River in Egypt submerged archaeological sites and ancient settlements, such as Buhen under Lake Nasser.
* Tehri was drowned after the construction of the Tehri Dam in the Indian state of Uttarakhand.
* Aceredo and five other villages in the region of Galicia, Spain, drowned by the construction of Alto Lindoso Dam downstream in Portugal in 1992 (later exposed after extreme drought conditions in early 2022).
* Capel Celyn, Gwynedd, Wales, was lost to the Trywern Flooding of 1965. This was to create a reservoir, Llyn Celyn, in order to supply the English areas of Liverpool and Wirral with water for industry.

=== Armed conflicts ===

Some towns become deserted when their populations were massacred, deported, or expelled. Examples include Kayaköy, an ancient Greek city abandoned in 1923 as result of population exchange between Greece and Turkey and the original French village at Oradour-sur-Glane which was destroyed on 10 June 1944 when 642 of its 663 inhabitants were killed by a German Waffen-SS company. A new village was built after the war on a nearby site, and the ruins of the original have been maintained as a memorial.
Another example is Aghdam, a city in Azerbaijan. Armenian forces occupied Aghdam in July 1993 during the First Nagorno-Karabakh War. The heavy fighting forced the entire population to flee. Upon seizing the city, Armenian forces destroyed much of the town to discourage Azerbaijanis from returning. More damage occurred in the following decades when locals looted the abandoned town for building materials. It is currently almost entirely ruined and uninhabited.

=== Disasters, actual and anticipated ===

Natural and human-made disasters can create ghost towns. For example, after being flooded more than 30 times since their town was founded in 1845, residents of Pattonsburg, Missouri, decided to relocate after two floods in 1993. With government help, the whole town was rebuilt away.

Craco, a medieval village in the Italian region of Basilicata, was evacuated after a landslide in 1963. Nowadays it is a filming location for many movies, including &quot;The Passion of The Christ&quot; by Mel Gibson, &quot;Christ Stopped at Eboli&quot; by Francesco Rosi, &quot;The Nativity Story&quot; by Catherine Hardwicke and &quot;Quantum of Solace&quot; by Marc Forster.

In 1984, Centralia, Pennsylvania, was abandoned due to an uncontainable mine fire, which began in 1962 and still rages to this day; eventually the fire reached an abandoned mine underneath the nearby town of Byrnesville, which caused that mine to catch on fire too and forced the evacuation of that town as well.
Ghost towns may also occasionally come into being due to an &quot;anticipated&quot; natural disaster – for example, the Canadian town of Lemieux, Ontario, was abandoned in 1991 after soil testing revealed that the community was built on an unstable bed of Leda clay. Two years after the last building in Lemieux was demolished, a landslide swept part of the former town-site into the South Nation River. Two decades earlier, the Canadian town of Saint-Jean-Vianney, Québec, also constructed on a Leda clay base, had been abandoned after a landslide on 4 May 1971, which swept away 41 homes, killing 31 people.

Following the Chernobyl disaster of 1986, dangerously high levels of nuclear contamination escaped into the surrounding area, and nearly 200 towns and villages in Ukraine and neighbouring Belarus were evacuated, including the cities of Pripyat and Chernobyl. The area was so contaminated that many of the evacuees were never permitted to return to their homes. Pripyat is the most famous of these abandoned towns; it was built for the workers of the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant and had a population of almost 50,000 at the time of the disaster.

==== Human health ====

Significant fatality rates from epidemics have produced ghost towns. Some places in eastern Arkansas were abandoned after more than 7,000 Arkansans died during the Spanish flu epidemic of 1918 and 1919. Several communities in Ireland, particularly in the west of the country, were wiped out due to the Great Famine in the latter half of the 19th century, and the years of economic decline that followed.

Catastrophic environmental damage caused by long-term contamination can also create a ghost town. Some notable examples are Times Beach, Missouri, whose residents were exposed to a high level of dioxins, and Wittenoom, Western Australia, which was once Australia&#x27;s largest source of blue asbestos, but was shut down in 1966 due to health concerns. Treece and Picher, twin communities straddling the Kansas–Oklahoma border, were once one of the United States&#x27; largest sources of zinc and lead, but over a century of unregulated disposal of mine tailings led to groundwater contamination and lead poisoning in the town&#x27;s children, eventually resulting in a mandatory Environmental Protection Agency buyout and evacuation. Contamination due to ammunition caused by military use may also lead to the development of ghost towns. Tyneham, in Dorset, was requisitioned for military exercises during the Second World War, and remains unpopulated, being littered with unexploded munitions from regular shelling.

==Ghost town repopulation==
A few ghost towns have managed to get a second life, and this happens through a variety of reasons.
One of these reasons is heritage tourism generating a new economy able to support residents.

For example, Walhalla, Victoria, Australia, became almost deserted after its gold mine ceased operation in 1914, but owing to its accessibility and proximity to other attractive locations, it has had a recent economic and holiday population surge. Another town, Sungai Lembing, Malaysia, was almost deserted due to closure of a tin mine in 1986 was revived in 2001 and has become a tourist destination since then.

Foncebadón, a village in León, Spain, that was mostly abandoned and only inhabited by a mother and son, is slowly being revived owing to the ever-increasing stream of pilgrims on the road to Santiago de Compostela.

Some ghost towns (e.g. Riace, Muñotello) are being repopulated by respectively refugees and homeless people. In Riace, this was accomplished by a scheme funded by the Italian government which offers the housing to refugees and in Muñotello it was accomplished through an NGO (Madrina Foundation).

In Algeria, many cities became hamlets after the end of Late Antiquity. They were revived with shifts in population during and after French colonization of Algeria. Oran, currently the nation&#x27;s second-largest city with 1 million people, was a village of only a few thousand people before colonization.

Alexandria, the second-largest city of Egypt, was a flourishing city in the Ancient era, but declined during the Middle Ages. It underwent a dramatic revival during the 19th century; from a population of 5,000 in 1806, it grew into a city of more than 200,000 inhabitants by 1882, and is now home to more than four million people.

==Around the world==
===Africa===

Wars and rebellions in some African countries have left many towns and villages deserted. Since 2003, when President François Bozizé came to power, thousands of citizens of the Central African Republic have been forced to flee their homes as a result of the escalating conflict between armed rebels and government troops. Villages accused of supporting the rebels, such as Beogombo Deux near Paoua, are ransacked by government soldiers. Those who are not killed have no choice but to escape to refugee camps. The instability in the region also leaves organized and well-equipped bandits free to terrorize the populace, often leaving villages abandoned in their wake. Elsewhere in Africa, the town of Lukangol was burnt to the ground during tribal clashes in South Sudan. Before its destruction, the town had a population of 20,000. The Libyan town of Tawergha had a population of around 25,000 before it was abandoned during the 2011 civil war, and it has remained empty since.

Many of the ghost towns in mineral-rich Africa are former mining towns. Shortly after the start of the 1908 diamond rush in German South-West Africa, now known as Namibia, the German Imperial government claimed sole mining rights by creating the (&quot;forbidden zone&quot;), effectively criminalizing new settlement. The small mining towns of this area, among them Pomona, Elizabeth Bay and Kolmanskop, were exempt from this ban, but the denial of new land claims soon rendered all of them ghost towns.

===Asia===

The town of Dhanushkodi, India is a ghost town. It was destroyed during the 1964 Rameswaram cyclone and remains uninhabited in the aftermath.

Many abandoned towns and settlements in the former Soviet Union were established near Gulag labour camps to supply necessary services. Since most of these camps were abandoned in the 1950s, the towns were abandoned as well. One such town is located near the former Gulag camp called Butugychag (also called Lower Butugychag). Other towns were deserted due to deindustrialisation and the economic crises of the early 1990s attributed to post-Soviet conflicts – one example being Tkvarcheli in Georgia, a coal mining town that suffered a drastic population decline as a result of the War in Abkhazia in the early 1990s and Aghdam, made ruined and uninhabited after the First Nagorno-Karabakh War.

Although in 2010s Chinese ghost cities became a frequent feature of discourse regarding China&#x27;s economy and urbanization, underoccupied cities filled up. Writing in 2023, academic and former UK diplomat Kerry Brown described the idea of Chinese ghost cities as a popular bandwagon which was shown to be a myth.

The town of Namie, along with several other towns in Fukushima Prefecture, Japan, was temporarily evacuated as a result of the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster following the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami. Following ongoing decontamination works, several portions of Namie have been fully reopened to residents, allowing reconstruction and renovation of the town&#x27;s buildings to be undertaken and resettlement of the area to take place.

===Europe===

Urbanization – the migration of a country&#x27;s rural population into the cities – has left many European towns and villages deserted. An increasing number of settlements in Bulgaria are becoming ghost towns for this reason; at the time of the 2011 census, the country had 181 uninhabited settlements. In Hungary, dozens of villages are also threatened with abandonment. The first village officially declared as &quot;dead&quot; was in the late 1970s, but later it was repopulated as an eco-village. Some other depopulated villages were successfully saved as small rural resorts, such as Kán, Tornakápolna, Szanticska, Gorica, and Révfalu.

In Spain, large zones of the mountainous Iberian System and the Pyrenees have undergone heavy depopulation since the early 20th century, leaving a string of ghost towns in areas such as the Solana Valley. Traditional agricultural practices such as sheep and goat rearing, on which the mountain village economy was based, were not taken over by the local youth, especially after the lifestyle changes that swept over rural Spain during the second half of the 20th century.

Examples for ghost towns in Italy include the medieval village of Fabbriche di Careggine near Lago di Vagli, in province of Lucca, in Tuscany, the deserted mountain village Craco located in Basilicata, which has served as a filming location, and the ghost village Roveraia, in the municipality of Loro Ciuffenna, in province of Arezzo, situated near Pratovalle. During World War II it was an important partisan base and it was definitively abandoned in the 1980s, when the last family who lived here, left the village.. Two projects have been proposed for the recovery of the village: in 2011 the proposal of Movimento Libero Perseo &quot;Roveraia eco - lab&quot;, based on sustainability, and in 2019 there was a proposal aiming to recover the village with a mix of functions called &quot;Ecomuseum of Pratomagno&quot;.
In the United Kingdom, thousands of villages were abandoned during the Middle Ages, as a result of Black Death, revolts, and enclosure, the process by which vast amounts of farmland became privately owned. Since there are rarely any visible remains of these settlements, they are not generally considered ghost towns; instead, they are referred to in archaeological circles as deserted medieval villages.

Sometimes, wars and genocide end a town&#x27;s life. In 1944, occupying German &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; troops murdered almost the entire population of the French village Oradour-sur-Glane. A new settlement was built nearby after the war, but the old town was left depopulated on the orders of President Charles de Gaulle, as a permanent memorial. In Germany, numerous smaller towns and villages in the former eastern territories were completely destroyed in the last two years of the war. These territories later became part of Poland and the Soviet Union, and many of the smaller settlements were never rebuilt or repopulated, for example Kłomino (&quot;Westfalenhof&quot;), Pstrąże (&quot;Pstransse&quot;), and Janowa Góra (&quot;Johannesberg&quot;). Some villages in England were also abandoned during the war, but for different reasons. Imber, on Salisbury Plain, and several villages in the Stanford Battle Area, were commandeered by the War Office for use as training grounds for British and US troops. Although this was intended to be a temporary measure, the residents were never allowed to return, and the villages have been used for military training ever since. southeast of Imber is Copehill Down, a deserted village purpose-built for training in urban warfare.

Disasters &amp; natural disasters have played a part in the abandonment of settlements within Europe. Two examples are Pripyat and Chernobyl. After the Chernobyl disaster of 1986, both cities were evacuated due to dangerous radiation levels within the area. As of today, Pripyat remains completely abandoned, and Chernobyl has around 500 remaining inhabitants. Another example is Todoque in the Canary Islands, Spain. During the 2021 Cumbre Vieja volcanic eruption, the locality was severely affected. Hundreds of buildings were destroyed, including the parish Church of Saint Pius X, the health center, the headquarters of the neighborhood association, the School of Early Childhood Education, and Los Campitos Elementary School and the Todoque Elementary and the Infant Education School, and by October 10, new lava flows destroyed the remaining buildings that were still standing, leaving the town practically erased from the map.

An example in the UK of a ghost village which was abandoned before it was ever occupied is at Polphail, Argyll and Bute. The planned development of an oil rig construction facility nearby never materialised, and a village built to house the workers and their families became deserted the moment the building contractors finished their work.

War activities, displacements and complete destruction of cities as result of intense fighting were the reason for their complete abandonment. Examples are Marinka and Soledar in Donbas in Ukraine.

===North America===
====Canada====

Canada has several ghost towns in parts of British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario, Saskatchewan, Newfoundland and Labrador, and Quebec. Some were logging towns or dual mining and logging sites, often developed at the behest of the company. In Alberta and Saskatchewan, most ghost towns were once farming communities that have since died off due to the removal of the railway through the town or the bypass of a highway. The ghost towns in British Columbia were predominantly mining towns and prospecting camps as well as canneries and, in one or two cases, large smelter and pulp mill towns. British Columbia has more ghost towns than any other jurisdiction on the North American continent, with more than 1,500 abandoned or semi-abandoned towns and localities. Among the most notable are Anyox, Kitsault, and Ocean Falls.

Some ghost towns have revived their economies and populations due to historical and eco-tourism, such as Barkerville; once the largest town north of Kamloops, it is now a year-round provincial museum. In Quebec, Val-Jalbert is a well-known tourist ghost town; founded in 1901 around a mechanical pulp mill that became obsolete when paper mills began to break down wood fibre by chemical means, it was abandoned when the mill closed in 1927 and re-opened as a park in 1960.
====Mexico====
A former mining town in Mexico, Real de Catorce, has been used as a backdrop for Hollywood movies such as &quot;The Treasure of the Sierra Madre&quot; (1948), &quot;The Mexican&quot; (2001), and &quot;Bandidas&quot; (2006).

====United States====
Many ghost towns or abandoned communities exist in the American Great Plains, the rural areas of which have lost a third of their population since 1920. Thousands of communities in the northern plains states of Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, and South Dakota became railroad ghost towns when a rail line failed to materialize. Hundreds of towns were abandoned as the Interstate highway system replaced the railroads as the favored means of transportation. Ghost towns are common in mining or mill towns in all the western states, and many eastern and southern states as well. Residents are compelled to leave in search of more productive areas when the resources that had created an employment boom in these towns were eventually exhausted.

Sometimes a ghost town consists of many abandoned buildings as in Bodie, California, or standing ruins as in Rhyolite, Nevada, while elsewhere only the foundations of former buildings remain as in Graysonia, Arkansas. Old mining camps that have lost most of their population at some stage of their history such as Aspen, Deadwood, Oatman, Tombstone and Virginia City are sometimes referred to as ghost towns although they are presently active towns and cities. Many U.S. ghost towns, such as South Pass City in Wyoming are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

Starting in 2002, an attempt to declare an official ghost town in California stalled when the adherents of the town of Bodie and those of Calico, in Southern California, could not agree on the most deserving settlement for the recognition. A compromise was eventually reached—Bodie became the official state gold rush ghost town, while Calico was named the official state silver rush ghost town.

===South America===
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, a wave of European immigrants arrived in Brazil and settled in the cities, which offered jobs, education, and other opportunities that enabled newcomers to enter the middle class. Many also settled in the growing small towns along the expanding railway system. Since the 1930s, many rural workers have moved to the big cities. Other ghost towns were created in the aftermath of dinosaur fossil rushes.

In Colombia, a volcano erupted in 1985, where the city of Armero was engulfed by lahars, which killed approximately 23,000 people in total. Armero was never rebuilt (its inhabitants being diverted to nearby cities, and thus becoming a ghost town), but still stands today as &quot;holy land&quot;, as dictated by Pope John Paul II.

A number of ghost towns throughout South America were once mining camps or lumber mills, such as the many saltpeter mining camps that prospered in Chile from the end of the Saltpeter War until the invention of synthetic saltpeter during World War I. Some of these towns, such as the Humberstone and Santa Laura Saltpeter Works in the Atacama Desert, have been declared UNESCO World Heritage Sites.

===Oceania===

The boom and bust of gold rushes and the mining of other ores has led to a number of ghost towns in both Australia and New Zealand. Other towns have become abandoned whether due to natural disasters, the weather, or the drowning of valleys to increase the size of lakes.

In Australia, the Victoria gold rush led to numerous ghost towns (such as Cassilis and Moliagul), as did the hunt for gold in Western Australia (for example, the towns of Ora Banda and Kanowna). The mining of iron and other ores has also led to towns thriving briefly before dwindling. The town of Wittenoom was abandoned and demolished due to the health hazards posed by asbestos mining in the area.

In New Zealand, the Otago gold rush similarly led to several ghost towns (such as Macetown). New Zealand&#x27;s ghost towns also include numerous coal mining areas in the South Island&#x27;s West Coast Region, including Denniston and Stockton. Natural disasters have also led to the loss of some towns, notably Te Wairoa, &quot;The Buried Village&quot;, destroyed in the 1886 eruption of Mount Tarawera, and the Otago town of Kelso, abandoned after it was flooded repeatedly after heavy rainstorms. Early settlements on the rugged southwest coast of the South Island at Martins Bay and Port Craig were also abandoned, mainly due to the inhospitable terrain.

===Antarctica===

The oldest ghost town in Antarctica is on Deception Island, where in 1906, a Norwegian-Chilean company set up a whaling station at Whalers Bay, which they used as a base for their factory ship, the &quot;Gobernador Bories&quot;. Other whaling operations followed suit, and by 1914 there were thirteen factory ships based there. The station ceased to be profitable during the Great Depression, and was abandoned in 1931. In 1969, the station was partially destroyed by a volcanic eruption. There are also many abandoned scientific and military bases in Antarctica, especially in the Antarctic Peninsula.

The Antarctic island of South Georgia used to have several thriving whaling settlements during the first half of the 20th century, with a combined population exceeding 2,000 in some years. These included Grytviken (operating 1904–64), Leith Harbour (1909–65), Ocean Harbour (1909–20), Husvik (1910–60), Stromness (1912–61) and Prince Olav Harbour (1917–34). The abandoned settlements have become increasingly dilapidated, and remain uninhabited nowadays except for the Museum curator&#x27;s family at Grytviken. The jetty, the church, dwellings and industrial buildings at Grytviken have recently been renovated by the South Georgian Government, becoming a popular tourist destination. Some historical buildings in the other settlements are being restored as well.

==See also==

* Abandoned mine
* Abandoned village
* Exclusion zone
* Ghost ship
* List of ghost towns by country
* Lost cities
* Modern ruins
* Old field (ecology)
* Phantom settlement
* Potemkin village
* Unused highway
* Urban decay
** Urbicide
* Urban exploration
* Yellowcake boomtown
==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="2" end="12" title="Ghost town" label="ghost town"/>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="14" end="27" title="Ghost town" label="deserted city"/>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="29" end="41" title="Ghost town" label="extinct town"/>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="46" end="60" title="Ghost town" label="abandoned city"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="381" end="387" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="475" end="480" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620824" start="598" end="651" title="nuclear and radiation accidents and incidents" label="nuclear and radiation-related accidents and incidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q806862" start="1001" end="1017" title="Bannack, Montana" label="Bannack, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008647" start="1022" end="1037" title="Oatman, Arizona" label="Oatman, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q808269" start="1060" end="1089" title="Barkerville, British Columbia" label="Barkerville, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52285" start="1101" end="1106" title="Craco" label="Craco"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="1111" end="1118" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q540844" start="1129" end="1135" title="Aghdam" label="Aghdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q819123" start="1151" end="1161" title="Kolmanskop" label="Kolmanskop"/>
<link wikidata="Q170456" start="1174" end="1181" title="Pripyat" label="Pripyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q129677" start="1186" end="1195" title="Chernobyl" label="Chernobyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207562" start="1208" end="1219" title="Dhanushkodi" label="Dhanushkodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437077" start="1230" end="1240" title="Fordlândia" label="Fordlândia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525050" start="1255" end="1268" title="Villa Epecuén" label="Villa Epecuén"/>
<link wikidata="Q356936" start="2576" end="2590" title="exclusion zone" label="exclusion zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q30990" start="2598" end="2605" title="Plymouth, Montserrat" label="natural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050926" start="2609" end="2626" title="Chernobyl Exclusion Zone" label="human-made causes"/>
<link wikidata="Q474164" start="2729" end="2737" title="boomtown" label="boomtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q273182" start="2887" end="2896" title="gold rush" label="gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q627236" start="3311" end="3323" title="company town" label="company town"/>
<link wikidata="Q820254" start="3618" end="3629" title="mining town" label="mining town"/>
<link wikidata="Q79934" start="3634" end="3647" title="U.S. Route 66" label="U.S. Route 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008647" start="3776" end="3791" title="Oatman, Arizona" label="Oatman, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410766" start="3827" end="3836" title="pulp mill" label="pulp mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075992" start="3946" end="3957" title="Ocean Falls" label="Ocean Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197599" start="4020" end="4028" title="Kitsault" label="Kitsault"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049352" start="4096" end="4103" title="Cassiar, British Columbia" label="Cassiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="4111" end="4119" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886375" start="4305" end="4328" title="Collingwood, Queensland" label="Collingwood, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q569073" start="4333" end="4340" title="Outback" label="Outback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026409" start="4363" end="4369" title="Winton, Queensland" label="Winton"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="4516" end="4526" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644166" start="4646" end="4660" title="fly-in fly-out" label="fly-in fly-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q627236" start="4690" end="4702" title="company town" label="company town"/>
<link wikidata="Q192541" start="4992" end="5001" title="Ctesiphon" label="Ctesiphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q186582" start="5073" end="5091" title="real-estate bubble" label="real-estate bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593021" start="5816" end="5828" title="Opeongo Line" label="Opeongo Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q79934" start="5840" end="5853" title="U.S. Route 66" label="U.S. Route 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q94275" start="5920" end="5924" title="Interstate 44" label="I-44"/>
<link wikidata="Q94209" start="5929" end="5933" title="Interstate 40" label="I-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q171043" start="5986" end="5997" title="steam train" label="steam train"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275033" start="6069" end="6082" title="dieselization" label="dieselization"/>
<link wikidata="Q388201" start="6086" end="6101" title="rail electrification" label="electrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q458547" start="6143" end="6160" title="Amboy, California" label="Amboy, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869402" start="6212" end="6241" title="Atlantic and Pacific Railroad" label="Atlantic and Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="6253" end="6266" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="6313" end="6318" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596850" start="6452" end="6470" title="Granville, Indiana" label="Granville, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958669" start="6487" end="6508" title="Wabash and Erie Canal" label="Wabash and Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35883" start="6586" end="6594" title="Aral Sea" label="Aral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q166332" start="6637" end="6649" title="eminent domain" label="expropriated"/>
<link wikidata="Q983926" start="6737" end="6744" title="Tyneham" label="Tyneham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="6870" end="6874" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q618717" start="6906" end="6934" title="John C. Stennis Space Center" label="John C. Stennis Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q485441" start="6971" end="6998" title="Hancock County, Mississippi" label="Hancock County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739672" start="7031" end="7042" title="Pearl River (Mississippi–Louisiana)" label="Pearl River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="7057" end="7068" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="7069" end="7078" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054581" start="7147" end="7158" title="buffer zone" label="buffer zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193281" start="7395" end="7406" title="Pearlington, Mississippi" label="Pearlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989362" start="7913" end="7929" title="Weston, DuPage County, Illinois" label="Weston, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q337641" start="8015" end="8052" title="Fermilab" label="Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391390" start="8453" end="8470" title="Kensico, New York" label="Kensico, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391393" start="8491" end="8508" title="Kensico Reservoir" label="Kensico Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061392" start="8512" end="8530" title="Loyston, Tennessee" label="Loyston, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632797" start="8567" end="8577" title="Norris Dam" label="Norris Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906795" start="8623" end="8641" title="St. Thomas, Nevada" label="St. Thomas, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q654515" start="8686" end="8695" title="Lake Mead" label="Lake Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q172822" start="8726" end="8736" title="Hoover Dam" label="Hoover Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617339" start="8740" end="8763" title="Stiltner, West Virginia" label="Stiltner, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328898" start="8794" end="8808" title="East Lynn Lake" label="East Lynn Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748773" start="8820" end="8837" title="The Lost Villages" label="The Lost Villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="8841" end="8848" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q753288" start="8861" end="8882" title="Saint Lawrence Seaway" label="Saint Lawrence Seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390242" start="8907" end="8923" title="Nether Hambleton" label="Nether Hambleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390242" start="8928" end="8944" title="Middle Hambleton" label="Middle Hambleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q822190" start="8995" end="9008" title="Rutland Water" label="Rutland Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570406" start="9012" end="9020" title="Ashopton" label="Ashopton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038719" start="9025" end="9032" title="Derwent, Derbyshire" label="Derwent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800100" start="9082" end="9101" title="Ladybower Reservoir" label="Ladybower Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432944" start="9109" end="9119" title="Tignes Dam" label="Tignes Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564651" start="9187" end="9193" title="Mologa" label="Mologa"/>
<link wikidata="Q375029" start="9235" end="9252" title="Rybinsk reservoir" label="Rybinsk reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12514" start="9329" end="9345" title="Three Gorges Dam" label="Three Gorges Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q690026" start="9411" end="9430" title="Guanacaste Province" label="Guanacaste Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q31938" start="9544" end="9555" title="Lake Arenal" label="Lake Arenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q351613" start="9559" end="9572" title="Old Adaminaby" label="Old Adaminaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804312" start="9632" end="9650" title="Snowy River Scheme" label="Snowy River Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q38891" start="9674" end="9688" title="Aswan Dam" label="Aswan High Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="9696" end="9706" title="Nile River" label="Nile River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002656" start="9780" end="9785" title="Buhen" label="Buhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182796" start="9792" end="9803" title="Lake Nasser" label="Lake Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249856" start="9807" end="9812" title="Tehri" label="Tehri"/>
<link wikidata="Q69091" start="9855" end="9864" title="Tehri Dam" label="Tehri Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499" start="9888" end="9899" title="Uttarakhand" label="Uttarakhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606028" start="9903" end="9910" title="Aceredo" label="Aceredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="9952" end="9959" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9649084" start="9999" end="10015" title="Alto Lindoso Dam" label="Alto Lindoso Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402628" start="10113" end="10124" title="Capel Celyn" label="Capel Celyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q63410863" start="10158" end="10174" title="Tryweryn flooding" label="Trywern Flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401399" start="10216" end="10226" title="Llyn Celyn" label="Llyn Celyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="10268" end="10277" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191558" start="10282" end="10288" title="Wirral Peninsula" label="Wirral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199915" start="10395" end="10403" title="massacre" label="massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q131017" start="10508" end="10553" title="population exchange between Greece and Turkey" label="population exchange between Greece and Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q190974" start="10589" end="10606" title="Oradour-sur-Glane" label="Oradour-sur-Glane"/>
<link wikidata="Q836897" start="10630" end="10642" title="Oradour-sur-Glane massacre" label="10 June 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="10699" end="10708" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q540844" start="10859" end="10865" title="Aghdam" label="Aghdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="10877" end="10887" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q540844" start="10914" end="10920" title="Aghdam" label="Aghdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q381375" start="10945" end="10971" title="First Nagorno-Karabakh War" label="First Nagorno-Karabakh War"/>
<link wikidata="Q954140" start="11507" end="11528" title="Pattonsburg, Missouri" label="Pattonsburg, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q52285" start="11632" end="11637" title="Craco" label="Craco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="11683" end="11693" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q51668" start="11803" end="11828" title="The Passion of The Christ" label="The Passion of The Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q42229" start="11838" end="11848" title="Mel Gibson" label="Mel Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087236" start="11856" end="11879" title="Christ Stopped at Eboli (film)" label="Christ Stopped at Eboli"/>
<link wikidata="Q53050" start="11889" end="11903" title="Francesco Rosi" label="Francesco Rosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171365" start="11911" end="11929" title="The Nativity Story" label="The Nativity Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q229598" start="11939" end="11958" title="Catherine Hardwicke" label="Catherine Hardwicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q181540" start="11969" end="11986" title="Quantum of Solace" label="Quantum of Solace"/>
<link wikidata="Q28497" start="11996" end="12008" title="Marc Forster" label="Marc Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q492386" start="12020" end="12043" title="Centralia, Pennsylvania" label="Centralia, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425553" start="12083" end="12092" title="mine fire" label="mine fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004266" start="12219" end="12230" title="Byrnesville, Pennsylvania" label="Byrnesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521151" start="12461" end="12477" title="Lemieux, Ontario" label="Lemieux, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578862" start="12580" end="12589" title="Leda clay" label="Leda clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304550" start="12708" end="12726" title="South Nation River" label="South Nation River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462515" start="12770" end="12788" title="Saint-Jean-Vianney, Quebec" label="Saint-Jean-Vianney"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="12949" end="12967" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="Chernobyl disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="13123" end="13130" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170456" start="13171" end="13178" title="Pripyat" label="Pripyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q129677" start="13183" end="13192" title="Chernobyl" label="Chernobyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q215419" start="13385" end="13414" title="Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant" label="Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="13599" end="13607" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="13671" end="13682" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="13809" end="13821" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434664" start="14036" end="14057" title="Times Beach, Missouri" label="Times Beach, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522" start="14107" end="14114" title="dioxins and dioxin-like compounds" label="dioxins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569521" start="14120" end="14148" title="Wittenoom, Western Australia" label="Wittenoom, Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q256865" start="14200" end="14213" title="blue asbestos" label="blue asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384288" start="14265" end="14271" title="Treece, Kansas" label="Treece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844779" start="14276" end="14282" title="Picher, Oklahoma" label="Picher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="14316" end="14322" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="14323" end="14331" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="14400" end="14404" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="14409" end="14413" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784525" start="14461" end="14474" title="mine tailings" label="mine tailings"/>
<link wikidata="Q110315" start="14512" end="14526" title="lead poisoning" label="lead poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="14592" end="14623" title="Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="14668" end="14678" title="ammunition" label="ammunition"/>
<link wikidata="Q983926" start="14751" end="14758" title="Tyneham" label="Tyneham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="14763" end="14769" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14823" end="14839" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559423" start="15083" end="15099" title="heritage tourism" label="heritage tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q174261" start="15166" end="15184" title="Walhalla, Victoria" label="Walhalla, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640157" start="15415" end="15429" title="Sungai Lembing" label="Sungai Lembing"/>
<link wikidata="Q657335" start="15568" end="15578" title="Foncebadón" label="Foncebadón"/>
<link wikidata="Q71140" start="15593" end="15597" title="province of León" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q14314" start="15759" end="15781" title="Santiago de Compostela" label="Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q54639" start="15807" end="15812" title="Riace" label="Riace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610989" start="15814" end="15823" title="Muñotello" label="Muñotello"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="15863" end="15870" title="refugee" label="refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="15876" end="15891" title="Homelessness" label="homeless people"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16060" end="16078" title="Madrina Foundation" label="Madrina Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="16138" end="16152" title="Late Antiquity" label="Late Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q218272" start="16215" end="16245" title="French Algeria" label="French colonization of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131818" start="16247" end="16251" title="Oran" label="Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="16390" end="16400" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q57452" start="16874" end="16889" title="François Bozizé" label="François Bozizé"/>
<link wikidata="Q929" start="16934" end="16958" title="Central African Republic" label="Central African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428263" start="17149" end="17154" title="Paoua" label="Paoua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280936" start="17457" end="17465" title="Lukangol" label="Lukangol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589923" start="17497" end="17526" title="South Sudan internal conflict (2011–present)" label="tribal clashes in South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="17593" end="17598" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q650227" start="17608" end="17616" title="Tawergha" label="Tawergha"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="17686" end="17700" title="Libyan Civil War (2011)" label="2011 civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270978" start="17844" end="17856" title="diamond rush" label="diamond rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q153665" start="17860" end="17884" title="German South-West Africa" label="German South-West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="17899" end="17906" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206047" start="18102" end="18108" title="Pomona, Namibia" label="Pomona"/>
<link wikidata="Q962557" start="18110" end="18123" title="Elizabeth Bay, Namibia" label="Elizabeth Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q819123" start="18128" end="18138" title="Kolmanskop" label="Kolmanskop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207562" start="18265" end="18276" title="Dhanushkodi" label="Dhanushkodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533253" start="18329" end="18352" title="1964 Rameswaram cyclone" label="1964 Rameswaram cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="18447" end="18459" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="18482" end="18487" title="Gulag" label="Gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q4100327" start="18679" end="18689" title="Butugychag" label="Butugychag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975306" start="18832" end="18853" title="post-Soviet conflicts" label="post-Soviet conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q270535" start="18874" end="18884" title="Tkvarcheli" label="Tkvarcheli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="18899" end="18910" title="coal mining" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209169" start="18978" end="18993" title="War in Abkhazia (1992–1993)" label="War in Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q540844" start="19017" end="19023" title="Aghdam" label="Aghdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q381375" start="19063" end="19089" title="First Nagorno-Karabakh War" label="First Nagorno-Karabakh War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17210463" start="19118" end="19130" title="Underoccupied developments in China" label="ghost cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q209380" start="19180" end="19200" title="Economy of China" label="China&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900233" start="19205" end="19217" title="Urbanization in China" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q55615855" start="19300" end="19311" title="Kerry Brown (historian)" label="Kerry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023937" start="19421" end="19426" title="Namie, Fukushima" label="Namie"/>
<link wikidata="Q71707" start="19462" end="19482" title="Fukushima Prefecture" label="Fukushima Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q171178" start="19536" end="19570" title="Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster" label="Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q36204" start="19585" end="19619" title="2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami" label="2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="19871" end="19883" title="Urbanization" label="Urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q295472" start="20359" end="20370" title="eco-village" label="eco-village"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20460" end="20463" title="Kán, Hungary" label="Kán"/>
<link wikidata="Q579525" start="20465" end="20477" title="Tornakápolna" label="Tornakápolna"/>
<link wikidata="Q962072" start="20479" end="20489" title="Szanticska" label="Szanticska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20491" end="20497" title="Gorica, Hungary" label="Gorica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20503" end="20510" title="Révfalu" label="Révfalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q201496" start="20554" end="20568" title="Iberian System" label="Iberian System"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="20577" end="20585" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823398" start="20703" end="20716" title="Solana Valley" label="Solana Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737508" start="21052" end="21074" title="Fabbriche di Careggine" label="Fabbriche di Careggine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800435" start="21080" end="21093" title="Lago di Vagli" label="Lago di Vagli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202" start="21098" end="21115" title="province of Lucca" label="province of Lucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="21120" end="21127" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q52285" start="21159" end="21164" title="Craco" label="Craco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="21176" end="21186" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21267" end="21297" title=":it:Loro Ciuffenna" label="municipality of Loro Ciuffenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16115" start="21302" end="21320" title="province of Arezzo" label="province of Arezzo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21336" end="21346" title=":it:Pratovalle" label="Pratovalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="21355" end="21367" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="21906" end="21917" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q792164" start="21932" end="21941" title="enclosure" label="enclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q21751582" start="22184" end="22209" title="deserted medieval village" label="deserted medieval village"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="22298" end="22307" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q190974" start="22381" end="22398" title="Oradour-sur-Glane" label="Oradour-sur-Glane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="22514" end="22531" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q700842" start="22613" end="22639" title="former eastern territories of Germany" label="former eastern territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="22754" end="22766" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q649357" start="22851" end="22858" title="Kłomino" label="Kłomino"/>
<link wikidata="Q11830666" start="22887" end="22894" title="Pstrąże" label="Pstrąże"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682960" start="22924" end="22935" title="Janowa Góra" label="Janowa Góra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303474" start="23052" end="23057" title="Imber" label="Imber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472049" start="23062" end="23077" title="Salisbury Plain" label="Salisbury Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598802" start="23107" end="23127" title="Stanford Battle Area" label="Stanford Battle Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="23154" end="23164" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168342" start="23406" end="23419" title="Copehill Down" label="Copehill Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q860251" start="23470" end="23483" title="urban warfare" label="urban warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q170456" start="23605" end="23612" title="Pripyat" label="Pripyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q129677" start="23617" end="23626" title="Chernobyl" label="Chernobyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="23638" end="23656" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="Chernobyl disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147983" start="23866" end="23873" title="Todoque" label="Todoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q108601121" start="23915" end="23950" title="2021 Cumbre Vieja volcanic eruption" label="2021 Cumbre Vieja volcanic eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q20877236" start="24515" end="24523" title="Polphail" label="Polphail"/>
<link wikidata="Q202174" start="24525" end="24540" title="Argyll and Bute" label="Argyll and Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494365" start="24919" end="24926" title="Marinka, Ukraine" label="Marinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399843" start="24931" end="24938" title="Soledar" label="Soledar"/>
<link wikidata="Q605714" start="24942" end="24948" title="Donbas" label="Donbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="24952" end="24959" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="24998" end="25004" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="25041" end="25057" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="25059" end="25066" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="25068" end="25075" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="25077" end="25089" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="25091" end="25116" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="25122" end="25128" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q627236" start="25194" end="25232" title="company town" label="developed at the behest of the company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857864" start="25783" end="25788" title="Anyox" label="Anyox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197599" start="25790" end="25798" title="Kitsault" label="Kitsault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075992" start="25804" end="25815" title="Ocean Falls" label="Ocean Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q808269" start="25923" end="25934" title="Barkerville, British Columbia" label="Barkerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q473209" start="25967" end="25975" title="Kamloops" label="Kamloops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553370" start="26030" end="26041" title="Val-Jalbert, Quebec" label="Val-Jalbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410766" start="26114" end="26123" title="pulp mill" label="pulp mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q918088" start="26150" end="26160" title="paper mill" label="paper mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625473" start="26182" end="26192" title="wood fibre" label="wood fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027749" start="26338" end="26353" title="Real de Catorce" label="Real de Catorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q251559" start="26418" end="26450" title="The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (film)" label="The Treasure of the Sierra Madre"/>
<link wikidata="Q469839" start="26471" end="26482" title="The Mexican" label="The Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q754742" start="26507" end="26515" title="Bandidas" label="Bandidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="26583" end="26594" title="unincorporated area" label="communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="26617" end="26629" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="26764" end="26771" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="26773" end="26781" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="26783" end="26795" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="26801" end="26813" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="26922" end="26947" title="Interstate highway system" label="Interstate highway system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012861" start="27047" end="27056" title="mill town" label="mill town"/>
<link wikidata="Q832945" start="27363" end="27380" title="Bodie, California" label="Bodie, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889901" start="27406" end="27422" title="Rhyolite, Nevada" label="Rhyolite, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598428" start="27494" end="27513" title="Graysonia, Arkansas" label="Graysonia, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q205842" start="27611" end="27616" title="Aspen, Colorado" label="Aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q262483" start="27618" end="27626" title="Deadwood, South Dakota" label="Deadwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008647" start="27628" end="27634" title="Oatman, Arizona" label="Oatman"/>
<link wikidata="Q79873" start="27636" end="27645" title="Tombstone, Arizona" label="Tombstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q955580" start="27650" end="27663" title="Virginia City, Montana" label="Virginia City"/>
<link wikidata="Q499629" start="27789" end="27815" title="South Pass City, Wyoming" label="South Pass City in Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="27834" end="27870" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q832945" start="27992" end="27997" title="Bodie, California" label="Bodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q526354" start="28011" end="28017" title="Calico, San Bernardino County, California" label="Calico"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="28022" end="28041" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q273182" start="28181" end="28190" title="gold rush" label="gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332228" start="28245" end="28256" title="silver rush" label="silver rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="28739" end="28747" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532815" start="28751" end="28766" title="Armero tragedy" label="volcano erupted"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="29048" end="29065" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q184373" start="29174" end="29183" title="sodium nitrate" label="saltpeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q152004" start="29241" end="29254" title="War of the Pacific" label="Saltpeter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q572895" start="29351" end="29394" title="Humberstone and Santa Laura Saltpeter Works" label="Humberstone and Santa Laura Saltpeter Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q47141" start="29402" end="29416" title="Atacama Desert" label="Atacama Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="29437" end="29463" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096366" start="29772" end="29790" title="Victoria gold rush" label="Victoria gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3662003" start="29828" end="29836" title="Cassilis, Victoria" label="Cassilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896150" start="29841" end="29849" title="Moliagul" label="Moliagul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="29880" end="29897" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099193" start="29925" end="29934" title="Ora Banda" label="Ora Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723895" start="29939" end="29946" title="Kanowna, Western Australia" label="Kanowna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569521" start="30052" end="30061" title="Wittenoom, Western Australia" label="Wittenoom"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="30126" end="30134" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573076" start="30176" end="30191" title="Otago gold rush" label="Otago gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994614" start="30238" end="30246" title="Macetown" label="Macetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q541468" start="30347" end="30364" title="West Coast, New Zealand" label="West Coast Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259123" start="30376" end="30385" title="Denniston, New Zealand" label="Denniston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618207" start="30390" end="30398" title="Stockton, New Zealand" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398235" start="30467" end="30476" title="Te Wairoa (village)" label="Te Wairoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16685818" start="30527" end="30558" title="1886 eruption of Mount Tarawera" label="1886 eruption of Mount Tarawera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714392" start="30582" end="30587" title="Kelso, New Zealand" label="Kelso"/>
<link wikidata="Q32270615" start="30726" end="30737" title="Martins Bay" label="Martins Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q25661755" start="30742" end="30752" title="Port Craig" label="Port Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="30858" end="30868" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045820" start="30875" end="30891" title="Deception Island" label="Deception Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="31208" end="31224" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q185605" start="31415" end="31434" title="Antarctic Peninsula" label="Antarctic Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35086" start="31461" end="31474" title="South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands" label="South Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185672" start="31641" end="31650" title="Grytviken" label="Grytviken"/>
<link wikidata="Q731574" start="31672" end="31685" title="Leith Harbour" label="Leith Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535131" start="31697" end="31710" title="Ocean Harbour" label="Ocean Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q121964" start="31722" end="31728" title="Husvik" label="Husvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q279780" start="31740" end="31749" title="Stromness (South Georgia)" label="Stromness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755244" start="31764" end="31783" title="Prince Olav Harbour" label="Prince Olav Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q185672" start="31938" end="31947" title="Grytviken" label="Grytviken"/>
<link wikidata="Q185672" start="32010" end="32019" title="Grytviken" label="Grytviken"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32219" end="32233" title="Abandoned mine#Abandoned mines" label="Abandoned mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q350895" start="32236" end="32253" title="Abandoned village" label="Abandoned village"/>
<link wikidata="Q356936" start="32256" end="32270" title="Exclusion zone" label="Exclusion zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q281019" start="32273" end="32283" title="Ghost ship" label="Ghost ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972572" start="32286" end="32316" title="List of ghost towns by country" label="List of ghost towns by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974842" start="32319" end="32330" title="Lost city" label="Lost cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870700" start="32333" end="32345" title="Modern ruins" label="Modern ruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966153" start="32348" end="32367" title="Old field (ecology)" label="Old field (ecology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180622" start="32370" end="32388" title="Phantom settlement" label="Phantom settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q543515" start="32391" end="32407" title="Potemkin village" label="Potemkin village"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897785" start="32410" end="32424" title="Unused highway" label="Unused highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039238" start="32427" end="32438" title="Urban decay" label="Urban decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261722" start="32442" end="32450" title="Urbicide" label="Urbicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130439" start="32453" end="32470" title="Urban exploration" label="Urban exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610800" start="32473" end="32492" title="Yellowcake boomtown" label="Yellowcake boomtown"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43573" wikidata="Q301458" url="?curid=43573" title="Lager Beer Riot">
<text>The Lager Beer Riot occurred on April 21, 1855 in Chicago, Illinois, and was the first major civil disturbance in the city. Mayor Levi Boone, a Nativist politician, renewed enforcement of an old local ordinance mandating that taverns be closed on Sundays and led the city council to raise the cost of a liquor license from $50 per year to $300 per year, renewable quarterly. The move was seen as targeting German immigrants in particular and so caused a greater sense of community within the group.

==Background==
Chicago&#x27;s rapid growth in the 1840s and 1850s was largely because of German and Irish Catholic immigrants. Chicago was developing into an attractive opportunity for many immigrants. Although the jobs that awaited the immigrant were often poor-paying wage based positions, opportunities were often more promising than that of their home country. The immigrants settled in their own neighborhoods, German immigrants congregating mainly on the North Side, across the Chicago River from City Hall and the older Protestant part of the city. The German settlers worked a six-day week, leaving Sunday as their primary day to socialize; much socialization took place in the small taverns that dotted the North Side of Chicago. German-language newspapers, such as the Illinois Staats-Zeitung and social movements like the Turners and German craft unions gave the German population of Chicago a high degree of social and political cohesiveness. Additionally, the Forty-Eighters among them had previously used demonstrations as a political tool during the European revolutions of 1848.

As in much of the rest of the country, nativist distrust of Catholic influence produced a backlash in the form of the &quot;Know-Nothing&quot; movement. In the election of 1854, the Temperance Party candidate, Amos Throop, lost by a margin of nearly 20% to Isaac Lawrence Milliken. Nevertheless, after winning the election, Milliken declared himself in favor of temperance as well. Milliken lost the following year to Levi Boone, the American Party candidate. Levi Boone ran on an anti-immigrant and anti-Catholic platform of the Know-Nothing Party, which garnered him enough support to win the election. The Know-Nothing Party nationally had been feeding off the swell of nationalist sentiments brewing in the nation in the 1840s and 1850s. In his inauguration speech, Mayor Boone stated, &quot;I cannot be blind to the existence in our midst of a powerful politico-religious organization, all its members owing, and its chief officers bound under an oath of allegiance to the temporal, as well as the spiritual supremacy of a foreign despot.&quot; Associated with his fear of foreigners, Boone, a Baptist and temperance advocate, believed that the Sabbath was profaned by having drinking establishments open on Sunday. However, the temperance movement was seen in the eyes of immigrants as a means of control used by the elites to further control the working class. Although Boone&#x27;s actions were in anticipation of Illinois enacting a Maine law by referendum that would prohibit the sale of alcohol for recreational purposes, the referendum failed in June 1855, by a statewide vote of 54% to 46%. The following year, after Boone was turned out of office, the prohibition was repealed.

Before 1853, Chicago had only &quot;a small force of armed municipal officers.&quot; The Cook County sheriff&#x27;s office was largely responsible for policing the city, whose constable system &quot;was modeled on the colonial and English systems.&quot; Lacking any distinction of their own, elected town constables and night watchmen contributed to the protection of the city. In response to the inadequacy of the constable system, a police department separate and distinct from municipal courts was established in 1853. All eighty men who comprised the newly formed Chicago Police department were native born.

==Events==
Despite the renewed enforcement of Chicago&#x27;s liquor ordinance, tavern owners continued to sell beer on Sundays. That resulted in over 200 Germans being arrested in violation of both the license and the Sunday ordinances. The numerous arrests lead to the scheduling of a test case for the 21st of April. Saloon keepers &quot;decided to unite for defense and resistance, [and] contributed toward a common fund and counsel to represent all.&quot;

Robin Einhorn argues that the scheduling of such an event, &quot;in effect, scheduled the riot.&quot; Protesters clashed with police near the Cook County Court House. Waves of angry immigrants stormed the downtown area. &quot;As the marchers, coming from the north with fife and drum, approached the Chicago River at Clark Street,&quot; the mayor ordered the swing bridges opened to stop further waves of protestors from crossing the river. This left some trapped on the bridges, police then fired shots at protesters stuck on the Clark Street Bridge over the Chicago River. A policeman named George W. Hunt was shot in the arm by a rioter named Peter Martin. Martin was then killed by police, and Hunt&#x27;s arm had to be amputated. Rumors flew throughout the city that more protesters were killed. There is no evidence to support that, but loaded cannons set on the public square contributed to those rumors.

== Outcomes ==
The Lager Beer Riot lead to a compromise in which the city council lowered the liquor license fee from $300 to $100. The council decided not to release those already imprisoned for not paying the $300 fee, but most of those arrested during the riot were released and not charged.

The Lager Beer Riot illustrated the risk German immigrants were willing to bear to protect German saloon owners who they perceived as leaders of their community. The mayor&#x27;s temperance policy thus united German property owners, who could have been a natural ally of the mayor because of their strong interest in order, with working-class German immigrants.

In addition to the economic implications of the riot, there were compelling socio-cultural reasons for German immigrants to protest the newly instated ordinance. Mitrani posits that, &quot;To the German and Irish immigrants, drinking beer on Sundays was an orderly and habitual way to spend their one day off... Yet on a deeper level, this clash over drinking marked the opening salvo in a struggle over how the new class of wage workers would spend their time.&quot; The riot over beer represents a larger issue of a nativist approach to control the immigrant working class. Drinking, particularly on Sundays, was considered unacceptable. Closing taverns on Sundays and raising the cost of liquor licenses was a way to enforce what was considered acceptable behavior.

While the new policies were an attempt to control the immigrant class, the events of the riot proved to be a call for a new type of order. Within a week of the riot, a committee was formed and worked with the city government to pass a series of reforms that ultimately resulted in the reorganization of the Chicago Police Department.

The lasting effects of such a traumatic event would influence Chicago for decades to come. Tensions continued to increase between those who advocated temperance and those who enjoyed the pastime. According to Sam Mitrani, &quot;the bulk of those arrested [had] working-class occupations...[and] the only arrestees who were not part of or tied to [Chicago&#x27;s] growing working class were four ministers, eight doctors, and four lawyers.&quot;

==See also==
* List of incidents of civil unrest in the United States
* Germans in Chicago

==References==
==External links==
* &quot;The Chicago Lager Beer Riots&quot; (Archive). Goethe Institute. (German version, Archive)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q301458" start="4" end="19" title="Lager Beer Riot" label="Lager Beer Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="50" end="57" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760078" start="124" end="129" title="Mayor of Chicago" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q295279" start="130" end="140" title="Levi Boone" label="Levi Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q550678" start="144" end="152" title="Know Nothing" label="Nativist"/>
<link wikidata="Q843713" start="195" end="210" title="local ordinance" label="local ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q154250" start="226" end="232" title="tavern" label="tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431927" start="303" end="317" title="liquor license" label="liquor license"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="406" end="412" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q5999730" start="1279" end="1302" title="Illinois Staats-Zeitung" label="Illinois Staats-Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542364" start="1333" end="1340" title="Turners" label="Turners"/>
<link wikidata="Q315189" start="1473" end="1487" title="Forty-Eighters" label="Forty-Eighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q515856" start="1778" end="1794" title="Temperance Party" label="Temperance Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q432617" start="1853" end="1876" title="Isaac Lawrence Milliken" label="Isaac Lawrence Milliken"/>
<link wikidata="Q550678" start="2030" end="2044" title="Know Nothing" label="American Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="2695" end="2702" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934208" start="2707" end="2717" title="temperance movement in Illinois" label="temperance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736591" start="3038" end="3047" title="Maine law" label="Maine law"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="4489" end="4495" title="police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q108418" start="4505" end="4516" title="Cook County, Illinois" label="Cook County"/>
<link wikidata="Q950431" start="4722" end="4735" title="swing bridges" label="swing bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127391" start="4894" end="4913" title="Clark Street Bridge" label="Clark Street Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q643284" start="4923" end="4936" title="Chicago River" label="Chicago River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623932" start="7501" end="7555" title="List of incidents of civil unrest in the United States" label="List of incidents of civil unrest in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994057" start="7558" end="7576" title="Germans in Chicago" label="Germans in Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q157033" start="7666" end="7682" title="Goethe Institute" label="Goethe Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43577" wikidata="Q186277" url="?curid=43577" title="Carmelites">
<text>The Order of the Brothers of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel (; abbreviated OCarm), known as the Carmelites or sometimes by synecdoche known simply as Carmel, is a mendicant order in the Catholic Church for both men and women. Historical records about its origin remain uncertain; it was probably founded in the 12th century on Mount Carmel in what is now Israel.

==Names==
The Order of the Brothers of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel are also known simply as the Carmelites or the Carmelite Order. To differentiate themselves from the Discalced Carmelites (founded in 1562), who grew out of the older order but today have more members, the original Carmelites are sometimes known as the Carmelites of the Ancient Observance and very rarely the Calced Carmelites (discalced being a reference to some religious orders going barefoot or wearing sandals instead of shoes).

==History==
Historical records about its origin remain uncertain, but the order was probably founded in the 12th century on Mount Carmel in the Crusader States. Berthold of Calabria, as well as Albert of Vercelli, have traditionally been associated with the founding of the order, but few clear records of early Carmelite history have survived. The order of Carmelite nuns was formalised in 1452.

=== Spiritual origin ===
The Carmelite Order is one of the few monastic orders, if not the only one, not to refer to a charismatic founder, but to a prophet of the Old Testament: Elijah and his disciple Elisha are considered by the Carmelites as the spiritual fathers of the order. Tradition indicates the presence on Mount Carmel of a series of Jewish and then Christian hermits who lived, prayed and taught in the caves used by Elijah and Elisha. This is how the first Christian hermits (at the origin of the founding of the order) settled in the caves of Mount Carmel to pray to God. The first chapel built within the hermitages and bringing together this community is dedicated to the Virgin Mary. Very quickly, the spirituality of the order turned to Mary who became the queen and mistress of Carmel.

=== Hermit and monastic life on Mount Carmel ===

Before the presence of the Carmelites, in the 6th century Byzantine monks built a monastery dedicated to Saint Elijah in a valley a few kilometers south of the present monastery. This was destroyed in 614 by the Persians of Khosrow II. Around 1150, a Greek monk from Calabria established a community of about ten members among the ruins of the ancient Byzantine monastery which he rebuilt and renamed Saint Elijah.

=== Foundation of the Order on Mount Carmel ===
Tradition indicates that the order was founded in 1185, but that is based on the story of a pilgrim in the Holy Land, the interpretation of which remains questionable. The oldest (and most reliable) written accounts of the presence of Latin hermits on Mount Carmel date back to 1220 and another text from 1263 (See ). During the Third Crusade, a group of hermits led by Berthold of Calabria began to inhabit the caves of Mount Carmel following the prophet Elijah. This first monastery was located in the east–west facing valley located south of the current monastery, and east of the &quot;Haifa Sde Yehoshua Cemetery&quot;.

At the beginning of the 13th century, their leader was supposed to be Brocard, although written evidence is lacking. In the Carmelite rule, reference is made only to &quot;Brother B.&quot; (in the introductory sentence of the rule) who asked the patriarch for a rule of life for hermits. Tradition has established that it was Brocard, second prior general of the order, who asked the Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem, Albert of Vercelli, to provide the group of hermits with a written rule of life. This rule, dated 1209, is centered on prayer and defined the way of life of hermits.

The first act of the Order of Brothers of The Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel was to dedicate a chapel to the Virgin Mary under the title of Mary, Star of the Sea (in Latin: &quot;Stella Maris&quot;). Elisabeth Steinmann considers it probable that the hermits of Mount Carmel also settled in some cities of Palestine (Acre, Israel, Tyre, Tripoli, Beaulieu in Lebanon), but after a few decades, these hermits began to leave the Holy Land as a result of the insecurity linked to the Muslim reconquests which marked the end of the Crusades. They then returned to Europe where they spread this new monastic order.

The rule of St. Albert was not approved by a pope until 30 January 1226 in the bull &quot;Ut vivendi normam&quot; of Honorius III. In 1229 Pope Gregory IX confirmed this rule again and gave it the status of &quot;Regula bullata&quot;.
At the end of the first crusade led by Louis IX of France in the Holy Land in 1254 (the Seventh Crusade), Louis brought six Carmelites back to France who joined with those who since 1238 had started to seek and found houses all over Europe. The fall of Saint-Jean-d&#x27;Acre in 1291, and the fall of the Latin state of Outremer led to the destruction of the last Carmelite convents in the Holy Land. The Carmelites who had chosen to remain there were massacred by the Mamelukes.

Jerg Ratgeb painted a fresco retracing the life of the Carmelites at the beginning of the 16th century, on the walls of the refectory of the Carmelite monastery in Frankfurt.

=== From hermits to friars ===

Back in Europe, the hermits of Carmel encountered many difficulties. Their eremitic life did not adapt well to their new settlements, they were scattered in different nations, and they found themselves in &quot;competition&quot; with other mendicant orders. Pope Innocent III wished to bring the mendicant orders all together under the direction of the Order of Friars Minor and the Order of Preachers. In 1215, the Fourth Lateran Council decided to group the existing Mendicant orders under the two primary ones. In 1274 the Second Council of Lyon disestablished all mendicant orders that were founded after 1215; only four remained: the Franciscans, the Order of Preachers, the Carmelites, and the Augustinians. The Carmelites, barely spared, had to change their way of life from eremitic to mendicant.

Gradually, during the 13th century, Carmelite hermits returning from Mount Carmel resettled throughout Europe, e.g. in Cyprus, Sicily, Italy, England, and southern France. Some dates and locations are known:
* in 1235, Pierre de Corbie and his companion settled in the Duchy of Hainaut (Valenciennes)
* in 1242, Carmelites settled in Aylesford, Kent, England
* in 1244, Carmelites disembarked in Marseille, France, and settled in caves in Aygalades
* in 1259, Carmelites settled in Paris, France 
* in 1279, Carmelites settled in Dublin, Ireland

However, the new settlements of the Carmelites in the European cities were very different from their eremitical life on Mount Carmel. In addition, they faced hostility from the secular clergy and even from other mendicant orders, who saw them as competitors.

According to tradition, the prior general of the Carmelites, Simon Stock, worried about the very difficult situation of the order, which was still threatened with dissolution by the Catholic Church, intensely prayed to the Blessed Virgin Mary to aid the order. In 1251, Our Lady of Mount Carmel appeared to him accompanied by a multitude of angels and holding in her hand the Scapular of the Order. In his vision, Mary said 

Following this vision, and the spread of the Scapular, the Order of Carmel endured and spread rapidly. The historicity of these events is disputed because of the lack of contemporary written records for the period in question; the earliest extant written records are from approximately 150 years later), and some documents contradict this narrative.

In the bull &quot;Paganorum incursus&quot; of 27 July 1247, Pope Innocent IV officially denominated the order the &quot;Brothers of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel&quot; and asked bishops to kindly accept them in their dioceses. However, the hostility of the secular clergy to the Carmelites was such that it prompted repetition of this recommendation on 4 October later that year.

In 1247, the Carmelites asked Pope Innocent IV to modify the &quot;Rule of Saint Albert&quot; of 1209 to adapt it to their new way of life in cities. In this modification, the communal dimension of their life was clearly emphasized. Pope Innocent IV clarified and corrected some ambiguities and mitigated some severities of the original Rule, and on 1 October 1247 he established the text in the bull &quot;Quae honorem conditoris omnium&quot;. Thereafter, e.g., the Carmelites no longer ate meals in their cells separately and instead ate in common in a refectory. Thereafter Carmelites also preached and heard confessions in secular (ordinary) churches.

The last great uncertainty for the survival of the order occurred in 1274. During the &quot;sanota vacillationis&quot; session of 17 July 1274, the Second Council of Lyon, presided by Pope Gregory X, suppressed all the mendicant orders that lacked regular legal status (&quot;incert mendicita&quot;). The Carmelites defended the anteriority of their foundation, i.e. their institution before 1215, and the pertinent decisions of the Fourth Lateran Council, and emphasized their pontifical approvals. After many Carmelite interventions during this session, the Pope confirmed their anteriority.

After the General Chapter of the Order of 1287 in Montpellier, France, the Carmelites replaced the white and brown striped, or barred, coat of their habit with a white cloak, because of which cloak they therefore colloquially were denominated &quot;White Friars&quot;.

The assimilation of the Carmelites as a mendicant order in 1326 by Pope John XXII ended the final hindrances, and the Carmelites could then rightly perform their apostolic mission. Nonetheless, a conflict ensued between the Carmelites who desired an eremitic life and those who desired an apostolic life in cities, including preaching. Consequently, two kinds of Carmelite monastery developed, one in the heart of cities and another outside them. Carmelites began to study theology at universities.

=== Mitigation of the rule ===

The mitigation of the Rule came after the great epidemic of the Black Death in the middle of the 14th century, which brought about a collapse of the European population accompanied by a decrease of members of monastic orders.

During the chapter of Nantes, a majority of Carmelites asked to appeal to Pope Eugene IV for a second mitigation of the Rule of 1209 of Saint Albert; the reform of 1247 was considered the first mitigation.

The letter, dated 15 February 1432, indicated that 

Two Carmelites were sent to convey this request to the Pope. The Pope responded in 1435 with the bull &quot;Romani Pontificis&quot;, dated 15 February 1432, the date of the petition. Addressed to the Prior General, Jean Faci, the bull granted the Carmelites permission to freely and lawfully stay and walk &quot;in their churches, and in the cloisters of these and in the places adjoining them at the appropriate times&quot;, moreover, it granted the faculty to eat meat three days a week, except during Advent and Lent and on other days when this was prohibited by general law.

Pope Pius II completed this permission on 5 December 1469 by granting the Prior General the faculty of dispensing from fasting on days when abstinence was lifted.

Pope Sixtus IV granted greater freedom, commonly known as &quot;Mare magnum&quot;, in the bull &quot;Dum attendant meditatatione&quot; of 28 November 1476, which conceded many advantages to the mendicant orders. However, this mitigation of the Rule was somewhat resisted. Even before its promulgation, there was some protest against &quot;a general relaxation&quot; of the Rule.

=== Attempts of reforms ===

The advantages of the new rule were sometimes frowned upon in certain monasteries which wished to return to the old rule of 1247. The convents of La Selve (near Florence), Mantua and Géronde (Switzerland) thrived because of their tendency to observe the ancient observant rule. The Carmelites of Mantua obtained from Pope Eugene IV the bull &quot;Fama laudabilis&quot;, in 1442, which allowed them to be a separate congregation, governed by a vicar general and only distantly subject to the prior general. While influential during the 15th century, the &quot;Reform of Mantua&quot; subsequently became of marginal influence. Finally, this mitigation introduced around 1465 was definitively incorporated into the regulation of the Order of the Great Carmelites in 1783 by Pope Pius VI.

John Soreth, a friar from the Carmelite Convent of Caen, who served as Prior General in the years 1451–1471, tried to convince his subjects to lead a more rigorous religious life by developing seeds already sown and promoting movements that already existed. His motto was &quot;Return to the Rule of Saint Albert&quot;. In his early decrees he protested against privileges and exemptions, seen as a major cause of the decline of the order.
The constitutions of the order dating from 1362 were revised and the text approved by the general chapter of Brussels in 1462. They insisted on The reform took hold in some of the convents, the &quot;observant convents&quot;, and the &quot;mixed convents&quot;. John Soreth hoped that his reform would gradually be imposed in all the houses of the order, but this attempt at reform remained largely unfulfilled since the prior general who followed him favored a return to a mitigation of the rule, and met with the approval of Popes Pius II and Sixtus IV.

In 1523 Pope Hadrian VI appointed Nicolas Audet as vicar general. The latter organized a centralization of the government of the different provinces while ensuring the training of the religious.

In 1499, the Reform of Albi aimed at a return to a more strict observance and in 1513 was approved as a &quot;Congregation of Observance&quot;. However, this reform was suppressed in 1584 by Pope Gregory XIII

In 1603, Henri Sylvius, Prior General of the Order, went to France at the request of the king Henri IV of France, to undertake with Philippe Thibault the reform of the province of Touraine. Pierre Behourt, Louis Charpentier, Philippe Thibault and Jean de Saint-Samson were to be the initiators and architects of this reform of the Carmelites of the Old observance. Figures of note in the Catholic Reformation, they were supported by Charles Borromeo, cardinal and archbishop of Milan. On 20 June 1604, at the provincial chapter of Nantes, Henri Sylvius published the statutes of the reform, which intended to promote the interior life and return to the ancient tradition of the order, under the patronage of the Virgin Mary and Saint Joseph.

By the middle of the 17th century, most of the French provinces had adopted the reform, which had already won over the convents of Belgium (1624) and Germany. Its constitutions were definitively affirmed in 1635.

In 1645, during the general chapter held in Rome, the provincial of Touraine, Léon de Saint-Jean, was appointed a member of a committee to further revise these constitutions with a view to having them adopted by all the reformed convents of the order.

=== Foundation of Carmelite Nuns ===
From the Middle Ages, women close to the communities of Carmelite friars were drawn to their life of prayer. Thus, in the Low Countries some beguinages adopted the Carmelite rule and thus formed communities in the second half of the 15th century. Prior General John Soreth worked to transform these beguinages into Carmelite women&#x27;s convents.

On 7 October 1452, Pope Nicholas V promulgated the bull &quot;Cum Nulla&quot; introducing the Carmelites in France. Under his protection, Françoise d&#x27;Amboise (†1485), Duchess of Brittany, erected the first convent for Carmelite nuns in France. In 1463, a house was built in Vannes to accommodate a first community and on 2 November 1463 nine nuns arrived there from Liège and settled permanently. While the Vannes convent, such as &quot;Les Trois Maries&quot;, was to suffer suppression in 1792, during the French Revolution, in the meantime convents of Carmelite nuns had spread rapidly, including many in Spain and Italy.

=== Foundation of the Third Order ===
John Soreth played an extremely important role in the founding of the Third Order of the Carmelites. Pope Nicholas V supported this action in his bull &quot;Cum Nulla&quot;, too.

In France, there were many Carmelite fraternities of the Third Order before the Revolution. Many died during the French Revolution, but a few evolved and organized themselves into a religious congregation of apostolic life.

Currently the Third Order of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel has a large number of fraternities in many countries. Following the return of the Carmelites of the Old observance to France in 1989, at the request of the laity, fraternities began to be formed. The first fraternity was established in the diocese of Toulon in 1992. A second was in Nantes in 2001.

===Teresian reform===

Reform in Spain began in earnest in the 1560s, with the work of Teresa of Ávila, who, together with John of the Cross, established the Discalced Carmelites. Teresa&#x27;s foundations were welcomed by King Philip II of Spain, who was most anxious for all Orders to be reformed according to the principles of the Council of Trent (1545–1563). But she created practical problems at the grassroots level. The proliferation of new religious houses in towns that were already struggling to cope economically was an unwelcome prospect. Local townspeople resisted direction by the nobility and diocesan clergy. Teresa tried to make her monasteries as self-sufficient as was practicable, and accordingly restricted the number of nuns in each community.
The Discalced Carmelites also faced much opposition from unreformed Carmelite houses, as when Carmelites from Toledo arrested and imprisoned John of the Cross in their monastery. Only in the 1580s did the Discalced Carmelites gain official approval of their status. In 1593, the Discalced Carmelites had their own superior general styled praepositus general, the first such being Nicholas Doria. Due to the politics of foundation, the Discalced friars in Italy were canonically erected as a separate juridical entity.
After the rise of Protestantism and the devastation of the French Wars of Religion, a spirit of reform renewed 16th–17th century France, as well as the Carmelite Order in France. In the late 16th century, Pierre Behourt began an effort to restore the state of the Province of Touraine, which was continued by the practical reforms of Philip Thibault. The Provincial Chapter of 1604 appointed Thibault the prior of the Convent in Rennes, and moved the Novitiate to Rennes, thereby ensuring that new members of the Province would be formed by the reform-minded friars. The Observance of Rennes advocated poverty, the interior life and regular observance as the antidote to the laxity and decadence into which religious life had fallen, in addition, incorporating currents of renewal from the Discalced Reform, the French School, and the Society of Jesus. Thibault is said to have wished to marry the spirit of the society with the Order of Carmelites as far as possible. One of the most renowned figures of the Reform was John of St. Samson, a blind lay brother, highly regarded for his humility and exalted spiritual life. In 1612, Br. John was moved to the Convent at Rennes and, in addition to playing the organ, served as the instructor and spiritual director of the novices. Thus John of St. Samson became known as the &quot;Soul of the Reform.&quot; Eventually, the Observance of Rennes spread to priories throughout France, Belgium, and Germany, and became known as the Touraine Reform, after the Province from which the movement originated.

Carmelite nunneries were established in New Spain (Mexico), the first founded in 1604 in Puebla de los Angeles, New Spain&#x27;s second largest city, followed by one in the capital Mexico City 1616. In all, before Mexican independence in 1821, there were five Carmelite convents among 56 nunneries.

===Papebroch controversy===
Daniel Papebroch was a member of the Bollandists, a group of Jesuit hagiographers who produced the &quot;Acta Sanctorum&quot;, which took an analytical approach to the &quot;Lives of the Saints&quot;. In his preliminary commentary on Albert of Vercelli, who is credited with the Carmelite Rule, Papebroch said that the tradition universally received by the Carmelites, that the origin of the order dated back to the prophet Elias, as its founder, was insufficiently grounded. The Carmelites took exception to this.

From 1681 to 1693 there appeared between twenty or thirty pamphlets castigating Papebroch and his work. The series culminated in the large quarto volume signed by Sebastian of St. Paul, provincial of the Flemish-Belgian province of the Carmelite Order, which made serious charges against Papebroch&#x27;s orthodoxy. Learning that steps were being taken to obtain a condemnation from Rome of the &quot;Acta Sanctorum&quot;, the Bollandists responded. Conrad Janninck replied first with open letters to Sebastian of St. Paul. The two letters were printed in 1693, followed by a more extended defense of the &quot;Acta&quot;, published by Janninck in 1695. Papebroch published his rebuttal in 1696, 1697, and 1698 in the three volumes of the &quot;Responsio Danielis Papebrochii ad Exhibitionem Errorum&quot;.

When Rome did not issue a condemnation the adversaries of Papebroch had recourse to the tribunal of the Spanish Inquisition, which in November, 1695, issued a decree condemning the fourteen volumes of the &quot;Acta Sanctorum&quot; published up to that time and branding it heretical. Janninck was sent to Rome not only to prevent the confirmation by Rome of the decree of the Spanish Inquisition, but also to secure the retraction of the decree. In December, 1697, he received the assurance that no censure would be passed against the volumes condemned in Spain. On 20 November 1698, Pope Innocent XII issued a brief that ended the controversy by imposing silence on both parties. Whether it was judged prudent in Rome not to enter into conflict with the Spanish tribunal, or whether the latter prolonged the affair by passive resistance, the decree of condemnation made in 1695 was not revoked until 1715, the year following the death of Papebroch.

=== Modern history ===
Leaders of the Carmelite Order meet from time to time in General Congregation. The most recent General Congregation took place in Fátima, Portugal in September 2016.
Since the 1430s, the Congregation of Mantua had continued to function in its little corner of Italy. It was only at the end of the 19th century that those following the reform of Tourraine (by this time known as the &quot;strict observance&quot;) and the Mantuan Congregation were formally merged under one set of constitutions. The friars following Mantua conceded to Tourraine&#x27;s Constitutions but insisted that the older form of the habit – namely their own – should be adopted. In a photograph of the period Titus Brandsma is shown in the habit of Tourraine as a novice; in all subsequent images he wears that of the newly styled ancient observance.

The French Revolution led to the suppression of the order, with the nuns dispersed into small groups who lived out of view in private houses. At the peak of the persecution, a Carmelite convent, now known as the Martyrs of Compiègne, were executed by guillotine.
After the end of the disturbances, the wealthy heiress Camille de Soyécourt who became later the Carmelite Thérèse-Camille de l&#x27;Enfant-Jésus did much to restore the Carmelite life in France.

The Napoleonic secularisation at the beginning of the 19th century in Germany was a strong blow to the Carmelites. After Napoleon had occupied large parts of the Rhineland, almost all monasteries were dissolved after 1806; the 16 houses of the Lower German Province disappeared.
By the last decades of the 19th century, there were approximately 200 Carmelite men throughout the world. At the beginning of the 20th century, however, new leadership and less political interference allowed a rebirth of the order. Existing provinces began re-founding provinces that had become defunct. The theological preparation of the Carmelites was strengthened, particularly with the foundation of St. Albert&#x27;s College in Rome.

By 2001, the membership had increased to approximately 2,100 men in 25 provinces, 700 enclosed nuns in 70 monasteries, and 13 affiliated Congregations and Institutes. In addition, the Third Order of lay Carmelites count 25,000–30,000 members throughout the world. Provinces exist in Australia, Brazil, Britain, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Hungary, Germany, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Singapore, Spain, Portugal and the United States. Delegations directly under the Prior General exist in Argentina, France, the Czech Republic, the Dominican Republic, Lebanon, the Philippines and Portugal.

Carmelite Missions exist in Bolivia, Burkino Faso, Cameroon, Colombia, India, Kenya, Lithuania, Mexico, Mozambique, Peru, Romania, Tanzania, Trinidad, Venezuela and Zimbabwe.

Monasteries of enclosed Carmelite nuns exist in Brazil, Croatia, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Indonesia, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kenya, the Netherlands, Australia, New Zealand (in Christchurch since 1933), Nicaragua, Norway, Peru, the Philippines, Spain, Sweden, Portugal, the United Kingdom and the United States. Hermit communities of either men or women exist in Brazil, France, Indonesia, Lebanon, Italy and the United States.
The Discalced Carmelite Order built the priory of Elijah (1911) at the site of Elijah&#x27;s epic contest with the prophets of Ba&#x27;al (1 Kings 18:20–40). The monastery is situated about 25 kilometers south of Haifa on the eastern side of the Carmel, and stands on the foundations of a series of earlier monasteries. The site is held sacred by Christians, Druze, Jews and Muslims; the name of the area is &quot;el-Muhraqa,&quot; an Arabic construction meaning &quot;place of burning&quot;, and is a direct reference to the biblical account.

Several Carmelite saints have received significant attention in the 20th and 21st centuries. In 1970, Teresa of Avila became the first woman to be named a Doctor of the Church. In 1997, Thérèse of Lisieux became one of only four female Doctors of the Church, so named because of her famous teaching on the &quot;way of confidence and love&quot; set forth in her best-selling memoir, &quot;Story of a Soul&quot;. The Martyrs of Compiègne, murdered during the French Revolution, inspired a 1931 novella followed by a play, an opera, and a film. Notable 20th century Carmelites include Titus Brandsma, a Dutch scholar and writer who was killed in Dachau concentration camp because of his stance against Nazism; Teresa Benedicta of the Cross (née Edith Stein), a Jewish convert to Catholicism who was imprisoned and murdered at Auschwitz; and three nuns of Guadalajara who were martyred on 24 July 1936 by Spanish Republicans.

Raphael Kalinowski (1835–1907) was the first friar to be canonized in the order since co-founder John of the Cross. The writings and teachings of Brother Lawrence of the Resurrection, a Carmelite friar of the 17th century, continue as a spiritual classic under the title &quot;The Practice of the Presence of God&quot;. Other non-religious (&quot;i.e.,&quot; non-vowed monastic) great figures include George Preca, a Maltese priest and Carmelite Tertiary. The Feast of All Carmelite Saints and Blesseds is celebrated on 14 November.

==Carmelite spirituality==

===Habit and scapular===


In 1287, the original way of life of the order was changed to conform to that of the mendicant orders on the initiative of Simon Stock and at the command of Pope Innocent IV. Their former habit of a mantle with black and white or brown and white stripesthe black or brown stripes representing the scorches the mantle of Elijah received from the fiery chariot as it fell from his shoulderswas discarded. They wore the same habit as the Dominicans, except that the cloak was white. They also borrowed much from the Dominican and Franciscan constitutions. Their distinctive garment was a scapular of two strips of dark cloth, worn on the breast and back, and fastened at the shoulders. Tradition holds that this was given to Simon Stock by the Blessed Virgin Mary, who appeared to him and promised that all who wore it with faith and piety and who died clothed in it would be saved. There arose a sodality of the scapular, which affiliated a large number of laymen with the Carmelites.
A miniature version of the Carmelite scapular is popular among Catholics and is one of the most popular devotions in the church. Wearers usually believe that if they faithfully wear the Carmelite scapular (also called &quot;the brown scapular&quot; or simply &quot;the scapular&quot;) and die in a state of grace, they will be saved from eternal torment. Catholics who decide to wear the scapular are usually enrolled by a priest, and some choose to enter the Scapular Confraternity. The Lay Carmelites of the Third Order of Our Lady of Mount Carmel wear a scapular which is smaller than the shortened scapular worn by some Carmelite religious for sleeping, but still larger than the devotional scapulars.

=== Visions and devotions ===
Among the various Catholic orders, Carmelite nuns have had a proportionally high ratio of visions of Jesus and Mary and have been responsible for key Catholic devotions.

From the time of her clothing in the Carmelite religious habit (1583) until her death (1607), Mary Magdalene de&#x27; Pazzi is said to have had a series of raptures and ecstasies.
*First, these raptures sometimes seized upon her whole being with such force as to compel her to rapid motion (e.g. towards some sacred object).
*Secondly, she was frequently able, whilst in ecstasy, to carry on working e.g., embroidery, painting, with perfect composure and efficiency.
*Thirdly, during these raptures Mary Magdalene de&#x27; Pazzi gave utterance to maxims of Divine Love, and to counsels of perfection for souls. These were preserved by her companions, who (unknown to her) wrote them down.
In the Carmelite convent of Beja, in Portugal, two Carmelite nuns of the Ancient Observance reported several apparitions and mystical revelations throughout their life: Mariana of the Purification received numerous apparitions of the Child Jesus and her body was found incorrupt after her death; Maria Perpétua da Luz wrote 60 books with messages from heaven; both religious died with the odor of sanctity.

In the 19th century, another Carmelite nun, Thérèse of Lisieux, was instrumental in spreading devotion to the Holy Face throughout France in the 1890s with her many poems and prayers. Eventually Pope Pius XII approved the devotion in 1958 and declared the Feast of the Holy Face of Jesus as Shrove Tuesday (the day before Ash Wednesday) for all Catholics. Therese of Lisieux emerged as one of the most popular saints for Catholics in the 20th century, and a statue of her can be found in many European and North American Catholic churches built prior to the Second Vatican Council (after which the number of statues tended to be reduced when churches were built).

In the 20th century, in the last apparition of the Blessed Virgin Mary in Fátima, Portugal, Sister Lúcia, one of the most famous visionaries of Our Lady, said that the Virgin appeared to her as Our Lady of Mount Carmel (holding the Brown Scapular). Many years after, Lúcia became a Carmelite nun. When Lúcia was asked in an interview why the Blessed Virgin appeared as Our Lady of Mount Carmel in her last apparition, she replied: &quot;Because Our Lady wants all to wear the Scapular... The reason for this&quot;, she explained, &quot;is that the Scapular is our sign of consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary&quot;. When asked if the Brown Scapular is as necessary to the fulfillment of Our Lady&#x27;s requests as the rosary, Lúcia answered: &quot;The Scapular and the Rosary are inseparable&quot;.

Many Carmelites have been canonized by the Catholic Church as saints. The Feast of All Carmelite Saints is celebrated on 14 November. The Commemoration of All the Departed of the Carmelite Order occurs on 15 November.

== See also ==

* Enclosed religious orders
* &quot;Dialogues of the Carmelites&quot; (an opera by Francis Poulenc)
* Ipswich Whitefriars
* List of Carmelite saints
* List of Carmelite saints and beatified people
* Former Carmelite Convent at Nantes

==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religion&quot;
* Copsey, Richard and Fitzgerald-Lombard, Patrick (eds.), &quot;Carmel in Britain: studies on the early history of the Carmelite Order&quot; (1992–2004).
* &quot;The Carmelite Order&quot; by Benedict Zimmerman. &quot;The Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;, 1908.
* T. Brandsma, &quot;Carmelite Mysticism, Historical Sketches: 50th Anniversary Edition&quot;, (Darien, IL, 1986), 
* J. Boyce, &quot;Carmelite Liturgy and Spiritual Identity. The Choir Books of Kraków&quot;, Turnhout, 2009, Brepols Publishers, 
* W. McGreal, &quot;At the Fountain of Elijah: The Carmelite Tradition&quot;, (Maryknoll, NY, 1999), 
* J. Smet, &quot;The Carmelites: A History of the Brothers of Our Lady of Mt. Carmel&quot;, 4. vol. (Darien IL, 1975)
* J. Welch, &quot;The Carmelite Way: An Ancient Path for Today&#x27;s Pilgrim&quot;, (New York: 1996), 

==External links==

* Order of the Brothers of Our Lady of Mount Carmel
* Order of the Discalced Carmelites
* Index of Carmelite Websites
* Carmelite Hermitage
* &quot;Sayings of Light and Love&quot; – Spiritual Maxims of John of the Cross
* The Carmelite history and vocation
* &quot;Mystical Brain&quot; by Isabelle Raynauld (2006) – a documentary film about five Carmelite Nuns who volunteered to have their brains scanned while they meditated by recalling mystical experiences

===Provinces of the Carmelite Order===
* Carmelites of the Province of the Assumption, British Province (founded c. 1241; refounded 1969)
* Carmelites of the Most Pure Heart of Mary Province, USA/Canada/Peru/Mexico/El Salvador (founded 1890)
* Carmelites of the North American Province of St. Elias (founded 1931)
* Carmelite Province of Blessed Titus Brandsma of the Philippines (founded 1968)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186277" start="4" end="68" title="Carmelites" label="Order of the Brothers of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q186277" start="84" end="89" title="Carmelites" label="OCarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q186277" start="105" end="115" title="Carmelites" label="Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q190068" start="132" end="142" title="synecdoche" label="synecdoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q186277" start="159" end="165" title="Carmelites" label="Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28653" start="172" end="187" title="Mendicant orders" label="mendicant order"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="195" end="210" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="336" end="348" title="Mount Carmel" label="Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="364" end="370" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135659" start="553" end="573" title="Discalced Carmelites" label="Discalced Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q746833" start="781" end="790" title="discalced" label="discalced"/>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="1012" end="1024" title="Mount Carmel" label="Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="1032" end="1047" title="Crusader States" label="Crusader States"/>
<link wikidata="Q828129" start="1049" end="1069" title="Berthold of Calabria" label="Berthold of Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q714267" start="1082" end="1100" title="Albert of Vercelli" label="Albert of Vercelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="1450" end="1463" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q133507" start="1465" end="1471" title="Elijah" label="Elijah"/>
<link wikidata="Q206238" start="1489" end="1495" title="Elisha" label="Elisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="1604" end="1616" title="Mount Carmel" label="Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1632" end="1638" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="1648" end="1657" title="Christian" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="1975" end="1986" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2201" end="2210" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q212732" start="2367" end="2377" title="Khosrow II" label="Khosrow II"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="2936" end="2949" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q828129" start="2977" end="2997" title="Berthold of Calabria" label="Berthold of Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="3028" end="3040" title="Mount Carmel" label="Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q133507" start="3063" end="3069" title="Elijah" label="Elijah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463699" start="3303" end="3310" title="Saint Brocard" label="Brocard"/>
<link wikidata="Q530906" start="3617" end="3645" title="Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem" label="Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q714267" start="3647" end="3665" title="Albert of Vercelli" label="Albert of Vercelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="4136" end="4148" title="Acre, Israel" label="Acre, Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="4150" end="4154" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q168954" start="4156" end="4163" title="Tripoli (Lebanon)" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="4245" end="4254" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="4346" end="4354" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q160182" start="4546" end="4558" title="Honorius III" label="Honorius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q124831" start="4573" end="4583" title="Gregory IX" label="Gregory IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="4703" end="4721" title="Louis IX of France" label="Louis IX of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q51661" start="4752" end="4767" title="Seventh Crusade" label="Seventh Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="4917" end="4939" title="Saint-Jean-d&amp;#x27;Acre" label="Saint-Jean-d&amp;#x27;Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="5133" end="5141" title="Mameluke" label="Mameluke"/>
<link wikidata="Q567523" start="5145" end="5156" title="Jerg Ratgeb" label="Jerg Ratgeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="5428" end="5436" title="eremitic" label="eremitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28653" start="5593" end="5609" title="mendicant orders" label="mendicant orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q128076" start="5611" end="5628" title="Pope Innocent III" label="Pope Innocent III"/>
<link wikidata="Q913972" start="5706" end="5727" title="Order of Friars Minor" label="Order of Friars Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="5736" end="5754" title="Order of Preachers" label="Order of Preachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q719992" start="5769" end="5791" title="Fourth Lateran Council" label="Fourth Lateran Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q10951" start="5879" end="5901" title="Second Council of Lyon" label="Second Council of Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="5992" end="6003" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="6009" end="6027" title="Order of Preachers" label="Order of Preachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q214528" start="6053" end="6065" title="Augustinians" label="Augustinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="6228" end="6240" title="Mount Carmel" label="Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="6278" end="6284" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="6286" end="6292" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="6294" end="6299" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="6301" end="6308" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="6323" end="6329" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q793057" start="6493" end="6502" title="Aylesford" label="Aylesford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="6504" end="6508" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="6510" end="6517" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="6555" end="6564" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="6566" end="6572" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="6641" end="6646" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="6648" end="6654" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="6689" end="6695" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="6697" end="6704" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="6826" end="6838" title="Mount Carmel" label="Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q721003" start="7027" end="7038" title="Simon Stock" label="Simon Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065053" start="7236" end="7260" title="Our Lady of Mount Carmel" label="Our Lady of Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q568699" start="7342" end="7363" title="Scapular of Our Lady of Mount Carmel" label="Scapular of the Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q160609" start="7808" end="7819" title="Innocent IV" label="Innocent IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q160609" start="8169" end="8180" title="Innocent IV" label="Innocent IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454225" start="8201" end="8221" title="Rule of Saint Albert" label="Rule of Saint Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q568225" start="8689" end="8698" title="refectory" label="refectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q10951" start="8939" end="8961" title="Second Council of Lyon" label="Second Council of Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q161740" start="8980" end="8989" title="Gregory X" label="Gregory X"/>
<link wikidata="Q719992" start="9224" end="9246" title="Fourth Lateran Council" label="Fourth Lateran Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="9436" end="9447" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="9449" end="9455" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="9728" end="9737" title="John XXII" label="John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="10252" end="10263" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q167561" start="10494" end="10503" title="Eugene IV" label="Eugene IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q101437" start="11260" end="11267" title="Pius II" label="Pius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q163514" start="11424" end="11433" title="Sixtus IV" label="Sixtus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247" start="12000" end="12006" title="Mantua" label="Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698425" start="12614" end="12625" title="John Soreth" label="John Soreth"/>
<link wikidata="Q57087" start="13624" end="13634" title="Hadrian VI" label="Hadrian VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q83029" start="14003" end="14015" title="Gregory XIII" label="Gregory XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="14111" end="14129" title="Henri IV of France" label="Henri IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="14405" end="14425" title="Catholic Reformation" label="Catholic Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q216946" start="14450" end="14466" title="Charles Borromeo" label="Charles Borromeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="14495" end="14500" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12191" start="14548" end="14554" title="Nantes" label="Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q128267" start="14745" end="14757" title="Saint Joseph" label="Saint Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q12816129" start="15405" end="15415" title="beguinages" label="beguinages"/>
<link wikidata="Q134588" start="15637" end="15647" title="Nicholas V" label="Nicholas V"/>
<link wikidata="Q271833" start="15751" end="15775" title="Françoise d&amp;#x27;Amboise" label="Françoise d&amp;#x27;Amboise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593" start="15892" end="15898" title="Vannes" label="Vannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="15984" end="15989" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="16574" end="16591" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291599" start="16700" end="16754" title="Lay Carmelites" label="Third Order of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q174880" start="17142" end="17157" title="Teresa of Ávila" label="Teresa of Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q190388" start="17178" end="17195" title="John of the Cross" label="John of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135659" start="17213" end="17233" title="Discalced Carmelites" label="Discalced Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="17278" end="17301" title="Philip II of Spain" label="King Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="17389" end="17405" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="18358" end="18371" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="18399" end="18422" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q605051" start="18616" end="18624" title="Touraine" label="Touraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q273545" start="19148" end="19165" title="French school of spirituality" label="the French School"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="19175" end="19191" title="Society of Jesus" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175682" start="19360" end="19378" title="John of St. Samson" label="John of St. Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="19928" end="19937" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q125293" start="19977" end="19998" title="Puebla de los Angeles" label="Puebla de los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="20069" end="20080" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q539175" start="20216" end="20232" title="Daniel Papebroch" label="Daniel Papebroch"/>
<link wikidata="Q670974" start="20253" end="20263" title="Bollandist" label="Bollandist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="20277" end="20283" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q343190" start="20321" end="20335" title="Acta Sanctorum" label="Acta Sanctorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q714267" start="20450" end="20468" title="Albert of Vercelli" label="Albert of Vercelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892831" start="21182" end="21197" title="Conrad Janninck" label="Conrad Janninck"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="21644" end="21663" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Spanish Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q132708" start="22125" end="22142" title="Pope Innocent XII" label="Pope Innocent XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q191133" start="22645" end="22661" title="Fátima, Portugal" label="Fátima, Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q454645" start="23197" end="23211" title="Titus Brandsma" label="Titus Brandsma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183487" start="23252" end="23258" title="novice" label="novice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="23344" end="23361" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q303617" start="23552" end="23572" title="Martyrs of Compiègne" label="Martyrs of Compiègne"/>
<link wikidata="Q128015" start="23591" end="23601" title="guillotine" label="guillotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18413900" start="23658" end="23678" title="Camille de Soyécourt" label="Camille de Soyécourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="24512" end="24516" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="24854" end="24861" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="24879" end="24888" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="24906" end="24911" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="24930" end="24936" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="24956" end="24964" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="25042" end="25051" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="25065" end="25079" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="25085" end="25103" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="25105" end="25112" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="25118" end="25129" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="25173" end="25180" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="25182" end="25194" title="Burkino Faso" label="Burkino Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="25196" end="25204" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="25206" end="25214" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="25223" end="25228" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="25230" end="25239" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="25249" end="25259" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="25261" end="25265" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="25267" end="25274" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="25276" end="25284" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q128323" start="25286" end="25294" title="Trinidad" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="25296" end="25305" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="25310" end="25318" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746003" start="25336" end="25344" title="Enclosed religious orders" label="enclosed"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="25386" end="25393" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="25419" end="25426" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="25457" end="25464" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606585" start="25475" end="25481" title="Stella Maris Monastery" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="25541" end="25553" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="25567" end="25576" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="25578" end="25584" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="25586" end="25590" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135659" start="25796" end="25815" title="Discalced Carmelite" label="Discalced Carmelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4224666" start="25931" end="25938" title="1 Kings" label="1 Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="26005" end="26010" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="26151" end="26156" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="26227" end="26233" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192499" start="26492" end="26512" title="Doctor of the Church" label="Doctor of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q181715" start="26523" end="26541" title="Thérèse of Lisieux" label="Thérèse of Lisieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q303617" start="26753" end="26773" title="Martyrs of Compiègne" label="Martyrs of Compiègne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208527" start="26861" end="26866" title="Dialogues of the Carmelites" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222297" start="26874" end="26878" title="Dialogue of the Carmelites" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q454645" start="26920" end="26934" title="Titus Brandsma" label="Titus Brandsma"/>
<link wikidata="Q151198" start="26981" end="27006" title="Dachau concentration camp" label="Dachau concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="27037" end="27043" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76749" start="27080" end="27091" title="Edith Stein" label="Edith Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="27161" end="27170" title="Auschwitz" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939663" start="27176" end="27201" title="Carmelite Martyrs of Guadalajara" label="three nuns of Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q941608" start="27261" end="27279" title="Raphael Kalinowski" label="Raphael Kalinowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q190388" start="27358" end="27375" title="John of the Cross" label="John of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090506" start="27407" end="27423" title="Brother Lawrence" label="Brother Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757999" start="27538" end="27573" title="The Practice of the Presence of God" label="The Practice of the Presence of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q607845" start="27662" end="27674" title="George Preca" label="George Preca"/>
<link wikidata="Q28653" start="27935" end="27951" title="mendicant orders" label="mendicant orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q721003" start="27973" end="27984" title="Simon Stock" label="Simon Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q160609" start="28007" end="28023" title="Pope Innocent IV" label="Pope Innocent IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="28285" end="28295" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q516992" start="28313" end="28318" title="cloak" label="cloak"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="28377" end="28387" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q866214" start="28435" end="28443" title="scapular" label="scapular"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="28591" end="28610" title="Blessed Virgin Mary" label="Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q357849" start="28744" end="28752" title="Sodality (Catholic Church)" label="sodality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054723" start="28937" end="28946" title="Catholic devotions" label="devotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852175" start="29140" end="29145" title="divine grace" label="grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="29171" end="29186" title="hell" label="eternal torment"/>
<link wikidata="Q831474" start="29256" end="29262" title="Presbyter" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q992253" start="29302" end="29315" title="Confraternity" label="Confraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291599" start="29343" end="29382" title="Third Order of Our Lady of Mount Carmel" label="Third Order of Our Lady of Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154317" start="29660" end="29685" title="visions of Jesus and Mary" label="visions of Jesus and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054723" start="29720" end="29738" title="Catholic devotions" label="Catholic devotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q242040" start="29835" end="29864" title="Mary Magdalene de&amp;#x27; Pazzi" label="Mary Magdalene de&amp;#x27; Pazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q213251" start="30458" end="30462" title="Beja (Portugal)" label="Beja"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="30467" end="30475" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10322964" start="30599" end="30626" title="Mariana of the Purification" label="Mariana of the Purification"/>
<link wikidata="Q942467" start="30664" end="30675" title="Child Jesus" label="Child Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q752380" start="30699" end="30708" title="Incorruptibility" label="incorrupt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30726" end="30747" title="Maria Perpétua da Luz" label="Maria Perpétua da Luz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349221" start="30819" end="30835" title="odour of sanctity" label="odor of sanctity"/>
<link wikidata="Q181715" start="30882" end="30900" title="Thérèse of Lisieux" label="Thérèse of Lisieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="31033" end="31046" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q116926" start="31107" end="31125" title="Holy Face of Jesus" label="Holy Face of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845365" start="31129" end="31143" title="Shrove Tuesday" label="Shrove Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q123542" start="31160" end="31173" title="Ash Wednesday" label="Ash Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="31396" end="31418" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q719524" start="31554" end="31573" title="Our Lady of Fátima" label="Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q191133" start="31577" end="31593" title="Fátima, Portugal" label="Fátima, Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q231103" start="31595" end="31607" title="Sister Lúcia" label="Sister Lúcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065053" start="31697" end="31721" title="Our Lady of Mount Carmel" label="Our Lady of Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q568699" start="31735" end="31749" title="Brown Scapular" label="Brown Scapular"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367441" start="32264" end="32287" title="Rosary and scapular" label="Scapular and the Rosary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746003" start="32549" end="32574" title="Enclosed religious orders" label="Enclosed religious orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208527" start="32583" end="32610" title="Dialogues of the Carmelites" label="Dialogues of the Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q191408" start="32630" end="32645" title="Francis Poulenc" label="Francis Poulenc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6065650" start="32649" end="32668" title="Ipswich Whitefriars" label="Ipswich Whitefriars"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32671" end="32695" title=":Category:Carmelite saints" label="List of Carmelite saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q122212631" start="32698" end="32743" title="List of Carmelite saints and beatified people" label="List of Carmelite saints and beatified people"/>
<link wikidata="Q15149915" start="32746" end="32780" title="Former Carmelite Convent at Nantes" label="Former Carmelite Convent at Nantes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43581" wikidata="Q1054799" url="?curid=43581" title="President of Poland">
<text>The president of Poland ( ), officially the president of the Republic of Poland (), is the head of state of the Republic of Poland. Their rights and obligations are determined in the Constitution of Poland. The president jointly partakes in the executive branch with the parliamentary Polish government. In addition, the president has a limited right to dissolve parliament, can veto legislation, represents Poland in the international arena, and is ceremonially the commander-in-chief.

==History==
The first president of Poland, Gabriel Narutowicz, was sworn in as president of the Second Polish Republic on 11 December 1922. He was elected by the National Assembly (the Sejm and the Senate) under the terms of the 1921 March Constitution. Narutowicz was assassinated on 16 December 1922. Previously Józef Piłsudski had been &quot;Chief of State&quot; (&quot;Naczelnik Państwa&quot;) under the provisional Small Constitution of 1919. In 1926 Piłsudski staged the &quot;May Coup&quot;, overthrew President Stanisław Wojciechowski and had the National Assembly elect a new one, Ignacy Mościcki, thus establishing the &quot;Sanation regime&quot;. Before Piłsudski&#x27;s death, parliament passed a more authoritarian 1935 April Constitution of Poland (not in accord with the amendment procedures of the 1921 March Constitution). Mościcki continued as president until he resigned in 1939 in the aftermath of the German invasion of Poland. Mościcki and his government went into exile in Romania, where Mościcki was interned. In Angers, France, Władysław Raczkiewicz, at the time the speaker of the Senate, assumed the presidency after Mościcki&#x27;s resignation on 29 September 1939. Following the fall of France, the president and the Polish government-in-exile were evacuated to London, United Kingdom. The transfer from Mościcki to Raczkiewicz was in accordance with Article 24 of the 1935 April Constitution. Raczkiewicz was followed by a succession of presidents in exile, of whom the last one was Ryszard Kaczorowski.

In 1945–54, Poland became a part of Soviet-controlled central-eastern Europe. Bolesław Bierut assumed the reins of government and in July 1945 was internationally recognised as the head of state. The Senate was abolished in 1946 by the Polish people&#x27;s referendum. When the Sejm passed the Small Constitution of 1947, based in part on the 1921 March Constitution, Bierut was elected president by that body. He served until the Constitution of the Polish People&#x27;s Republic of 1952 eliminated the office of the president, replacing it with a collective leadership called the Council of State ().

Following the 1989 amendments to the constitution which restored the presidency, general Wojciech Jaruzelski, the existing head of state, took office. In Poland&#x27;s first direct presidential election, Lech Wałęsa won and was sworn in on 22 December 1990. The office of the president was preserved in the Constitution of Poland passed in 1997; the constitution now provides the requirements for, the duties of and the authority of the office.

The topic of creation the presidency role as a single-person position was meant to safeguard slow, gentle political change to keep the interests of the ruling party. By March 1989, a compromise regarding the creation of the institution of the presidency was reached between the government and the opposition. In return for a constitutionally defined presidency with various competences, the ruling party agreed to relinquish its position as managing organ within the state. The presidency would be created along with the restoration of a freely elected upper house, the Senate. The president would be elected by a joint session of the lower house (Sejm) and the Senate. By this way, representatives of the opposition, sitting in the Senate, would be involved in the political process of electing the president.

The Small constitution of October 17, 1992 created a parliamentarisation of the political system and while the presidency remained in the active model, it was deprived of far-reaching governing powers.

In recent years, newly elected presidents have renounced formal ties with their political party before taking office.

==Election==
The president of Poland is elected directly by the people to serve for five years and can be reelected only once. Pursuant to the provisions of the Constitution, the president is elected by an absolute majority. If no candidate succeeds in passing this threshold, a second round of voting is held with the participation of the two candidates with the largest and second largest number of votes respectively.

In order to be registered as a candidate in the presidential election, one must be a Polish citizen, be at least 35 years old on the day of the first round of the election, and collect at least 100,000 signatures of registered voters.

==Powers==

Article 126 paragraph 1 states that the president is the supreme representative of the state, rather than the people, a privilege reserved for the deputies of the Sejm and senators of the Senate. The constitution confirms for the president the role of securing the continuity of state authority. The position of the presidency has an arbiter function (while not directly mentioned, unlike France or Romania), with the president playing a major role in the political system, assisted by a set of legal instruments with which they can exert influence on the organs of state authority and the political system.

The president has a free choice in selecting the prime minister, yet in practice they usually give the task of forming a new government to a politician supported by the political party with the majority of seats in the Sejm (usually, though not always, it is the leader of that political party).

The president has the right to initiate the legislative process. They also have the opportunity to directly influence it by using their veto to stop a bill; however, a veto can be overruled by a three-fifths majority vote in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of members of the Sejm (230). Before signing a bill into law, the president can also ask the Constitutional Tribunal to verify its compliance with the Constitution, which in practice bears a decisive influence on the legislative process.

In their role as supreme representative of the Polish state, the president has the power to ratify and revoke international agreements, nominates and recalls ambassadors, and formally accepts the accreditations of representatives of other states. The president also makes decisions on award of highest academic titles, as well as state distinctions and orders. In addition, they have the right of clemency, viz. they can dismiss final court verdicts (in practice, the president consults such decisions with the minister of justice).

The president is also the supreme commander of the armed forces; they appoint the chief of the general staff and the commanders of all of the service branches; in wartime, they nominate the commander-in-chief of the armed forces and can order a general mobilisation. The president performs their duties with the help of the following offices: the Chancellery of the President, the Office of National Security, and the Body of Advisors to the President.

==Presidential residencies and properties==

Several properties are owned by the Office of the President and are used by the head of state as their official residence, private residence, residence for visiting foreign officials etc.

* The Presidential Palace in Warsaw is the largest palace in Warsaw and the official seat of the president of the Republic of Poland since 1993. The first presidential tenant was Lech Wałęsa when he moved to the Palace from Belweder in 1994.
* Belweder, in Warsaw, was the official seat of the president until 1993. It is currently owned by the Office of the President as the &quot;official residence of the President&quot; and is used by the president and the government for ceremonial purposes. The palace also serves as an official residence for heads of state on official visits to Poland and other important guests.
* The Presidential Castle in Wisła in a château built for the Habsburgs as their hunting cottage. It was rebuilt 1929–1931 and used as recreational residence by Ignacy Mościcki, President 1916—1939. Since 2002 it is again a property of the president, restored and opened in 2005 by President Kwaśniewski. It is today a recreational and conference centre for the president and a hotel.
* Residence of the President of the Republic of Poland in Lucień
* Manor House of the President of the Republic of Poland in Ciechocinek
* Presidential Residence &quot;Jurata-Hel&quot; in Hel, the president&#x27;s Baltic coastal retreat
* Summer residence at the Hel Peninsula
* Presidential Villa in Promnik
* Presidential Villa in Klarysew

==Acting president of Poland==
The constitution states that the president is an elected office, there is no directly elected presidential line of succession. If the president is unable to execute their powers and duties, the marshal of the Sejm will have the powers of a president for a maximum of 60 days until elections are called.

On 10 April 2010, a plane carrying Polish president Lech Kaczyński, his wife, and 94 others including many Polish officials crashed near Smolensk North Airport in Russia; there were no survivors. Bronisław Komorowski took over acting presidential powers following the incident. On 8 July, Komorowski resigned from the office of Marshal of the Sejm after winning the presidential election. According to the constitution, the acting president then became the marshal of the Senate, Bogdan Borusewicz. In the afternoon Grzegorz Schetyna was elected as a new marshal of the Sejm and he became acting president. Schetyna served as the interim head of state until the swearing-in of Komorowski on 6 August.

==Former presidents==

Within Poland, former presidents are entitled to lifetime personal security protection by State Protection Service officers, in addition to receiving a substantial pension and a private office. On 10 April 2010, Lech Kaczyński, president at the time, along with Ryszard Kaczorowski, the last president-in-exile although not internationally recognised, died in the crash of a Polish Air Force Tu-154 en route to Russia.

==See also==
* List of heads of state of Poland
* List of Polish monarchs
* &quot;Naczelnik Państwa&quot;
* Polish government-in-exile
* Polish presidential elections of
** 1990, 1995, 2000, 2005, 2010, 2015, 2020
* Prime Minister of Poland
* Smolensk air disaster

==References==
==External links==

* President of Poland Official Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1054799" start="4" end="23" title="President of Poland" label="president of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054799" start="44" end="79" title="President of Poland" label="president of the Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="124" end="130" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q961507" start="183" end="205" title="Constitution of Poland" label="Constitution of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="271" end="284" title="Parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338983" start="292" end="302" title="Council of Ministers (Poland)" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="379" end="383" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q49371" start="384" end="395" title="legislation" label="legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="467" end="485" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q55836" start="531" end="549" title="Gabriel Narutowicz" label="Gabriel Narutowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q30672723" start="555" end="576" title="Polish presidential inauguration" label="sworn in as president"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="584" end="606" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969555" start="650" end="667" title="National Assembly" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="673" end="677" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q98975" start="686" end="692" title="Senate of Poland" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535435" start="722" end="740" title="March Constitution (Poland)" label="March Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386436" start="753" end="769" title="Assassination of Gabriel Narutowicz" label="was assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="802" end="817" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Józef Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957347" start="861" end="878" title="Chief of State (Poland)" label="Naczelnik Państwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3902557" start="908" end="934" title="Small Constitution of 1919" label="Small Constitution of 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851730" start="971" end="979" title="May Coup (Poland)" label="May Coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q55844" start="1007" end="1030" title="Stanisław Wojciechowski" label="Stanisław Wojciechowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q310594" start="1078" end="1093" title="Ignacy Mościcki" label="Ignacy Mościcki"/>
<link wikidata="Q586557" start="1123" end="1131" title="Sanation" label="Sanation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="1202" end="1215" title="Authoritarianism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280229" start="1221" end="1249" title="April Constitution of Poland" label="April Constitution of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="1417" end="1435" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="1454" end="1480" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="government went into exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="1484" end="1491" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q38380" start="1525" end="1531" title="Angers" label="Angers"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="1533" end="1539" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q55840" start="1541" end="1562" title="Władysław Raczkiewicz" label="Władysław Raczkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="1696" end="1710" title="Battle of France" label="fall of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="1734" end="1760" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1779" end="1785" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1787" end="1801" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q55835" start="2001" end="2020" title="Ryszard Kaczorowski" label="Ryszard Kaczorowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="2035" end="2041" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2059" end="2065" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="2077" end="2099" title="Eastern Bloc" label="central-eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q55832" start="2101" end="2116" title="Bolesław Bierut" label="Bolesław Bierut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210061" start="2259" end="2290" title="1946 Polish people&amp;#x27;s referendum" label="Polish people&amp;#x27;s referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3902558" start="2317" end="2343" title="Small Constitution of 1947" label="Small Constitution of 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q668817" start="2454" end="2503" title="Constitution of the Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Constitution of the Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687343" start="2605" end="2621" title="State Council of the Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q55834" start="2716" end="2735" title="Wojciech Jaruzelski" label="Wojciech Jaruzelski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="2801" end="2807" title="direct election" label="direct"/>
<link wikidata="Q673527" start="2808" end="2829" title="1990 Polish presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q444" start="2831" end="2842" title="Lech Wałęsa" label="Lech Wałęsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q961507" start="2934" end="2956" title="Constitution of Poland" label="Constitution of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5266" end="5272" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="5276" end="5283" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259469" start="5535" end="5549" title="Prime Minister of Poland" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636999" start="6155" end="6178" title="Constitutional Tribunal (Poland)" label="Constitutional Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294864" start="6812" end="6831" title="Ministry of Justice (Poland)" label="minister of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q282696" start="6886" end="6898" title="Polish Armed Forces" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q178909" start="7182" end="7210" title="Chancellery of the President of the Republic of Poland" label="Chancellery of the President"/>
<link wikidata="Q608932" start="7529" end="7558" title="Presidential Palace, Warsaw" label="Presidential Palace in Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="7584" end="7590" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q444" start="7702" end="7713" title="Lech Wałęsa" label="Lech Wałęsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q645474" start="7767" end="7775" title="Belweder" label="Belweder"/>
<link wikidata="Q257561" start="8150" end="8178" title="Wisła" label="Presidential Castle in Wisła"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="8206" end="8215" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q310594" start="8305" end="8320" title="Ignacy Mościcki" label="Ignacy Mościcki"/>
<link wikidata="Q55758" start="8436" end="8447" title="Aleksander Kwaśniewski" label="Kwaśniewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697167" start="8587" end="8593" title="Lucień" label="Lucień"/>
<link wikidata="Q985659" start="8654" end="8665" title="Ciechocinek" label="Ciechocinek"/>
<link wikidata="Q848973" start="8717" end="8720" title="Hel, Poland" label="Hel"/>
<link wikidata="Q579938" start="8743" end="8749" title="Baltic region" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606" start="8792" end="8805" title="Hel Peninsula" label="Hel Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249839" start="8830" end="8837" title="Promnik" label="Promnik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8862" end="8870" title="Klarysew" label="Klarysew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757" start="9259" end="9273" title="Lech Kaczyński" label="Lech Kaczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q215342" start="9275" end="9283" title="Maria Kaczyńska" label="his wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q131311" start="9331" end="9338" title="Smolensk air disaster" label="crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q849366" start="9344" end="9366" title="Smolensk North Airport" label="Smolensk North Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="9370" end="9376" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42939" start="9403" end="9423" title="Bronisław Komorowski" label="Bronisław Komorowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q100172" start="9535" end="9554" title="Marshal of the Sejm" label="Marshal of the Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3846811" start="9664" end="9685" title="Marshal of the Senate of Poland" label="marshal of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q890410" start="9687" end="9704" title="Bogdan Borusewicz" label="Bogdan Borusewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q362851" start="9723" end="9740" title="Grzegorz Schetyna" label="Grzegorz Schetyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q48618485" start="10022" end="10046" title="State Protection Service" label="State Protection Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q131311" start="10307" end="10330" title="Smolensk air disaster" label="Polish Air Force Tu-154"/>
<link wikidata="Q55830" start="10367" end="10399" title="List of heads of state of Poland" label="List of heads of state of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="10402" end="10425" title="List of Polish monarchs" label="List of Polish monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957347" start="10428" end="10457" title="Chief of State (Poland)" label="&amp;quot;Naczelnik Państwa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="10460" end="10486" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q673527" start="10525" end="10529" title="1990 Polish presidential election" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q374379" start="10531" end="10535" title="1995 Polish presidential election" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q786959" start="10537" end="10541" title="2000 Polish presidential election" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586050" start="10543" end="10547" title="2005 Polish presidential election" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q592635" start="10549" end="10553" title="2010 Polish presidential election" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933091" start="10555" end="10559" title="2015 Polish presidential election" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632774" start="10561" end="10565" title="2020 Polish presidential election" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259469" start="10568" end="10592" title="Prime Minister of Poland" label="Prime Minister of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q131311" start="10595" end="10616" title="Smolensk air disaster" label="Smolensk air disaster"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43582" wikidata="Q219429" url="?curid=43582" title="Begging the question">
<text>In classical rhetoric and logic, begging the question or assuming the conclusion (Latin: ) is an informal fallacy that occurs when an argument&#x27;s premises assume the truth of the conclusion. Historically, begging the question refers to a fault in a dialectical argument in which the speaker assumes some premise that has not been demonstrated to be true. In modern usage, it has come to refer to an argument in which the premises assume the conclusion without supporting it. This makes it an example of circular reasoning.

Some examples are: 

*&quot;People have known for thousands of years that the earth is round. Therefore, the earth is round.&quot;
*&quot;Drugs are illegal so they must be bad for you. Therefore, we ought not legalize drugs because drugs are bad for you.&quot;

The phrase &quot;beg the question&quot; can also mean &quot;strongly prompt the question&quot;, a usage that is distinct from the sense in logic but is widespread, though some consider it incorrect.

== History ==
The original phrase used by Aristotle from which &quot;begging the question&quot; descends is , or sometimes , . Aristotle&#x27;s intended meaning is closely tied to the type of dialectical argument he discusses in his &quot;Topics&quot;, book VIII: a formalized debate in which the defending party asserts a thesis that the attacking party must attempt to refute by asking yes-or-no questions and deducing some inconsistency between the responses and the original thesis.

In this stylized form of debate, the proposition that the answerer undertakes to defend is called () and one of the rules of the debate is that the questioner cannot simply ask (beg) for it (that would be trivial and uninteresting). Aristotle discusses this in &quot;Sophistical Refutations&quot; and in &quot;Prior Analytics&quot; book II, (64b, 34–65a 9, for circular reasoning see 57b, 18–59b, 1).

The stylized dialectical exchanges Aristotle discusses in the &quot;Topics&quot; included rules for scoring the debate, and one important issue was precisely the matter of &quot;asking for the initial thing&quot;—which included not just making the actual thesis adopted by the answerer into a question, but also making a question out of a sentence that was too close to that thesis (for example, &quot;PA&quot; II 16).

The term was translated into English from Latin in the 16th century. The Latin version, , can be interpreted in different ways. (from ), in the post-classical context in which the phrase arose, means or , but in the older classical sense means , or . , genitive of , means , or (of an argument). Literally means or .

The Latin phrase comes from the Greek ( ) in Aristotle&#x27;s &quot;Prior Analytics&quot; II xvi 64b28–65a26:

Aristotle&#x27;s distinction between apodictic science and other forms of nondemonstrative knowledge rests on an epistemology and metaphysics wherein appropriate first principles become apparent to the trained dialectician:
Thomas Fowler believed that would be more properly called , which is literally .

== Definition ==
To (also called ) is to attempt to support a claim with a premise that itself restates or presupposes the claim. It is an attempt to prove a proposition while simultaneously taking the proposition for granted.

When the fallacy involves only a single variable, it is sometimes called a &quot;hysteron proteron&quot; (Greek for ), a rhetorical device, as in the statement:
Reading this sentence, the only thing one can learn is a new word (soporific) that refers to a more common action (inducing sleep); it does not explain why opium causes that effect. A sentence that explains why opium induces sleep (or the same, why opium has soporific quality) could be the following one:

A less obvious example from &quot;Fallacies and Pitfalls of Language: The Language Trap&quot; by S. Morris Engel:

This form of the fallacy may not be immediately obvious. Linguistic variations in syntax, sentence structure, and the literary device may conceal it, as may other factors involved in an argument&#x27;s delivery. It may take the form of an unstated premise which is essential but not identical to the conclusion, or is &quot;controversial or questionable for the same reasons that typically might lead someone to question the conclusion&quot;:

For example, one can obscure the fallacy by first making a statement in concrete terms, then attempting to pass off an identical statement, delivered in abstract terms, as evidence for the original. One could also &quot;bring forth a proposition expressed in words of Saxon origin, and give as a reason for it the very same proposition stated in words of Norman origin&quot;, as here:

When the fallacy of begging the question is committed in more than one step, some authors dub it , or more commonly, &quot;circular reasoning&quot;.

Begging the question is not considered a formal fallacy (an argument that is defective because it uses an incorrect deductive step). Rather, it is a type of informal fallacy that is logically valid but unpersuasive, in that it fails to prove anything other than what is already assumed.

== Related fallacies ==

Closely connected with begging the question is the fallacy of circular reasoning (), a fallacy in which the reasoner begins with the conclusion. The individual components of a circular argument can be logically valid because if the premises are true, the conclusion must be true, and does not lack relevance. However, circular reasoning is not persuasive because a listener who doubts the conclusion also doubts the premise that leads to it.

Begging the question is similar to the &quot;complex question&quot; (also known as &quot;trick question&quot; or &quot;fallacy of many questions&quot;): a question that, to be valid, requires the truth of another question that has not been established. For example, &quot;Which color dress is Mary wearing?&quot; may be fallacious because it presupposes that Mary is wearing a dress. Unless it has previously been established that her outfit is a dress, the question is fallacious because she could be wearing pants instead.

Another related fallacy is &quot;ignoratio elenchi&quot; or &quot;irrelevant conclusion&quot;: an argument that fails to address the issue in question, but appears to do so. An example might be a situation where A and B are debating whether the law permits A to do something. If A attempts to support his position with an argument that the law to allow him to do the thing in question, then he is guilty of .

== Vernacular ==
In vernacular English, &quot;begging the question&quot; (or equivalent rephrasing thereof) is sometimes used in place of &quot;raises the question&quot;, &quot;invites the question&quot;, &quot;suggests the question&quot;, &quot;leaves unanswered the question&quot; etc. Such preface is then followed with the question, as in: 
* &quot;[...]personal letter delivery is at an all-time low... Which begs the question: are open letters the only kind the future will know?&quot;
* &quot;Hopewell&#x27;s success begs the question: why aren&#x27;t more companies doing the same?&quot;
* &quot;Spending the summer traveling around India is a great idea, but it does beg the question of how we can afford it.&quot;

Sometimes it is further confused with &quot;dodging the question&quot;, an attempt to avoid it, or perhaps more often &quot;begging the question&quot; is simply used to mean leaving the question unanswered.

== See also ==
* Ambiguity
* Catch-22 (logic)
* Circular definition
* Euphemism treadmill
* Fallacies of definition
* Loaded question
* Open-question argument
* Polysyllogism
* Presuppositional apologetics
* Regress argument ()
* Spin (propaganda)

== Notes ==
== References ==

* Cohen, Morris Raphael, Ernest Nagel, and John Corcoran. &quot;An Introduction to Logic&quot;. Hackett Publishing, 1993. .
* Davies, Arthur Ernest. &quot;A Text-book of Logic&quot;. R.G. Adams and Company, 1915.
* Follett, Wilson. &quot;Modern American Usage: A Guide&quot;. Macmillan, 1966. .
* Gibson, William Ralph Boyce, and Augusta Klein. &quot;The Problem of Logic&quot;. A. and C. Black, 1908.
* Herrick, Paul. &quot;The Many Worlds of Logic&quot;. Oxford University Press, 2000. 
* Kahane, Howard, and Nancy Cavender. &quot;Logic and contemporary rhetoric: the use of reason in everyday life&quot;. Cengage Learning, 2005. .
* Kilpatrick, James. &quot;Begging Question Assumes Proof of an Unproved Proposition&quot;. &quot;Rocky Mountain News (CO)&quot; 6 April 1997. Accessed through Access World News on 3 June 2009.
* Martin, Robert M. &quot;There Are Two Errors in the Title of This Book: A sourcebook of philosophical puzzles, paradoxes, and problems&quot;. Broadview Press, 2002. .
* Mercier, Charles Arthur. &quot;A New Logic&quot;. Open Court Publishing Company, 1912.
* Mill, John Stuart. &quot;A system of logic, ratiocinative and inductive: being a connected view of the principles of evidence, and the methods of scientific investigation&quot;. J.W. Parker, 1851.
* Safire, William. &quot;On Language: Take my question please!&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot; 26 July 1998. Accessed 3 June 2009.
* Schiller, Ferdinand Canning Scott. &quot;Formal logic, a scientific and social problem&quot;. London: Macmillan, 1912.
* Welton, James. &quot;Fallacies incident to the method&quot;. &quot;A Manual of Logic&quot;, Vol. 2. London: W.B. Clive University Tutorial Press, 1905.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="13" end="21" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="26" end="31" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219429" start="33" end="53" title="Begging the question" label="begging the question"/>
<link wikidata="Q219429" start="57" end="80" title="Begging the question" label="assuming the conclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="82" end="87" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312438" start="97" end="113" title="informal fallacy" label="informal fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949" start="170" end="175" title="truth" label="truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q374182" start="183" end="193" title="Logical consequence" label="conclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9453" start="253" end="264" title="dialectical" label="dialectical"/>
<link wikidata="Q186619" start="265" end="273" title="argument" label="argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q321703" start="308" end="315" title="premise" label="premise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011160" start="507" end="525" title="circular reasoning" label="circular reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="1032" end="1041" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9453" start="1182" end="1191" title="dialectic" label="dialectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095335" start="1229" end="1235" title="Topics (Aristotle)" label="Topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q766539" start="1745" end="1768" title="Sophistical Refutations" label="Sophistical Refutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q485217" start="1788" end="1803" title="Prior Analytics" label="Prior Analytics"/>
<link wikidata="Q485217" start="2282" end="2284" title="Prior Analytics" label="PA"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2342" end="2347" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234117" start="2444" end="2458" title="Postclassical Era" label="post-classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="2553" end="2561" title="genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q618829" start="2766" end="2775" title="apodictic" label="apodictic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="2842" end="2854" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="2859" end="2870" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q536351" start="2891" end="2907" title="first principles" label="first principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789756" start="2953" end="2966" title="Thomas Fowler (Oxford)" label="Thomas Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q591227" start="3344" end="3361" title="hysteron proteron" label="hysteron proteron"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="3384" end="3392" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="4558" end="4563" title="Saxon" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33850" start="4645" end="4651" title="Norman language" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q962165" start="4867" end="4881" title="formal fallacy" label="formal fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186619" start="4886" end="4894" title="argument" label="argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q484284" start="4942" end="4956" title="deductive reasoning" label="deductive step"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312438" start="4983" end="4999" title="informal fallacy" label="informal fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047000" start="5008" end="5023" title="Validity (logic)" label="logically valid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011160" start="5201" end="5219" title="circular reasoning" label="circular reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047000" start="5350" end="5355" title="Validity (logic)" label="valid"/>
<link wikidata="Q105291974" start="5627" end="5643" title="complex question" label="complex question"/>
<link wikidata="Q737677" start="6141" end="6158" title="ignoratio elenchi" label="ignoratio elenchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="6538" end="6548" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416089" start="7287" end="7307" title="question dodging" label="dodging the question"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140419" start="7468" end="7477" title="Ambiguity" label="Ambiguity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250696" start="7480" end="7496" title="Catch-22 (logic)" label="Catch-22 (logic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q428414" start="7499" end="7518" title="Circular definition" label="Circular definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="7521" end="7540" title="Euphemism treadmill" label="Euphemism treadmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432186" start="7543" end="7566" title="Fallacies of definition" label="Fallacies of definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q638149" start="7569" end="7584" title="Loaded question" label="Loaded question"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095717" start="7587" end="7609" title="Open-question argument" label="Open-question argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498324" start="7612" end="7625" title="Polysyllogism" label="Polysyllogism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118925" start="7628" end="7656" title="Presuppositional apologetics" label="Presuppositional apologetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662395" start="7659" end="7675" title="Regress argument" label="Regress argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q12776523" start="7681" end="7698" title="Spin (propaganda)" label="Spin (propaganda)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023055" start="7945" end="7960" title="Wilson Follett" label="Follett, Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q765704" start="8060" end="8073" title="Augusta Klein" label="Augusta Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q254983" start="9017" end="9032" title="William Safire" label="Safire, William"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43583" wikidata="Q174880" url="?curid=43583" title="Teresa of Ávila">
<text>Teresa of Ávila (born Teresa Sánchez de Cepeda Dávila y Ahumada; 28March 15154or 15October 1582), also called Saint Teresa of Jesus, was a Carmelite nun and prominent Spanish mystic and religious reformer.

Active during the Counter-Reformation, Teresa became the central figure of a movement of spiritual and monastic renewal, reforming the Carmelite Orders of both women and men. The movement was later joined by the younger Carmelite friar and mystic Saint John of the Cross, with whom she established the Discalced Carmelites. A formal papal decree adopting the split from the old order was issued in 1580.

Her autobiography, &quot;The Life of Teresa of Jesus&quot;, and her books &quot;The Interior Castle&quot; and &quot; The Way of Perfection&quot; are prominent works on Christian mysticism and Christian meditation practice. In her autobiography, written as a defense of her ecstatic mystical experiences, she discerns four stages in the ascent of the soul to God: mental prayer and meditation; the prayer of quiet; absorption-in-God; ecstatic consciousness. &quot;The Interior Castle&quot;, written as a spiritual guide for her Carmelite sisters, uses the illustration of seven mansions within the castle of the soul to describe the different states one&#x27;s soul can be in during life.

Forty years after her death, in 1622, Teresa was canonized by Pope Gregory XV. On 27 September 1970 Pope Paul VI proclaimed Teresa the first female &quot;Doctor of the Church&quot; in recognition of her centuries-long spiritual legacy to Catholicism.

==Biography==

===Early life===
Teresa Sánchez de Cepeda Dávila y Ahumada was born on 28 March 1515. Her birthplace was either Ávila or Gotarrendura. Her paternal grandfather, Juan Sánchez de Toledo, was a or , a Jew forced to convert to Christianity or emigrate. When Teresa&#x27;s father was a child, Juan was condemned by the Spanish Inquisition for allegedly returning to Judaism, but he was later able to assume a Catholic identity. Her father, Alonso Sánchez de Cepeda, was a successful wool merchant and one of the wealthiest men in Ávila. He bought a knighthood and assimilated successfully into Christian society.

Previously married to Catalina del Peso y Henao, with whom he had three children, in 1509, Sánchez de Cepeda married Teresa&#x27;s mother, Beatriz de Ahumada y Cuevas, in Gotarrendura. A brother, Lorenzo de Cepeda y Ahumada, was the father of Teresa de Ahumada.

Teresa&#x27;s mother brought her up as a dedicated Christian. Fascinated by accounts of the lives of the saints, she ran away from home at age seven, with her brother Rodrigo, to seek martyrdom in the fight against the Moors. Her uncle brought them home, when he spotted them just outside the town walls.

When Teresa was fourteen years old, her mother died, leaving her grief-stricken. This prompted her to embrace a deeper devotion to the Virgin Mary as her spiritual mother. Teresa was also enamored of popular fiction, which at the time consisted primarily of medieval tales of knighthood and works about fashion, gardens and flowers. Teresa was sent to the Augustinian nuns&#x27; school in Ávila.

===Religious life===

====Ascetic and mystical practice====
After completing her education, she initially resisted the idea of a religious vocation, but after a stay with her uncle and other relatives, she relented. In 1534, aged 20, much to the disappointment of her pious and austere father, she decided to enter the local easy-going Carmelite &quot;Convent of the Incarnation&quot;, significantly built on top of land that had been used previously as a burial ground for Jews. She took up religious reading on contemplative prayer, especially Osuna&#x27;s &quot;Abecedario espiritual&quot; (&quot;Third Spiritual Alphabet,&quot; 1527), a guide on examination of conscience and &quot;spiritual self-concentration and inner contemplation, known in mystical nomenclature as &quot;. She also dipped into other mystical ascetical works such as the of Peter of Alcantara.

Her zeal for mortification caused her to become ill again and she spent almost a year in bed, causing huge worry to her community and family. She nearly died but she recovered, attributing her recovery to the miraculous intercession of Saint Joseph. She began to experience bouts of religious ecstasy. She reported that, during her illness, she had progressed from the lowest stage of &quot;recollection&quot;, to the &quot;devotions of silence&quot; and even to the &quot;devotions of ecstasy&quot;, in which was one of perceived in &quot;perfect union with God&quot; (see ). She said she frequently experienced the rich &quot;blessing of tears&quot; during this final stage. As the Catholic distinction between mortal and venial sin became clear to her, she came to understand the awful horror of sin and the inherent nature of original sin. 

Around the same time, she received a copy of the full Spanish translation of Augustine of Hippo&#x27;s autobiographical work &quot;Confessions&quot;, which helped her resolve and to tend to her own bouts of religious scruples. The text helped her realize that holiness was indeed possible and she found solace in the idea that such a great saint was once an inveterate sinner. In her autobiography, she wrote that she &quot;was very fond of St. Augustine[...] for he was a sinner too&quot;.

====&quot;Transverberation&quot;====
Around 1556, friends suggested that her newfound knowledge could be of diabolical rather than divine origin. She had begun to inflict mortifications of the flesh upon herself. But her confessor, the Jesuit Francis Borgia, reassured her of the divine inspiration of her thoughts. On St. Peter&#x27;s Day in 1559, Teresa became firmly convinced that Jesus Christ had presented himself to her in bodily form, though invisible. These visions lasted almost uninterruptedly for more than two years. In another vision, the famous &quot;transverberation&quot;, a seraph drove the fiery point of a golden lance repeatedly through her heart, causing her an ineffable spiritual and bodily pain:
The account of this vision was the inspiration for one of Bernini&#x27;s most famous works, the &quot;Ecstasy of Saint Teresa&quot; at Santa Maria della Vittoria in Rome. Although based in part on Teresa&#x27;s description of her mystical transverberation in her autobiography, Bernini&#x27;s depiction of the event is considered by some to be highly eroticized, especially when compared to the entire preceding artistic Teresian tradition.

The memory of this episode served as an inspiration throughout the rest of her life, and motivated her lifelong imitation of the life and suffering of Jesus, epitomized in the adage often associated with her: &quot;Lord, either let me suffer or let me die.&quot;

Teresa, who became a celebrity in her town dispensing wisdom from behind the convent grille, was known for her raptures, which sometimes involved levitation. It was a source of embarrassment to her and she bade her sisters hold her down when this occurred. Subsequently, historians, neurologists and psychiatrists like Peter Fenwick and Javier Álvarez-Rodríguez, among others, have taken an interest in her symptomatology. The fact that she wrote down virtually everything that happened to her during her religious life means that an invaluable and exceedingly rare medical record from the 16th century has been preserved. Examination of this record has led to the speculative conclusion that she may have suffered from temporal lobe epilepsy.

====Monastic reformer====
Over time, Teresa found herself increasingly at odds with the spiritual malaise prevailing in her convent of the Incarnation. Among the 150 nuns living there, the observance of cloister, designed to protect and strengthen spiritual practice and prayer, became so lax that it appeared to lose its purpose. The daily invasion of visitors, many of high social and political rank, disturbed the atmosphere with frivolous concerns and vacuous conversation. Such intrusions in the solitude essential to develop and sustain contemplative prayer so grieved Teresa that she longed to intervene.

The incentive to take the practical steps inspired by her inward motivation was supported by the Franciscan priest, Peter of Alcantara, who met her early in 1560 and became her spiritual adviser. She resolved to found a &quot;reformed&quot; Carmelite convent, correcting the laxity which she had found at the Incarnation convent and elsewhere besides. Doña Guiomar of Ulloa, a friend, was granted permission for the project.

The abject poverty of the new convent, established in 1562 and named St. Joseph&#x27;s (San José), at first caused a scandal among the citizens and authorities of Ávila, and the small house with its chapel was in peril of suppression. However, powerful patrons, including the local bishop, coupled with the impression of well ordered subsistence and purpose, turned animosity into approval.

In March 1563, after Teresa had moved to the new convent house, she received papal sanction for her primary principles of absolute poverty and renunciation of ownership of property, which she proceeded to formulate into a &quot;constitution&quot;. Her plan was the revival of the earlier, stricter monastic rules, supplemented by new regulations including the three disciplines of ceremonial flagellation prescribed for the Divine Office every week, and the discalceation of the religious. For the first five years, Teresa remained in seclusion, mostly engaged in prayer and writing.

====Extended travels====
In 1567, Teresa received a patent from the Carmelite General, Rubeo de Ravenna, to establish further houses of the new order. This process required many visitations and long journeys across nearly all the provinces of Spain. She left a record of the arduous project in her &quot;Libro de las Fundaciones&quot;. Between 1567 and 1571, reformed convents were established at Medina del Campo, Malagón, Valladolid, Toledo, Pastrana, Salamanca, and Alba de Tormes.

As part of the original patent, Teresa was given permission to set up two houses for men who wished to adopt the reforms. She convinced two Carmelite friars, John of the Cross and Anthony of Jesus to help with this. They founded the first monastery of Discalced Carmelite brothers in November 1568 at Duruelo. Another friend of Teresa, Jerónimo Gracián, the Carmelite visitator of the older observance of Andalusia and apostolic commissioner, and later provincial of the Teresian order, gave her powerful support in founding monasteries at Segovia (1571), Beas de Segura (1574), Seville (1575), and Caravaca de la Cruz (Murcia, 1576). Meanwhile, John of the Cross promoted the inner life of the movement through his power as a teacher and preacher.

====Opposition to reforms====
In 1576, unreformed members of the Carmelite order began to persecute Teresa, her supporters and her reforms. Following a number of resolutions adopted at the general chapter at Piacenza, the governing body of the order forbade all further founding of reformed convents. The general chapter instructed her to go into &quot;voluntary&quot; retirement at one of her institutions. She obeyed and chose St. Joseph&#x27;s at Toledo. Meanwhile, her friends and associates were subjected to further attacks.

Several years later, her appeals by letter to King Philip II of Spain secured relief. As a result, in 1579, the cases before the inquisition against her, Gracián and others, were dropped. This allowed the reform to resume. An edict from Pope Gregory XIII allowed the appointment of a special provincial for the newer branch of the Carmelite religious, and a royal decree created a &quot;protective&quot; board of four assessors for the reform.

During the last three years of her life, Teresa founded convents at Villanueva de la Jara in northern Andalusia (1580), Palencia (1580), Soria (1581), Burgos, and Granada (1582). In total, seventeen convents, all but one founded by her, and as many men&#x27;s monasteries, were owed to her reforms over twenty years.

===Last days===
Her final illness overtook her on one of her journeys from Burgos to Alba de Tormes. She died in 1582, just as Catholic Europe was making the switch from the Julian to the Gregorian calendar, which required the excision of the dates of 5–14 October from the calendar. She died either before midnight of 4 October or early in the morning of 15 October, which is celebrated as her feast day. According to the liturgical calendar then in use, she died on the 15th. Her last words were: &quot;My Lord, it is time to move on. Well then, may your will be done. O my Lord and my Spouse, the hour that I have longed for has come. It is time to meet one another.&quot;

===After death===

====Holy relics====

She was buried at the Convento de la Anunciación in Alba de Tormes. Nine months after her death the coffin was opened and her body was found to be intact but the clothing had rotted. Before the body was re-interred one of her hands was cut off, wrapped in a scarf and sent to Ávila. Gracián cut the little finger off the hand and – according to his own account – kept it with him until it was taken by the occupying Ottoman Turks, from whom he had to redeem it with a few rings and 20 reales. The body was exhumed again on 25 November 1585 to be moved to Ávila and found to be incorrupt. An arm was removed and left in Alba de Tormes at the nuns&#x27; request, to compensate for losing the main relic of Teresa, but the rest of the body was reburied in the Discalced Carmelite chapter house in Ávila. The removal was done without the approval of the Duke of Alba de Tormes and he brought the body back in 1586, with Pope Sixtus V ordering that it remain in Alba de Tormes on pain of excommunication. A grander tomb on the original site was raised in 1598 and the body was moved to a new chapel in 1616.

The body still remains there, except for the following parts:
* Rome – right foot and part of the upper jaw
* Lisbon – hand
* Ronda, Spain – left eye and left hand (the latter was kept by Francisco Franco until his death, after Francoist troops captured it from Republican troops during the Spanish Civil War)
* Museum of the Church of the Annunciation, Alba de Tormes – left arm and heart
* Church of Our Lady of Loreto, Paris, France – one finger
* Sanlúcar de Barrameda – one finger

On August 28, 2024, it was made the canonical recognition of Teresa&#x27;s body. The postulator general of the Order of Discalced Carmelites, Father Marco Chiesa, announced that those present at the scene were able to see that &quot;it is in the same condition as when it was last opened in 1914.&quot;

====Canonization====
In 1622, forty years after her death, she was canonized by Pope Gregory XV. The Cortes exalted her to patroness of Spain in 1627. The University of Salamanca had granted her the title (Latin for &quot;Doctor of the Church&quot;) with a diploma in her lifetime, but that title is distinct from the papal honour of Doctor of the Church, which is always conferred posthumously. The latter was finally bestowed upon her by Pope Paul VI on 27 September 1970, along with Catherine of Siena, making them the first women to be awarded the distinction. Teresa is revered as the Doctor of Prayer. The mysticism in her works exerted a formative influence upon many theologians of the following centuries, such as Francis of Sales, Fénelon, and the Port-Royalists. In 1670, her coffin was plated in silver.

Teresa of Avila is honored in the Church of England and in the Episcopal Church on 15 October.

====Patron saint====
In 1626, at the request of Philip IV of Spain, the Castilian parliament elected Teresa &quot;without lacking one vote&quot; as copatron saint of Castile. This status was affirmed by Pope Urban VIII in a brief issued on 21 July 1627 in which he stated:
More broadly, the 1620s, the entirety of Spain (Castile and beyond) debated who should be the country&#x27;s patron saint; the choices were either the current patron, James Matamoros, or a pairing of him and the newly canonised Saint Teresa of Ávila. Teresa&#x27;s promoters said Spain faced newer challenges, especially the threat of Protestantism and societal decline at home, thus needing a more contemporary patron who understood those issues and could guide the Spanish nation. Santiago&#x27;s supporters (&quot;Santiaguistas&quot;) fought back and eventually won the argument, but Teresa of Ávila remained far more popular at the local level. James the Great kept the title of patron saint for the Spanish people, and the most Blessed Virgin Mary under the title Immaculate Conception as the sole patroness for the entire Spanish Kingdom.

====Legacy regarding the Infant Jesus of Prague====
The Spanish nuns who established &quot;Carmel&quot; in France brought a devotion to the Infant Jesus with them, and it became widespread in France.

Though there are no written historical accounts establishing that Teresa of Ávila ever owned the famous Infant Jesus of Prague statue, according to tradition, such a statue is said to have been in her possession and Teresa is reputed to have given it to a noblewoman travelling to Prague. The age of the statue dates to approximately the same time as Teresa. It has been thought that Teresa carried a portable statue of the Child Jesus wherever she went; the idea circulated by the early 1700s.

==Writings==
===Autobiography===
The autobiography &quot;La Vida de la Santa Madre Teresa de Jesús&quot; (&quot;The Life of the Holy Mother Teresa of Jesus&quot;) was written at Avila between 1562 and 1565, but published posthumously. Editions include:
* &quot;The Life of St. Teresa of Jesus ... Written by herself&quot;. Translated from the Spanish by D. Lewis, 1870. London: Burns, Oates, &amp; Co
* The &quot;Autobiography&quot;, written before 1567, under the direction of her confessor, Fr. Pedro Ibáñez, 1882
* &quot;The Life of Saint Teresa of Avila by herself&quot;. J. M. Cohen, 1957. Penguin Classics
* &quot;Life of St. Teresa of Jesus&quot;. Translated by Benedict Zimmerman, 1997. Tan Books, 
* &quot;The Life of Teresa of Jesus: The Autobiography of Teresa of Avila&quot;. Translated by E. Allison Peers, 1991. Doubleday, 
* &quot;The Book of Her Life&quot;, translated, with notes, by Kieran Kavanaugh, OCD and Otilio Rodriguez, OCD, 2008. Introduction by Jodi Bilinkoff. Indianapolis/Cambridge: Hackett Publishing Company, 
* &quot;The Book of My Life&quot;. Mirabai Starr, 2008. Boston, Massachusetts: Shambhala Publications, 

===&quot;The Way of Perfection&quot;===
&quot;The Way of Perfection&quot; (&quot;&quot;) was published in 1566. Teresa called this a &quot;living book&quot; and in it set out to teach her nuns how to progress through prayer and Christian meditation. She discusses the rationale for being a Carmelite, and the rest deals with the purpose of and approaches to spiritual life. The title was inspired by the devotional book &quot;The Imitation of Christ&quot; (1418) which had become a favourite expression of Teresa much before she wrote this work, as it appeared at several places in her autobiography, &quot;The Life of Teresa of Jesus&quot;. Like her other books, &quot;The Way of Perfection&quot; was written on the advice of her counsellors to describe her experiences in prayer during the period when the Reformation was spreading through Europe. Herein she describes ways of attaining spiritual perfection through prayer and its four stages, as in meditation, quiet, repose of soul and finally perfect union with God, which she equates with rapture.

;Editions:
* &quot;The Way of Perfection&quot;. Translated and Edited by E. Allison Peers, Doubleday, 1991. 
* &quot;The Way of Perfection&quot;, TAN Books, 1997. 
* &quot;Way of Perfection&quot;, London, 2012. limovia.net 
* &quot;El Camino de Perfección&quot; (&quot;The Way of Perfection&quot;), written also before 1567, at the direction of her confessor.

===&quot;Interior Castle&quot;===
The &quot;Interior Castle&quot;, or &quot;The Mansions&quot;, (&quot;&quot; or &quot;Las Moradas&quot;) was written in 1577, and published in 1588. It contained the basis for what she felt should be the ideal journey of faith, comparing the contemplative soul to a castle with seven successive interior courts, or chambers, analogous to the seven mansions. The work was inspired by her vision of the soul as a diamond in the shape of a castle containing seven mansions, which she interpreted as the journey of faith through seven stages, ending with union with God. Fray Diego, one of Teresa&#x27;s former confessors wrote that God revealed to Teresa:
Christia Mercer, Columbia University philosophy professor, claims that the seventeenth-century Frenchman René Descartes lifted some of his most influential ideas from Teresa of Ávila, who, fifty years before Descartes, wrote popular books about the role of philosophical reflection in intellectual growth. She describes a number of striking similarities between Descartes&#x27;s seminal work &quot;Meditations on First Philosophy&quot; and Teresa&#x27;s &quot;Interior Castle&quot;.

====Translations====
* The first English translation was published in 1675.
* Fr. John Dalton (1852). John Dalton’s translation of &quot;The Interior Castle&quot; contains an interesting preface and translations of other letters by St. Teresa.
* Benedictines of Stanbrook, edited by Fr. Zimmerman (1921). The translation of &quot;The Interior Castle&quot; by the Benedictines of Stanbrook also has an excellent introduction and includes many cross-references to other works by St. Teresa.
* E. Allison Peers (1946). E. Allison Peers’ translation of &quot;The Interior Castle&quot; is another popular public domain version translated by a professor and scholar of Hispanic studies.
* Fr. Kieran Kavanaugh (1979). This translation also stays true to the text and contains many useful cross-references. An updated study edition contains comprehensive notes, reflection questions and a glossary.
* &quot;The Interior Castle – The Mansions&quot;, TAN Books, 1997. 
* Mirabai Starr (2004). Described as &quot;free of religious dogma, this modern translation renders St. Teresa&#x27;s work a beautiful and practical set of teachings for seekers of all faiths in need of spiritual guidance&quot;. Starr’s interpretive version of &quot;The Interior Castle&quot; eliminates Teresa’s use of words such as &quot;sin&quot;, which results in a translation which is more paraphrased than accurate translation and departs significantly from the original&#x27;s meaning.
* &quot;The Interior Castle – Modern update of the spiritual guide by Teresa of Avila&quot;. by M.B. Anderson, Root Classics (publisher), 2022. .

====In popular culture====
St. Teresa&#x27;s mystical experiences have inspired several authors in modern times, but not necessarily from Teresa&#x27;s Christian theological perspective.
* She is mentioned in Elizabeth Goudge&#x27;s play, &quot;The Brontës of Haworth&quot; (in &quot;Three Plays&quot;, Duckworth, London, 1939), as one of the authors included by Emily Brontë when she and her sister Charlotte are packing to go to Brussels. In the play, Emily is depicted as very interested in mysticism, and is also packing a book by Saint John of the Cross, and another by John Ruysbroeck (John of Ruusbroec or Jan van Ruusbroec: 1293/94-1381: a medieval mystic from the Low Countries).
* The 2006 book &quot;Eat, Pray, Love&quot; by Elizabeth Gilbert recognizes St. Teresa as &quot;that most mystical of Catholic figures&quot; and alludes to St. Teresa&#x27;s &quot;Interior Castle&quot; as the &quot;mansions of her being&quot; and her journey as one of &quot;divine meditative bliss&quot;.
* The 2007 book by American spiritual author Caroline Myss &quot;Entering the Castle&quot; was inspired by St. Teresa&#x27;s &quot;Interior Castle&quot;, but still has a New Age approach to mysticism.
* St. Teresa also inspired American author R. A. Lafferty in his novel &quot;Fourth Mansions&quot; (1969), which was nominated for the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1970.
* Brooke Fraser&#x27;s song &quot;Orphans, Kingdoms&quot; was inspired by St. Teresa&#x27;s &quot;Interior Castle&quot;.
* Jean Stafford&#x27;s short story &#x27;The Interior Castle&#x27; relates the intense preoccupation of an accident victim with her own brain, which she sees variously as a jewel, a flower, a light in a glass and a set of envelopes within envelopes.
* Jeffrey Eugenides&#x27; 2011 novel &quot;The Marriage Plot&quot; refers to St. Teresa&#x27;s &quot;Interior Castle&quot; when recounting the religious experience of Mitchell Grammaticus, one of the main characters of the book.
* Teen Daze&#x27;s 2012 release &quot;The Inner Mansions&quot; refers to St. Teresa&#x27;s &quot;Interior Castle&quot; in the album&#x27;s title as well as in the first track. &quot;... have mercy on yourselves! If you realize your pitiable condition, how can you refrain from trying to remove the darkness from the crystal of your souls? Remember, if death should take you now, you would never again enjoy the light of this Sun&quot;. This line appears dubbed over the musical introduction to &quot;New Life&quot;.
* In Mark Williamson&#x27;s &quot;ONE: a memoir&quot; (2018), the metaphor of the &quot;Interior Castle&quot; is used to describe an inner world of introspective reflection on past events, a set of &quot;memory loci&quot; based on the ancient system of recall for rhetorical purposes.

===Other===
*&quot; Relaciones&quot; (&quot;Relationships&quot;), an extension of the autobiography giving her inner and outer experiences in epistolary form.
* Her rare poems (&quot;Todas las poesías&quot;, Munster, 1854) are distinguished for tenderness of feeling and rhythm of thought.
* &quot;The Complete Poetry of St. Teresa of Avila&quot;. A Bilingual Edition – Edición y traducción de Eric W. Vogt. New Orleans University Press of the South, 1996. Second edition, 2015. xl, 116 p. 
* &quot;Meditations on Song of Songs&quot;, 1567, written nominally for her daughters at the convent of Our Lady of Mount Carmel.
* &quot;Conceptos del Amor&quot; (&quot;Concepts of Love&quot;) and 
* &quot;Exclamaciones&quot;. 
* &quot;Las Cartas&quot; (Saragossa, 1671), or her correspondence, of which there are 342 extant letters and 87 fragments of others. The first edition of Teresa&#x27;s letters was published in 1658 with the comment of Juan de Palafox y Mendoza, Roman Catholic bishop of Osma and an opponent to the Company of Jesus.
* &quot;The Complete Works of St Teresa of Jesus&quot;, in five volumes, translated and edited by E. Allison Peers, including 2 volumes of correspondence. London: Sheed and Ward, 1982.

==Mysticism==

The ultimate preoccupation of Teresa&#x27;s mystical thought, as consistently reflected in her writings, is the ascent of the soul to God. Aumann notes that, &quot;the grades of prayer described in &quot;The Life&quot; do not correspond to the division of prayer commonly given in the manuals of spiritual life&quot;, due to the fact that &quot;St. Teresa did not write a systematic theology of prayer&quot;. According to Zimmerman, &quot;In all her writings on this subject she deals with her personal experiences [...] there is no vestige in her writings of any influence of the Areopagite, the Patristic, or the Scholastic Mystical schools, as represented among others, by the German Dominican Mystics. She is intensely personal, her system going exactly as far as her experiences, but not a step further.&quot;

Teresa describes in the &quot;Interior Castle&quot; that the treasure of heaven lies buried within our hearts, and that there is an interior part of the heart which is the centre of the soul.

===Four stages as described in the &quot;autobiography&quot;===
In her autobiography she describes four stages, in which she uses the image of watering one&#x27;s garden as a metaphor for mystical prayer:
* The first, &quot;Devotion of the Heart&quot;, consists of mental prayer and meditation. It means the withdrawal of the soul from without, penitence and especially the devout meditation on the passion of Christ (&quot;Autobiography&quot; 11.20).
* The second, &quot;Devotion of Peace&quot;, is where human will is surrendered to God. This occurs by virtue of an uplifted awareness granted by God, while other faculties, such as memory, reason, and imagination, are not yet safe from worldly distraction. Although a partial distraction can happen, due to outer activity such as repetition of prayers or writing down spiritual things, the prevailing state is one of quietude (&quot;Autobiography&quot; 14.1).
* The third, &quot;Devotion of Union&quot;, concerns the absorption-in-God. It is not only a heightened, but essentially, an ecstatic state. At this level, reason is also surrendered to God, and only the memory and imagination are left to ramble. This state is characterized by a blissful peace, a sweet slumber of at least the &quot;higher soul faculties&quot;, that is a consciousness of being enraptured by the love of God.
* The fourth, &quot;Devotion of Ecstasy&quot;, is where the consciousness of being in the body disappears. Sensory faculties cease to operate. Memory and imagination also become absorbed in God, as though intoxicated. Body and spirit dwell in the throes of exquisite pain, alternating between a fearful fiery glow, in complete unconscious helplessness, and periods of apparent strangulation. Sometimes such ecstatic transports literally cause the body to be lifted into space. This state may last as long as half an hour and tends to be followed by relaxation of a few hours of swoon-like weakness, attended by the absence of all faculties while in union with God. The subject awakens from this trance state in tears. It may be regarded as the culmination of mystical experience. Indeed, Teresa was said to have been observed levitating during Mass on more than one occasion.

===The seven mansions of the Interior castle===
The &quot;Interior Castle&quot; is divided into seven mansions (also called dwelling places), each level describing a step to get closer to God. In her work, Teresa already assumed entrance into the first mansions by prayer and meditation.

The purgative stage, involving active prayer and asceticism:
* The first mansion begin with a soul&#x27;s state of grace, but the souls are surrounded by sin and only starting to seek God&#x27;s grace through humility in order to achieve perfection. 
* The second mansions are also called the &quot;Mansion of the Practice of Prayer&quot; because the soul seeks to advance through the castle by daily thoughts of God, humble recognition of God&#x27;s work in the soul and ultimately daily prayer. 
* The third mansions are the Mansions of Exemplary Life characterized through divine grace and a love for God that is so great that the soul has an aversion to both mortal and venial sin and a desire to do works of charitable service to man for the ultimate glory of God. The prayer of acquired recollection belongs to the third mansion.

The illuminative stage, the beginning of mystical or contemplative or supernatural prayer:
* The fourth mansions are a departure from the soul actively acquiring what it gains as God increases his role. In this mansion, the soul begins to experience two types of supernatural prayer, namely the &quot;Prayer of Supernatural (or passive) Recollection&quot; and &quot;The Prayer of Quiet&quot;;
* The fifth mansion is &quot;The Prayer of Union&quot;, in which the soul prepares itself to receive gifts from God;

Unitive stage:
* The sixth mansion is the betrothal (engagement) of the soul with God can be compared to lovers. The soul spends increasing amounts of time torn between favors from God and from outside afflictions. 
* The seventh mansion is the spiritual marriage with God, in which the soul achieves clarity in prayer

===Nine grades of prayer===

====Overview====
The first four grades of Teresa&#x27;s classifications of prayer belong to the ascetical stage of spiritual life. These are vocal prayer, meditational or mental prayer, affective prayer, and acquired or natural recollection.

According to Augustin Poulain and Robert Thouless, Teresa described four degrees or stages of mystical union, namely the prayer of quiet, full or semi-ecstatic union, ecstatic union or ecstasy, and transforming or deifying union, or spiritual marriage (properly) of the soul with God. While Augustin Poulain and Robert Thouless do not mention the &quot;Prayer of Supernatural (or passive) Recollection&quot; as a separate stage, Aumann discerns infused contemplation as a separate stage in the fourth mansion of the &quot;Interior Castle&quot;. Together, these &quot;five grades are infused prayer and belong to the mystical phase of spiritual life&quot;.

Thomas Merton disagrees on a fine-cut distinction between acquired contemplation and the prayer of quiet, noticing the Carmelite tendency of systematization, whereas Teresa herself was just describing her personal experiences. Commenting on Teresa&#x27;s writings and the scholarly discussions on the precise stages, Thomas Merton comments: &quot;with all these divisions and distinctions, comings and goings and varieties of terms, one tends to become impatient with the saint&quot;.

Aumann synthesizes Teresa&#x27;s writings into nine grades of prayer:
====Ordinary prayer or ascetical stage====

=====Mental or meditational prayer=====
Mental prayer is a form of prayer &quot;performed without aid of any particular formula.&quot; It is distinguished from vocal prayers, &quot;prayers performed by means of a given formula&quot;, Prayer is mental when the thoughts and affections of the soul are not expressed in a previously determined formula. According to Teresa of Ávila, mental prayer is meditational prayer, in which the person is like a gardener, who, with much labour, draws the water up from the depths of the well to water the plants and flowers. According to Teresa of Avila, mental prayer can proceed by using vocal prayers in order to improve dialogue with God. According to Lehodey, mental prayer can be divided into meditation, more active in reflections, and contemplation, more quiet and gazeful.

===== Natural or acquired contemplation – prayer of simplicity =====
For Teresa of Avila, in natural or acquired contemplation, also called the prayer of simplicity there is one dominant thought or sentiment which recurs constantly and easily (although with little or no development) amid many other thoughts, beneficial or otherwise. The prayer of simplicity often has a tendency to simplify itself even in respect to its object, leading one to think chiefly of God and of his presence, but in a confused manner.

In the words of Saint Alphonsus Maria de Liguori, acquired contemplation &quot;consists in seeing at a simple glance the truths which could previously be discovered only through prolonged discourse&quot;: reasoning is largely replaced by intuition and affections and resolutions, though not absent, are only slightly varied and expressed in a few words. Similarly, Saint Ignatius of Loyola, in his 30-day retreat or Spiritual Exercises beginning in the &quot;second week&quot; with its focus on the life of Jesus, describes less reflection and more simple contemplation on the events of Jesus&#x27; life. These contemplations consist mainly in a simple gaze and include an &quot;application of the senses&quot; to the events, to further one&#x27;s empathy for Jesus&#x27; values, &quot;to love him more and to follow him more closely&quot;.

Definitions similar to that of Saint Alphonsus Maria de Liguori are given by Adolphe Tanquerey (&quot;a simple gaze on God and divine things proceeding from love and tending thereto&quot;) and Saint Francis de Sales (&quot;a loving, simple and permanent attentiveness of the mind to divine things&quot;).

Natural or acquired contemplation has been compared to the attitude of a mother watching over the cradle of her child: she thinks lovingly of the child without reflection and amid interruptions. The &quot;Catechism of the Catholic Church&quot; states: 
====Infused or higher contemplation – mystical union====
According to Hardon, infused contemplation is &quot;A supernatural gift by which a person&#x27;s mind and will become totally centered on God. Under this influence the intellect receives special insights into things of the spirit, and the affections are extraordinarily animated with divine love. Infused contemplation assumes the free co-operation of the human will.&quot; According to Poulain, it is a form of mystical union with God, a union characterized by the fact that it is God, and God only, who manifests Himself. According to Poulain, mystical grace may also manifest as visions of the humanity of Christ or an angel or revelations of a future event, and include miraculous bodily phenomena sometimes observed in ecstatics.

In Teresa&#x27;s mysticism, infused contemplation is described as a &quot;divinely originated, general, non-conceptual, loving awareness of God&quot;. According to Dubay:
According to Thomas Dubay, infused contemplation is the normal, ordinary development of discursive prayer (mental prayer, meditative prayer), which it gradually replaces. Dubay considers infused contemplation as common only among &quot;those who try to live the whole Gospel wholeheartedly and who engage in an earnest prayer life&quot;. Other writers view contemplative prayer in its infused supernatural form as far from common. John Baptist Scaramelli, reacting in the 17th century against quietism, taught that asceticism and mysticism are two distinct paths to perfection, the former being the normal, ordinary end of the Christian life, and the latter something extraordinary and very rare. Jordan Aumann considered that this idea of the two paths was &quot;an innovation in spiritual theology and a departure from the traditional Catholic teaching&quot;. And Jacques Maritain proposed that one should not say that every mystic necessarily enjoys habitual infused contemplation in the mystical state, since the gifts of the Holy Spirit are not limited to intellectual operations.

=====The Prayer of Quiet=====

For Teresa of Avila, the Prayer of Quiet is a state in which the soul experiences an extraordinary peace and rest, accompanied by delight or pleasure in contemplating God as present. According to Poulain, &quot;Mystical union will be called spiritual quiet when the Divine action is still too weak to prevent distractions: in a word, when the imagination still retains a certain liberty&quot;. According to Poulain, in incomplete mystical union, or the prayer of quiet or supernatural recollection, the action of God is not strong enough to prevent distractions, and the imagination still retains a certain liberty.

=====Full or semi-ecstatic union=====
According to Poulain, &quot;Mystical union will be called [...] full union when its strength is so great that the soul is fully occupied with the Divine object, whilst, on the other hand, the senses continue to act (under these conditions, by making a greater or less effort, one can cease from prayer&quot;.

=====Ecstatic union=====
According to Poulain, &quot;Mystical union will be called [...] ecstasy when communications with the external world are severed or nearly so (in this event one can no longer make voluntary movement nor energy from the state at will).&quot;

=====Transforming union=====
The transforming union differs from the other three specifically and not merely in intensity. According to Poulain, &quot;It consists in the habitual consciousness of a mysterious grace which all shall possess in heaven: the anticipation of the Divine nature. The soul is conscious of the Divine assistance in its superior supernatural operations, those of the intellect and the will. Spiritual marriage differs from spiritual espousals inasmuch as the first of these states is permanent and the second only transitory.&quot;

==Portrayals==
Portrayals of Teresa include the following:


=== Literature ===
* Simone de Beauvoir singles out Teresa as a woman who truly lived life for herself (and perhaps the only woman to do so) in her book &quot;The Second Sex&quot;.
* She is mentioned prominently in Kathryn Harrison&#x27;s novel &quot;Poison&quot;. The main character, Francisca De Luarca, is fascinated by her life.
* Don DeLillo in &quot;End Zone&quot; depicted Teresa as a saint who eats from a human skull to remind herself of final things. 
* R. A. Lafferty was strongly inspired by &quot;El Castillo Interior&quot; when he wrote his novel &quot;Fourth Mansions&quot;. Quotations from St. Teresa&#x27;s work are frequently used as chapter headings.
* Pierre Klossowski prominently features Saint Teresa of Ávila in his metaphysical novel &quot;The Baphomet&quot;.
* George Eliot compared Dorothea Brooke to St. Teresa in &quot;Middlemarch&quot; (1871–1872) and wrote briefly about the life and works of St. Teresa in the &quot;Prelude&quot; to the novel.
* Thomas Hardy took Saint Teresa as the inspiration for much of the characterisation of the heroine Tess (Teresa) Durbeyfield, in &quot;Tess of the d&#x27;Urbervilles&quot; (1891), most notably the scene in which she lies in a field and senses her soul ecstatically above her.
* The contemporary poet Jorie Graham features Saint Teresa in the poem &quot;Breakdancing&quot; in her volume &quot;The End of Beauty&quot;.
* Bárbara Mujica&#x27;s novel &quot;Sister Teresa&quot;, while not strictly hagiographical, is based upon Teresa&#x27;s life.
* Timothy Findley&#x27;s 1999 novel &quot;Pilgrim&quot; features Saint Teresa as a minor character.
* Vita Sackville-West wrote a double biography contrasting the two Carmelites Teresa of Avila and Thérèse of Lisieux, &quot;The Eagle and the Dove&quot;, re-issued in 2018.

=== Painting and sculpture ===
*&quot;Saint Teresa of Ávila&#x27;s Vision of the Holy Spirit&quot; is a 1612–1614 painting by Peter Paul Rubens and is exhibited in the Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen in Rotterdam, and Rubens&#x27; c. 1614 painting of the same subject is in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge.
* Another Rubens portrait of Teresa, from 1615, is now in the collection of the Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna.
* Saint Teresa was the inspiration for one of Bernini&#x27;s most famous sculptures, &quot;The Ecstasy of St. Teresa&quot; (mid-17th century) in Santa Maria della Vittoria, Rome.
* &quot;St. Teresa&quot; was painted in 1819–20 by François Gérard, a French neoclassical painter.
* &quot;St Theresa of Avila&quot; is a 1754-1755 painting by Joseph-Marie Vien and is exhibited in the New Orleans Museum of Art in New Orleans, Louisiana.

====Iconography====
Theresa is usually shown in the habit of the Discalced Carmelites, and writing in a book with a quill pen. Sometimes there is a dove, symbolizing the Holy Spirit.

=== Drama and film ===
* Hugh Ross Williamson wrote a play, &quot;Teresa of Avila&quot;, about her life, which premiered in London in 1961.
* Performance artist Linda Montano has cited Teresa of Ávila as one of the most important influences on her work and since her return to Catholicism in the 2000s has done performances of her life.
* &quot;Teresa de Jesús&quot; (1984), directed by Josefina Molina and starring Concha Velasco, is a Spanish made-for-TV mini-series. In it, Teresa is portrayed as the determined foundress of new Carmelite houses while protecting the infant Jesus statue on her many arduous journeys. The devotion to the Child Jesus spread quickly in Spain, possibly due to her mystical reputation, and then to other places, including France.
* Nigel Wingrove&#x27;s 1989 short film &quot;Visions of Ecstasy&quot; was based on Teresa of Ávila. The film features fantasised sexualised scenes of Teresa with the body of Jesus on the cross. It is the only work to be refused certification by the British Board of Film Classification (BBFC) on the grounds of blasphemy.
* Dževad Karahasan. &quot;The Delighted Angel&quot; drama about Teresa of Ávila and Rabija al-Adavija, Vienna-Salzburg-Klagenfurt, ARBOS 1995.
* Paz Vega stars as Teresa in &quot;Teresa, el cuerpo de Cristo&quot;, a 2007 Spanish biopic directed by Ray Loriga.
* St. Teresa also features prominently in the 2009 Ron Howard film, &quot;Angels and Demons&quot;, where the Bernini sculpture, &quot;The Ecstasy of St. Teresa&quot;, is an important clue in helping Robert Langdon (Tom Hanks) find an anti-matter bomb that is hidden in and set to destroy the Vatican.
* Marian Álvarez portrays Teresa in the 2015 television film of the same name directed by Jorge Dorado and made for the 500th anniversary of her birth.
* Blanca Portillo, Greta Fernández, and Ainet Jounou portray Teresa in the 2023 film of the same name directed by Paula Ortiz.

=== Music ===
* Marc-Antoine Charpentier composed two motets for the feast of Saint Teresa: &quot;Flores, flores o Gallia&quot; for two voices, two flutes and continuo (H.374), c. 1680 and the other, for three voices and continuo (H.342), in 1686–87.
* She is a principal character of the opera &quot;Four Saints in Three Acts&quot; by the composer Virgil Thomson with a libretto by Gertrude Stein.
* Saint Teresa is the subject of the song &quot;Theresa&#x27;s Sound-World&quot; by Sonic Youth off the 1992 album &quot;Dirty&quot;, lyrics by Thurston Moore.
* &quot;Saint Teresa&quot; is a track on Joan Osborne&#x27;s &quot;Relish&quot; album, nominated for a Grammy Award in 1996.
* References to Saint Theresa and her visions appear in several songs across multiple albums by the Hold Steady, including &quot;Chicago Seemed Tired Last Night&quot;, &quot;The Sweet Part of the City&quot;, and &quot;Our Whole Lives&quot;

==See also==
* Asín on mystical analogies in Saint Teresa of Avila and Islam
* &quot;Book of the First Monks&quot;
* Byzantine Discalced Carmelites
* Carmelite Rule of St. Albert
* Constitutions of the Carmelite Order
* Mount Carmel#Canaanites
* Secular Order of Discalced Carmelites
* Saints and levitation
* Spanish Renaissance literature
* &quot;Teresa de Jesús&quot;, 1984 Spanish language mini-series
* St. Teresa&#x27;s Church (Hong Kong)
==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
This article was originally based on the text in the &quot;Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge&quot;.

;Printed sources
* (493 pages) French original
* , (457 pages)

*

*
* 
*
*
* 
*
*

*; English translation 
*
*
*

*
* 
*
*
* 
* 

*
*
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 



;Web-sources
==Further reading==
* Carolyn A. Greene. &quot;Castles in the Sand&quot; fiction with cited sources about Teresa of Avila Lighthouse Trails Publishing, 2009. 
* Jean Abiven. &quot;15 Days of Prayer with Saint Teresa of Avila&quot;, New City Press, 2011. 
* Bárbara Mujica, &quot;Teresa de Ávila: Lettered Woman&quot;, (Nashville, Vanderbilt University Press, 2009).
* E. Rhodes, &quot;Teresa de Jesus&#x27;s Book and the Reform of the Religious Man in Sixteenth Century Spain,&quot; in Laurence Lux-Sterritt and Carmen Mangion (eds), &quot;Gender, Catholicism and Spirituality: Women and the Roman Catholic Church in Britain and Europe, 1200–1900&quot; (Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan, 2011),
* John Thomas, &quot;Ecstasy, art &amp; the body. St. Teresa of Avila&#x27;s &#x27;Transverberation&#x27;, and its depiction in the sculpture of Gianlorenzo Bernini&quot; in John Thomas, &quot;Happiness, Truth &amp; Holy Images. Essays of Popular Theology and Religion &amp; Art&quot; (Wolverhampton, Twin Books, 2019), pp. 12–16.
* John Thomas, &quot;Architectural image and &quot;via mystica&quot;. St. Teresa&#x27;s &quot;Las Moradas&quot;&quot;, in John Thomas, &quot;Happiness, Truth &amp; Holy Images. Essays of Popular Theology and Religion &amp; Art&quot; (Wolverhampton, Twin Books, 2019), pp. 39–48.

==External links==
* 
* &quot;Teresa 500&quot;: Videos of a conference held at Roehampton University in 2015 on the 500th anniversary of Teresa&#x27;s birth
* &quot;St. Teresa, Virgin&quot;, &quot;Butler&#x27;s Lives of the Saints&quot;
* Founder Statue in St Peter&#x27;s Basilica
* Biography Online: Saint Teresa of Avila
* Patron Saints: Saint Teresa of Avila
* Books written by Saint Teresa of Avila, including Saint John of the Cross
* 
* Basilica of Saint Teresa in Alba de Tormes (in Spanish)
* (in Spanish)
* Life of St. Teresa of Jesus, of The Order of Our Lady of Carmel
* &quot;Way of Perfection&quot;
* &quot;Interior Castle&quot; or &quot;The Mansions&quot;
* Convent of St Teresa in Avila
* Poems of Saint Teresa
* , 1900, by Alexander Whyte, from Project Gutenberg
* Colonnade Statue St Peter&#x27;s Square</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q174880" start="0" end="15" title="Teresa of Ávila" label="Teresa of Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q174880" start="22" end="63" title="Teresa of Ávila" label="Teresa Sánchez de Cepeda Dávila y Ahumada"/>
<link wikidata="Q174880" start="110" end="131" title="Teresa of Ávila" label="Saint Teresa of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q186277" start="139" end="152" title="Carmelite nun" label="Carmelite nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813828" start="167" end="181" title="Spanish mystic" label="Spanish mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="186" end="204" title="Catholic Reformation" label="religious reformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="225" end="244" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190388" start="454" end="477" title="John of the Cross" label="Saint John of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135659" start="509" end="529" title="Discalced Carmelites" label="Discalced Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q174880" start="692" end="711" title="The Interior Castle" label="The Interior Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q174880" start="729" end="750" title="The Way of Perfection" label="The Way of Perfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="780" end="799" title="Christian mysticism" label="Christian mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110342" start="804" end="824" title="Christian meditation" label="Christian meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="962" end="966" title="Soul (spirit)" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817490" start="975" end="988" title="mental prayer" label="mental prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="1350" end="1359" title="canonized" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q132692" start="1363" end="1378" title="Pope Gregory XV" label="Pope Gregory XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="1401" end="1413" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q192499" start="1455" end="1475" title="Doctor of the Church" label="Doctor of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1539" end="1550" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15688" start="1680" end="1685" title="Ávila" label="Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q842702" start="1689" end="1701" title="Gotarrendura" label="Gotarrendura"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="1882" end="1901" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Spanish Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="1929" end="1936" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2003" end="2027" title=":es:Alonso Sánchez de Cepeda" label="Alonso Sánchez de Cepeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="2112" end="2122" title="knighthood" label="knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q63187330" start="2420" end="2437" title="Teresa de Ahumada" label="Teresa de Ahumada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="2624" end="2633" title="martyrdom" label="martyrdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="2655" end="2664" title="the Moors" label="the Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="2881" end="2892" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="3022" end="3032" title="knighthood" label="knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q214528" start="3102" end="3113" title="Augustinians" label="Augustinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q921537" start="3689" end="3694" title="Francisco de Osuna" label="Osuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286701" start="3793" end="3818" title="examination of conscience" label="examination of conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="3961" end="3968" title="ascetic" label="ascetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q470608" start="3992" end="4010" title="Peter of Alcantara" label="Peter of Alcantara"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096310" start="4296" end="4313" title="religious ecstasy" label="religious ecstasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321540" start="4726" end="4732" title="mortal sin" label="mortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754656" start="4737" end="4747" title="venial sin" label="venial sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184186" start="4843" end="4855" title="original sin" label="original sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="4936" end="4954" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q372941" start="4990" end="5001" title="Confessions (Augustine)" label="Confessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q772440" start="5076" end="5084" title="Scrupulosity" label="scruples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358616" start="5522" end="5549" title="mortification of the flesh" label="mortifications of the flesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q183959" start="5572" end="5581" title="confession (sacrament)" label="confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="5587" end="5593" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q380092" start="5594" end="5608" title="Francis Borgia" label="Francis Borgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153043" start="5670" end="5690" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q194077" start="5943" end="5949" title="seraph" label="seraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q160538" start="6130" end="6137" title="Bernini" label="Bernini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333433" start="6174" end="6197" title="Ecstasy of Saint Teresa" label="Ecstasy of Saint Teresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q863593" start="6207" end="6233" title="Santa Maria della Vittoria, Rome" label="Santa Maria della Vittoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333433" start="6311" end="6327" title="Transverberation of Saint Teresa" label="transverberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q740997" start="6924" end="6934" title="Levitation (physics)" label="levitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173966" start="7097" end="7110" title="Peter Fenwick (neuropsychologist)" label="Peter Fenwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q616667" start="7498" end="7520" title="temporal lobe epilepsy" label="temporal lobe epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430154" start="7726" end="7734" title="cloister" label="cloister"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="8233" end="8243" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q470608" start="8252" end="8270" title="Peter of Alcantara" label="Peter of Alcantara"/>
<link wikidata="Q45684" start="8313" end="8330" title="Spiritual direction" label="spiritual adviser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166337" start="8631" end="8659" title="Convento de San José (Ávila)" label="St. Joseph&amp;#x27;s (San José)"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="9031" end="9045" title="Papal decree" label="papal sanction"/>
<link wikidata="Q779753" start="9346" end="9358" title="flagellation" label="flagellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q45774" start="9378" end="9391" title="Liturgy of the Hours" label="Divine Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q746833" start="9412" end="9425" title="discalceation" label="discalceation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="9591" end="9597" title="letters patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q391009" start="9683" end="9688" title="Religious order (Catholic)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q693913" start="9936" end="9952" title="Medina del Campo" label="Medina del Campo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613270" start="9954" end="9961" title="Malagón" label="Malagón"/>
<link wikidata="Q8356" start="9963" end="9973" title="Valladolid" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="9975" end="9981" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655081" start="9983" end="9991" title="Pastrana, Spain" label="Pastrana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695" start="9993" end="10002" title="Salamanca" label="Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q946344" start="10008" end="10022" title="Alba de Tormes" label="Alba de Tormes"/>
<link wikidata="Q548320" start="10110" end="10113" title="Friar" label="men"/>
<link wikidata="Q190388" start="10183" end="10200" title="John of the Cross" label="John of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q534473" start="10326" end="10333" title="Duruelo" label="Duruelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190926" start="10361" end="10377" title="Jerónimo Gracián" label="Jerónimo Gracián"/>
<link wikidata="Q202030" start="10383" end="10402" title="Carmelite visitator" label="Carmelite visitator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="10430" end="10439" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975161" start="10478" end="10488" title="Provincial superior" label="provincial"/>
<link wikidata="Q15684" start="10565" end="10572" title="Segovia" label="Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313394" start="10581" end="10595" title="Beas de Segura" label="Beas de Segura"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="10604" end="10611" title="Seville" label="Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q230368" start="10624" end="10643" title="Caravaca de la Cruz" label="Caravaca de la Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12225" start="10645" end="10651" title="Murcia" label="Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216285" start="10964" end="10979" title="general chapter" label="general chapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13329" start="10983" end="10991" title="Piacenza" label="Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="11358" end="11376" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="11436" end="11447" title="inquisition" label="inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q83029" start="11544" end="11561" title="Pope Gregory XIII" label="Pope Gregory XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q319074" start="11820" end="11841" title="Villanueva de la Jara" label="Villanueva de la Jara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="11854" end="11863" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8378" start="11872" end="11880" title="Palencia" label="Palencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12155" start="11889" end="11894" title="Soria" label="Soria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9580" start="11903" end="11909" title="Burgos" label="Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="11915" end="11922" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706060" start="12197" end="12212" title="Catholic Europe" label="Catholic Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="12244" end="12250" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="12258" end="12276" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q946344" start="12839" end="12853" title="Alba de Tormes" label="Alba de Tormes"/>
<link wikidata="Q752380" start="12934" end="12940" title="Incorruptibility" label="intact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="13203" end="13215" title="Ottoman Turk" label="Ottoman Turk"/>
<link wikidata="Q133350" start="13703" end="13716" title="Pope Sixtus V" label="Pope Sixtus V"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="14001" end="14007" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13153" start="14017" end="14022" title="Ronda" label="Ronda"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="14079" end="14095" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="14182" end="14199" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710369" start="14283" end="14311" title="Notre-Dame-de-Lorette, Paris" label="Church of Our Lady of Loreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="14313" end="14318" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q210887" start="14342" end="14363" title="Sanlúcar de Barrameda" label="Sanlúcar de Barrameda"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="14749" end="14758" title="canonized" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q132692" start="14762" end="14777" title="Pope Gregory XV" label="Pope Gregory XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q219692" start="14783" end="14789" title="Cortes Generales" label="Cortes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="14805" end="14814" title="patron saint" label="patroness"/>
<link wikidata="Q308963" start="14837" end="14860" title="University of Salamanca" label="University of Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="14888" end="14893" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192499" start="15016" end="15036" title="Doctor of the Church" label="Doctor of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="15122" end="15134" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q229190" start="15168" end="15186" title="Catherine of Siena" label="Catherine of Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q231256" start="15405" end="15421" title="Francis of Sales" label="Francis of Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q310002" start="15423" end="15430" title="Fénelon" label="Fénelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q652981" start="15440" end="15454" title="Port-Royal-des-Champs" label="Port-Royalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019506" start="15533" end="15550" title="Calendar of saints (Church of England)" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019509" start="15562" end="15578" title="Calendar of saints (Episcopal Church)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q691402" start="15643" end="15661" title="Philip IV of Spain" label="Philip IV of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755695" start="15667" end="15687" title="Cortes of Castile and León" label="Castilian parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q131579" start="15798" end="15813" title="Pope Urban VIII" label="Pope Urban VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="15977" end="15989" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749646" start="16035" end="16050" title="Saint James Matamoros" label="James Matamoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q43999" start="16517" end="16532" title="James the Great" label="James the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="16572" end="16586" title="Spanish people" label="Spanish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="16601" end="16620" title="Blessed Virgin Mary" label="Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q185606" start="16637" end="16658" title="Immaculate Conception" label="Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="16696" end="16711" title="Spanish Kingdom" label="Spanish Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q942467" start="16854" end="16866" title="Infant Jesus" label="Infant Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q603573" start="17019" end="17041" title="Infant Jesus of Prague" label="Infant Jesus of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="17196" end="17202" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q942467" start="17339" end="17350" title="Child Jesus" label="Child Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637282" start="18423" end="18449" title="Hackett Publishing Company" label="Hackett Publishing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110342" start="18785" end="18805" title="Christian meditation" label="Christian meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q670350" start="18983" end="19006" title="The Imitation of Christ" label="The Imitation of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="19365" end="19376" title="Catholic Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817490" start="19475" end="19481" title="Mental prayer" label="prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110342" start="19509" end="19519" title="Christian meditation" label="meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="19521" end="19526" title="Prayer of Quiet" label="quiet"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738771" start="19563" end="19577" title="union with God" label="union with God"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669313" start="19758" end="19767" title="TAN Books" label="TAN Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q174880" start="19847" end="19867" title="Camino de Perfección" label="Camino de Perfección"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577278" start="20227" end="20232" title="Faith in Christianity" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="20262" end="20266" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="20272" end="20278" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827718" start="20613" end="20622" title="confessor" label="confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109221" start="20659" end="20674" title="Christia Mercer" label="Christia Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="20764" end="20778" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q605790" start="21057" end="21088" title="Meditations on First Philosophy" label="Meditations on First Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669313" start="22085" end="22094" title="TAN Books" label="TAN Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q242571" start="22953" end="22969" title="Elizabeth Goudge" label="Elizabeth Goudge"/>
<link wikidata="Q190388" start="23279" end="23302" title="Saint John of the Cross" label="Saint John of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q920312" start="23319" end="23334" title="John of Ruusbroec" label="John Ruysbroeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661615" start="23455" end="23470" title="Eat, Pray, Love" label="Eat, Pray, Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q231424" start="23480" end="23497" title="Elizabeth Gilbert" label="Elizabeth Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045168" start="23784" end="23797" title="Caroline Myss" label="Caroline Myss"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="23909" end="23916" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q982489" start="23983" end="23997" title="R. A. Lafferty" label="R. A. Lafferty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476126" start="24017" end="24032" title="Fourth Mansions" label="Fourth Mansions"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="24075" end="24087" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q266012" start="24092" end="24102" title="Nebula Award for Best Novel" label="Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q204112" start="24114" end="24127" title="Brooke Fraser" label="Brooke Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q290633" start="24235" end="24248" title="Jean Stafford" label="Jean Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q357108" start="24485" end="24502" title="Jeffrey Eugenides" label="Jeffrey Eugenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q3824677" start="24526" end="24543" title="The Marriage Plot" label="The Marriage Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131438" start="25722" end="25729" title="Munster" label="Munster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010804" start="25922" end="25944" title="New Orleans University" label="New Orleans University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448974" start="26452" end="26477" title="Juan de Palafox y Mendoza" label="Juan de Palafox y Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889845" start="26648" end="26664" title="Edgar Allison Peers" label="E. Allison Peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636781" start="26713" end="26727" title="Sheed and Ward" label="Sheed and Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="26877" end="26881" title="Soul (spirit)" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q312816" start="27332" end="27342" title="Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite" label="Areopagite"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="27348" end="27357" title="Church Fathers" label="Patristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="27366" end="27376" title="Scholasticism" label="Scholastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q823154" start="27431" end="27455" title="Friends of God" label="German Dominican Mystics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817490" start="28025" end="28038" title="mental prayer" label="mental prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10909316" start="28105" end="28114" title="penitence" label="penitence"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068793" start="28141" end="28151" title="Meditations on the Life of Christ" label="meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096310" start="28798" end="28806" title="religious ecstasy" label="ecstatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892035" start="29926" end="29936" title="levitation (paranormal)" label="levitating"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="29944" end="29948" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q40953" start="30242" end="30248" title="prayer" label="prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110342" start="30253" end="30263" title="Christian meditation" label="meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="30315" end="30325" title="asceticism" label="asceticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="30360" end="30364" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852175" start="30381" end="30386" title="divine grace" label="grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227" start="30420" end="30423" title="sin" label="sin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30475" end="30483" title="Humility#Christianity" label="humility"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852175" start="30842" end="30854" title="divine grace" label="divine grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q456673" start="30861" end="30865" title="Charity (virtue)" label="love"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="32327" end="32342" title="prayer of quiet" label="prayer of quiet"/>
<link wikidata="Q335011" start="33180" end="33193" title="Thomas Merton" label="Thomas Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q40953" start="33530" end="33536" title="prayer" label="prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q273334" start="34819" end="34845" title="Alphonsus Maria de Liguori" label="Alphonsus Maria de Liguori"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="35168" end="35186" title="Ignatius of Loyola" label="Ignatius of Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q655710" start="35213" end="35232" title="Spiritual Exercises of Ignatius of Loyola" label="Spiritual Exercises"/>
<link wikidata="Q231256" start="35838" end="35854" title="Francis de Sales" label="Francis de Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q75561" start="36150" end="36182" title="Catechism of the Catholic Church" label="Catechism of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715209" start="36667" end="36690" title="Henosis" label="mystical union with God"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358482" start="37175" end="37187" title="Thomas Dubay" label="Thomas Dubay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110342" start="37250" end="37267" title="Christian meditation" label="discursive prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q944774" start="37593" end="37616" title="John Baptist Scaramelli" label="John Baptist Scaramelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q919060" start="37655" end="37663" title="Quietism (Christian philosophy)" label="quietism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="37677" end="37687" title="asceticism" label="asceticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="37692" end="37701" title="Christian mysticism" label="mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45723" start="38028" end="38044" title="Jacques Maritain" label="Jacques Maritain"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="38447" end="38450" title="God in Christianity" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197" start="40149" end="40167" title="Simone de Beauvoir" label="Simone de Beauvoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q470098" start="40287" end="40301" title="The Second Sex" label="The Second Sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917259" start="40343" end="40359" title="Kathryn Harrison" label="Kathryn Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q310048" start="40463" end="40474" title="Don DeLillo" label="Don DeLillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375813" start="40484" end="40492" title="End Zone" label="End Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q982489" start="40592" end="40606" title="R. A. Lafferty" label="R. A. Lafferty"/>
<link wikidata="Q174880" start="40638" end="40658" title="El Castillo Interior" label="El Castillo Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q203674" start="40800" end="40817" title="Pierre Klossowski" label="Pierre Klossowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715583" start="40893" end="40905" title="The Baphomet" label="The Baphomet"/>
<link wikidata="Q131333" start="40915" end="40927" title="George Eliot" label="George Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q313129" start="40976" end="40987" title="Middlemarch" label="Middlemarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q132805" start="41106" end="41118" title="Thomas Hardy" label="Thomas Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q649409" start="41240" end="41270" title="Tess of the d&amp;#x27;Urbervilles" label="Tess of the d&amp;#x27;Urbervilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6278867" start="41405" end="41417" title="Jorie Graham" label="Jorie Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859177" start="41524" end="41538" title="Bárbara Mujica (writer)" label="Bárbara Mujica"/>
<link wikidata="Q116777139" start="41558" end="41571" title="Sister Teresa (novel)" label="Sister Teresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379443" start="41650" end="41665" title="Timothy Findley" label="Timothy Findley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4362704" start="41690" end="41697" title="Pilgrim (Timothy Findley novel)" label="Pilgrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q235505" start="41750" end="41769" title="Vita Sackville-West" label="Vita Sackville-West"/>
<link wikidata="Q18536276" start="41960" end="42014" title="Saint Teresa of Ávila&amp;#x27;s Vision of the Holy Spirit" label="Saint Teresa of Ávila&amp;#x27;s Vision of the Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599" start="42048" end="42065" title="Peter Paul Rubens" label="Peter Paul Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q679527" start="42090" end="42119" title="Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen" label="Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="42123" end="42132" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q50814741" start="42159" end="42187" title="Saint Teresa of Ávila&amp;#x27;s Vision of the Holy Spirit (Cambridge)" label="painting of the same subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421440" start="42198" end="42216" title="Fitzwilliam Museum" label="Fitzwilliam Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="42218" end="42227" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q95569" start="42309" end="42333" title="Kunsthistorisches Museum" label="Kunsthistorisches Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="42335" end="42341" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q160538" start="42389" end="42396" title="Bernini" label="Bernini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333433" start="42434" end="42459" title="Ecstasy of Saint Teresa" label="The Ecstasy of St. Teresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q863593" start="42488" end="42520" title="Santa Maria della Vittoria, Rome" label="Santa Maria della Vittoria, Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q163543" start="42573" end="42588" title="François Pascal Simon, Baron Gérard" label="François Gérard"/>
<link wikidata="Q647934" start="42682" end="42699" title="Joseph-Marie Vien" label="Joseph-Marie Vien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063082" start="42724" end="42749" title="New Orleans Museum of Art" label="New Orleans Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932544" start="42987" end="43007" title="Hugh Ross Williamson" label="Hugh Ross Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q213156" start="43104" end="43119" title="Performance art" label="Performance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551843" start="43123" end="43136" title="Linda Montano" label="Linda Montano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690284" start="43307" end="43322" title="Teresa de Jesús (film)" label="Teresa de Jesús"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815247" start="43349" end="43364" title="Josefina Molina" label="Josefina Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q270812" start="43378" end="43392" title="Concha Velasco" label="Concha Velasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q603573" start="43532" end="43544" title="Infant Jesus of Prague" label="infant Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="43716" end="43722" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032716" start="43726" end="43740" title="Nigel Wingrove" label="Nigel Wingrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936254" start="43770" end="43788" title="Visions of Ecstasy" label="Visions of Ecstasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="43899" end="43904" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q861670" start="43974" end="44010" title="British Board of Film Classification" label="British Board of Film Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q200481" start="44036" end="44045" title="blasphemy" label="blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44131" end="44148" title="Rabija al-Adavija" label="Rabija al-Adavija"/>
<link wikidata="Q234618" start="44192" end="44200" title="Paz Vega" label="Paz Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q9086110" start="44226" end="44253" title="Teresa, el cuerpo de Cristo" label="Teresa, el cuerpo de Cristo"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="44276" end="44282" title="Biographical film" label="biopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q734340" start="44295" end="44305" title="Ray Loriga" label="Ray Loriga"/>
<link wikidata="Q103646" start="44358" end="44368" title="Ron Howard" label="Ron Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q182502" start="44381" end="44398" title="Angels and Demons" label="Angels and Demons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="44522" end="44531" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="44599" end="44606" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5999448" start="44610" end="44624" title="Marian Álvarez" label="Marian Álvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q120188869" start="44648" end="44685" title="Teresa (2015 film)" label="2015 television film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277923" start="44698" end="44710" title="Jorge Dorado" label="Jorge Dorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q289922" start="44762" end="44777" title="Blanca Portillo" label="Blanca Portillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q61740672" start="44779" end="44794" title="Greta Fernández" label="Greta Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q120188866" start="44835" end="44861" title="Teresa (2023 film)" label="2023 film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q621836" start="44874" end="44885" title="Paula Ortiz" label="Paula Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q55524" start="44904" end="44928" title="Marc-Antoine Charpentier" label="Marc-Antoine Charpentier"/>
<link wikidata="Q188285" start="44942" end="44947" title="motet" label="motet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475468" start="45189" end="45214" title="Four Saints in Three Acts" label="Four Saints in Three Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q544485" start="45237" end="45251" title="Virgil Thomson" label="Virgil Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188385" start="45271" end="45285" title="Gertrude Stein" label="Gertrude Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="45371" end="45382" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q531154" start="45408" end="45413" title="Dirty (Sonic Youth album)" label="Dirty"/>
<link wikidata="Q505677" start="45431" end="45445" title="Thurston Moore" label="Thurston Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q232193" start="45488" end="45500" title="Joan Osborne" label="Joan Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110306" start="45514" end="45520" title="Relish (album)" label="Relish"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="45550" end="45562" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535768" start="45668" end="45683" title="the Hold Steady" label="the Hold Steady"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45828" end="45889" title="Miguel Asín Palacios#Teresa of Ávila" label="Asín on mystical analogies in Saint Teresa of Avila and Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943119" start="45898" end="45921" title="Book of the First Monks" label="Book of the First Monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004695" start="45930" end="45960" title="Byzantine Discalced Carmelites" label="Byzantine Discalced Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454225" start="45963" end="45991" title="Carmelite Rule of St. Albert" label="Carmelite Rule of St. Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164344" start="45994" end="46030" title="Constitutions of the Carmelite Order" label="Constitutions of the Carmelite Order"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46033" end="46056" title="Mount Carmel#Canaanites" label="Mount Carmel#Canaanites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076354" start="46059" end="46096" title="Secular Order of Discalced Carmelites" label="Secular Order of Discalced Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402460" start="46099" end="46120" title="Saints and levitation" label="Saints and levitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573283" start="46123" end="46153" title="Spanish Renaissance literature" label="Spanish Renaissance literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690284" start="46162" end="46177" title="Teresa de Jesús" label="Teresa de Jesús"/>
<link wikidata="Q15899019" start="46221" end="46257" title="St. Teresa&amp;#x27;s Church (Hong Kong)" label="St. Teresa&amp;#x27;s Church (Hong Kong)"/>
<link wikidata="Q632762" start="46354" end="46403" title="Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge" label="Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q939607" start="47963" end="47984" title="Roehampton University" label="Roehampton University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="43585" wikidata="Q493878" url="?curid=43585" title="753 BC">
<text>== Events ==

=== By place ===

==== Europe ====
* April 21: Romulus and Remus legendarily found the city of Rome (according to the calculations of the Roman scholar Varro Reatinus). According to the legend, Romulus and Remus are the sons of Rhea Silvia, daughter of Numitor, king of Alba Longa, and descended from Aeneas. Alba Longa is an ancient Latin city, located in the Alban Hills in Central Italy. Before the birth of the twin brothers, Numitor is deposed by his younger brother, Amulius, who forces Rhea to become a vestal virgin, so that she will not give birth to rival claimants to his title. However, Rhea is impregnated (raped) by the war god Mars and gives birth to Romulus and Remus. Amulius orders the infants to be drowned in the Tiber River, but they survive and wash ashore at the foot of the Palatine Hill – where they are suckled by a she-wolf until they are found by the shepherd Faustulus. Reared by Faustulus and his wife, the twins later become leaders of a band of young shepherd warriors. After learning their true identity, they attack Alba Longa, killing the wicked Amulius, and restore their grandfather to the throne. The twins decide to found a town on the site where they had been saved as infants. Romulus and Remus soon become involved in a quarrel, however, Remus is slain by his brother. Romulus then becomes ruler of the settlement, which is named Rome after him. To populate his town, Romulus offers asylum to fugitives and exiles.

=== By topic ===

==== Chronology ====
* Beginning of the Roman &quot;Ab urbe condita&quot; calendar.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2525" start="51" end="59" title="April 21" label="April 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197" start="61" end="78" title="Romulus and Remus" label="Romulus and Remus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247524" start="91" end="113" title="Founding of Rome" label="found the city of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q206119" start="166" end="180" title="Marcus Terentius Varro" label="Varro Reatinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q219936" start="242" end="253" title="Rhea Silvia" label="Rhea Silvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q660623" start="267" end="274" title="Numitor" label="Numitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q335070" start="284" end="294" title="Alba Longa" label="Alba Longa"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="315" end="321" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q202335" start="348" end="353" title="Latins (Italic tribe)" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129380" start="375" end="386" title="Alban Hills" label="Alban Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127320" start="390" end="403" title="Central Italy" label="Central Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q889656" start="487" end="494" title="Amulius" label="Amulius"/>
<link wikidata="Q188761" start="524" end="537" title="vestal virgin" label="vestal virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="634" end="638" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="656" end="660" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="747" end="758" title="Tiber" label="Tiber River"/>
<link wikidata="Q200642" start="812" end="825" title="Palatine Hill" label="Palatine Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162374" start="902" end="911" title="Faustulus" label="Faustulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1386" end="1390" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q26805" start="1542" end="1557" title="Ab urbe condita" label="Ab urbe condita"/>
</links>
</doc>
