<doc id="40096" wikidata="Q839809" url="?curid=40096" title="History of Bangladesh">
<text>The history of Bangladesh dates back over four millennia to the Chalcolithic period. The region&#x27;s early history was characterized by a succession of Hindu and Buddhist kingdoms and empires that fought for control over the Bengal region. Islam arrived in the 8th century and gradually became dominant from the early 13th century with the conquests led by Bakhtiyar Khalji and the activities of Sunni missionaries like Shah Jalal. Muslim rulers promoted the spread of Islam by building mosques across the region. From the 14th century onward, Bengal was ruled by the Bengal Sultanate, founded by Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah, who established an individual currency. The Bengal Sultanate expanded under rulers like Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah, leading to economic prosperity and military dominance, with Bengal being referred to by Europeans as the richest country to trade with. The region later became a part of the Mughal Empire, and according to historian C. A. Bayly, it was probably the empire&#x27;s wealthiest province.

Following the decline of the Mughal Empire in the early 1700s, Bengal became a semi-independent state under the Nawabs of Bengal, ultimately led by Siraj ud-Daulah. It was later conquered by the British East India Company after the Battle of Plassey in 1757. Bengal played a crucial role in the Industrial Revolution in Britain, but also faced significant deindustrialization. The Bengal Presidency was established during British rule.

The borders of modern Bangladesh were established with the partition of Bengal between India and Pakistan during the Partition of India in August 1947, when the region became East Pakistan as part of the newly formed State of Pakistan following the end of the British rule in the region. The Proclamation of Bangladeshi Independence in March 1971 led to the nine-month-long Bangladesh Liberation War, which culminated in the emergence of the People&#x27;s Republic of Bangladesh. Independence was declared in 1971.

Since gaining independence, Bangladesh has faced political instability, economic reconstruction, and social transformation. The country experienced military coups and authoritarian rule, notably under General Ziaur Rahman and General Hussain Muhammad Ershad. The restoration of parliamentary democracy in the 1990s saw power alternate between the Awami League, and the Bangladesh Nationalist Party. In recent decades, Bangladesh has achieved significant economic growth, emerging as one of the world&#x27;s fastest-growing economies, driven by its garment industry, remittances, and infrastructure development. However, it continues to grapple with political instability, human rights issues, and the impact of climate change. The return of the Awami League to power in 2009 under Sheikh Hasina&#x27;s leadership saw economic progress but criticisms of authoritarianism. Bangladesh has played a critical role in addressing regional issues, including the Rohingya refugee crisis, which has strained its resources and highlighted its humanitarian commitments.

==Ancient period==
===Prehistoric Bengal===

It is believed that there were movements of Indo-Aryans, Dravidians and Mongoloids, including a people called Vanga, into Bengal. There is weak evidence for a prehistoric human presence in the region. There is scant evidence of a human presence during the Neolithic and Chalcolithic eras. This could be because of the shifts in the rivers&#x27; courses. The Bengali climate and geography is not suitable for tangible archaeological remains. Due to lack of stones the early humans in Bengal probably used materials such as wood and bamboo that could not survive in the environment. South Asian archaeologists have tended to focus on other parts of the subcontinent. Archaeologists interested in Bengal have focused on more recent history.

West Bengal holds the earliest evidence of settled agrarian societies.

Agricultural success gave ground in the fifth century BCE for a stationary culture and the emergence of towns, cross-sea trade and the earliest polities. Archaeologists have uncovered a port at Wari-Bateshwar which traded with Ancient Rome and Southeast Asia. The archaeologists have discovered coinage, pottery, iron artefacts, bricked road and a fort in Wari-Bateshwar. The findings suggest that the area was an important administrative hub, which had industries such as iron smelting and valuable stone beads. The site shows widespread use of clay. The clay, and bricks, were used to build walls. The most famous terracotta plaques, made by clay, are from Chandraketurgah and depicts deities and scenes of nature and ordinary life. The early coinage discovered in War-Bateshwar and Chandraketugarh (West Bengal, India) depict boats.

Archaeological excavations in Bangladesh revealed evidences of the Northern Black Polished Ware (NBPW or NBP) culture of the Indian Subcontinent (c. 700–200 BC), which was an Iron Age culture developed beginning around 700 BC and peaked from c. 500–300 BC, coinciding with the emergence of 16 great states or mahajanapadas in Northern India, and the subsequent rise of the Mauryan Empire.

Well developed towns had emerged by 300 BCE such as Tamralipti (present-day Tamluk, West Bengal, India), Mahasthan and Mainamati. Instead of the seaside, main towns sprang up by the riversides. Mahasthan contains the earliest piece of writing in Bangladesh, a stone inscription. It indicates that the site was an important town in the Maurya empire. Mahasthan is believed to have then been a provincial centre. The inscription, in Prakrit, apparently contains a command to stock up supplies in case of an emergency. The inscription is called the Mahasthan Brahmi Inscription. Bengal was the eastern frontier of the Mauryan empire. Western Bengal with its port of Tamralipti achieved importance under the Mauryas.

A prominent view in scholarship is that the Mauryan and Gupta empires exercised authority over most parts of the Bengal delta. The incomplete evidence which exists suggests that Bengal&#x27;s western rather than eastern regions were parts of larger empires. The ancient zones in Bengal were the Bhagirathi-Hooghly basin, Harikela, Samatata, Vanga and Varendra. Vanga is believed to be central Bengal, Harikela and Samitata were apparently Bengal&#x27;s eastern zones and Varendra was northern Bengal. The names of sites indicate that Tibeto-Burman, Austro-Asiatic and Dravidian languages were spoken by the majority of people. Indo-European languages became prominent from 400 BCE.

The Vanga Kingdom was a powerful seafaring nation of Ancient Bengal. They had overseas trade relations with Java, Sumatra and Siam (modern day Thailand). According to Mahavamsa, the Vanga prince Vijaya Singha conquered Lanka (modern day Sri Lanka) in 544 BC and gave the name &quot;Sinhala&quot; to the country. Bengali people migrated to the Maritime Southeast Asia and Siam (in modern Thailand), establishing their own settlement there.

===Gangaridai/Nanda Empire===

Though north and west Bengal were part of the empire, southern Bengal thrived and became powerful with her overseas trades. In 326 BCE, with the invasion of Alexander the Great the region again came to prominence. The Greek and Latin historians suggested that Alexander the Great withdrew from India anticipating the valiant counter-attack of the Gangaridai empire that was located in the Bengal region. Alexander, after the meeting with his officer, Coenus, was convinced that it was better to return. Diodorus Siculus mentions Gangaridai to be the most powerful empire in India. The allied forces of the Nanda Empire/Gangaridai empire and Prasioi(region inside Nanda empire)were preparing a massive counter-attack against the forces of Alexander on the banks of the Ganges. Gangaridai, according to the Greek accounts, kept on flourishing at least up to the 1st century CE.
The Greeco-Roman sources description of Gangaridai matches with Nanda empire. 
One account of the origins of the Nanda&#x27;s, are them being represented as the lord of both &quot;Prasioi and the Gangaridai&quot; or of Gangaridai alone. The description of Prasioi was a general name for the people of Eastern India, so the specific mention of Gangaridai attaches significance. The importance of Gangaridai or the Vanga people (Lower Bengal) may be explained by the suggestion of the Nanda dynasty belonging to them.

==Early Middle Ages==
Bengal was left on its own after Mauryan power declined. Little is known of the period after that although parts of Bengal were probably under the Pataliputra-based Sunga dynasty. During this time Pundra was still a significant Buddhist location. Local rulers retained power while paying tribute to the Gupta Empire in the 300s and 400s. The Bengal delta became the kingdom of Samatata; its hub near the contemporary Chandpur. A Gupta inscription indicates that the Gupta empire possessed influence in Samatata without ruling it directly. Bengal remained a frontier despite its rare associations with the Indian heartland. Several dynasties changed during the next few centuries. While not much information is available about them, plates and other forms of evidence obtained from the Comilla district indicate that Gopachandra ruled the area in the early 500s. The Khargas became rulers in the next century. They were followed by the Deva dynasty, Harikela kingdom, Chandras and the Varmans. They were based in different sites of the Comilla district and Dhaka district&#x27;s Vikrampur. Around that time, Bengalis first ruled in Varendra. Gaur was ruled by Sasanka in the early 600s. He was based in Karnasuvarna in modern-day Murshidabad district. Contemporary Chinese reports and coinage suggest that he was a firm Shaivite who was vehemently opposed to Buddhism. Opposition to Buddhism and a commitment to Brahminism apparently continued under the Sura dynasty, founded by Adisura around 700 CE. Around the middle of the eighth century a firm Buddhist, Gopala, assumed power in Bengal, possibly supported by Buddhist chiefs who were opposed to the effects of the Suras and Sasanka&#x27;s faithful Brahmanism. During this time, the kingdoms of the Bay of Bengal were trading with the nations of nearby South Asia and Southeast Asia, thereby exporting Buddhism into Sri Lanka to the south and both Hinduism and Buddhism into Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and the Philippines to the east.

=== Gauda Kingdom ===

By the 6th century, the Gupta Empire, which ruled over the northern Indian subcontinent had largely broken up. Eastern Bengal splintered into the kingdoms of Vanga, Samatata and Harikela while the Gauda kings rose in the west with their capital at Karnasuvarna (near modern Murshidabad). Shashanka, a vassal of the last Gupta Emperor proclaimed independence and unified the smaller principalities of Bengal (Gaur, Vanga, Samatata). He vied for regional power with Harshavardhana in northern India after treacherously murdering Harsha&#x27;s elder brother Rajyavardhana. Harsha&#x27;s continuous pressure led to the gradual weakening of the Gauda kingdom founded by Shashanka and finally ended with his death. With the overthrow of Manava (his son), Bengal descended into a period marked by disunity and intrude once more.

===Pala Empire===
The Pala Empire ruled Bengal until the middle of the twelfth century, expanded Bengali power to its farthest extent and supported Buddhism. It was the first independent Buddhist dynasty of Bengal. The name &quot;Pala&quot; ( &quot;pal&quot;) means &quot;protector&quot; and was used as an ending to the names of all Pala monarchs. The Palas were followers of the Mahayana and Tantric schools of Buddhism. Gopala was the first ruler from the dynasty. He came to power in 750 in Gaur, after being elected by a group of feudal chiefs. He reigned from 750 to 770 and consolidated his position by extending his control over all of Bengal. He was succeeded by Dharmapala. The Palas promoted Buddhism and opposed Brahmanism. They provided support to Buddhist universities in Vikramashila and Nalanda. During the Pala dynasty the Vajrayana was developed in Bengal and introduced to Tibet. The Palas patronised the arts.

The empire reached its peak under Dharmapala and Devapala. Dharmapala extended the empire into the northern parts of the Indian Subcontinent. This triggered once more for the control of the subcontinent. Devapala, successor of Dharmapala, expanded the empire considerably. The Pala inscriptions credit him with extensive conquests in hyperbolic language. The Badal pillar inscription of his successor Narayana Pala states that he became the suzerain monarch or Chakravarti of the whole tract of Northern India bounded by the Vindhyas and the Himalayas. It also states that his empire extended up to the two oceans (presumably the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal). It also claims that Devpala defeated Utkala (present-day Orissa), the Hunas, the Dravidas, the Kamarupa (present-day Assam), the Kambojas and the Gurjaras. Historian B. P. Sinha wrote that these claims about Devapala&#x27;s victories are exaggerated, but cannot be dismissed entirely. Besides, the neighbouring kingdoms of Rashtrakutas and the Gurjara-Pratiharas were weak at the time, which might have helped him extend his empire. Devapala is also believed to have led an army up to the Indus river in Punjab. Devapala shifted the capital from Monghyr to Pataliputra. Although they were Bengali the dynasty considered the Ganges valley as the centre of its power.
The dynasty&#x27;s power declined after Devapala&#x27;s death. During the rule of Mahipala I the South Indian Chola dynasty challenged the Palas.

During the later part of Pala rule, Rajendra Chola I of the Chola Empire frequently invaded Bengal from 1021 to 1023 to get Ganges water and in the process, succeeded in humbling the rulers and acquiring considerable booty. The rulers of Bengal who were defeated by Rajendra Chola were Dharmapal, Ranasur and Govindachandra of the Candra Dynasty who might have been feudatories under Mahipala of the Pala Dynasty. The invasion by the south Indian ruler Vikramaditya VI of the Western Chalukya Empire brought his countrymen from Karnataka into Bengal which explains the southern origin of the Sena Dynasty. Around the 1150s the Palas lost power to the Senas.

===Chandra dynasty===

The Chandra dynasty were a family who ruled over the kingdom of Harikela in eastern Bengal (comprising the ancient lands of Harikela, Vanga and Samatata) for roughly a century and a half from the beginning of the 10th century CE. Their empire also encompassed Vanga and Samatata, with Srichandra expanding his domain to include parts of Kamarupa. Their empire was ruled from their capital, Vikrampur (modern Munshiganj) and was powerful enough to militarily withstand the Pala Empire to the north-west. The last ruler of the Chandra Dynasty, Govindachandra, was defeated by the south Indian Emperor Rajendra Chola I of the Chola dynasty in the 11th century.

===Sena dynasty===

The Sena dynasty started around 1095 but only finally defeated the Palas around 1150. They apparently originated in Karnataka. Vijayasena took control of northern and western Bengal, removed the Palas from the former regions and based his rule in Nadia. The greatest ruler from the dynasty was Lakshmanasena. He established the dynasty&#x27;s writ in Orissa and Benares. In 1202, Ikhtiyarrudin Muhammad Bakhtiyar Khalji took Nadia from the Senas, already having taken Bihar. Lakshmanasena left for Vikrampur in southeastern Bengal. His sons inherited the dynasty, which came to an end around 1245 because of feudal revolts and Muslim pressure.

The dynasty has been staunchly Brahminist and had attempted to restore Brahminism to Bengal. They also established the system of &quot;kulin&quot;ism in Bengal; through which higher caste males could take lower caste brides and enhance the status of these women&#x27;s children. Some postulate that the dynasty&#x27;s suppression of Buddhism became a cause for the conversions to Islam, especially in eastern Bengal.

===Deva Kingdom===

The Deva Kingdom was a Hindu dynasty of medieval Bengal that ruled over eastern Bengal after the collapse Sena Empire. The capital of this dynasty was Bikrampur in present-day Munshiganj District of Bangladesh. The inscriptional evidences show that his kingdom was extended up to the present-day Comilla-Noakhali-Chittagong region. A later ruler of the dynasty &quot;Ariraja-Danuja-Madhava&quot; Dasharathadeva extended his kingdom to cover much of East Bengal.

==Late Middle Ages==

Muslim rule in the region was inaugurated with the taking of Nadia in 1202 (Ghurid invasion of Bengal). Initially, Bengal was administered by the Delhi Sultanate&#x27;s governors, then by independent sultanates and then was under the rule of the Mughal empire. While Muslims had advanced into Sindh in the 700s, it was in Afghanistan that the ultimate Muslim conquest of South Asia originated from, starting with the raids by Mahmud of Ghazni in the early 11th century. The Afghanistan-based Ghurids replaced the Ghaznavids and they started expanded into the Ganges region. As part of this eastward expansion Ikhtiyaruddin Muhammad Bakhtiar Khan defeated the Palas in Bihar and in 1202 was victorious over the Senas in Nadia. In 1206, the Delhi Sultanate was created. It was not a true dynasty but the rulers was known as Mamluk. The Sultanate continued till 1290. The conquest of Nadia did not entail swift conversions to Islam. The authority of the Senas persisted in Vikrampur till 1245 and a large part of eastern Bangladesh had neither been conquered nor converted.

Four dynasties based in Delhi succeeded the Slave dynasty. The Khaljis ruled from 1290 to 1320. The Tughluq dynasty&#x27;s rule lasted until 1413. Sayyid rule ran from 1414 to 1451. The Lodhi dynasty ruled in the 1451-1526 period. But the writ of the Delhi Sultanate had been weak in its outer regions and Bengal like other similar areas turned into an independent region. Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah became the ruler of independent Bengal in 1342 and his dynasty ruled until 1486, barring a short interlude. He had come to power after a Bengali revolt against the Tughluq dynasty&#x27;s governor. Shamsuddin drove up the Ganges to contest Tughluq rule. The Tughluqs, in return drove Ilyas Shah out of Pandua into eastern Bengal. Shamsuddin reclaimed Pandua and continued ruling Bengal. Shamsuddin&#x27;s heir repelled Tughluq incursions and like his predecessor expanded the dynasty&#x27;s authority into Bihar.

The dynasty constructed grand buildings in Pandua. They built India&#x27;s biggest mosque, the Adina mosque. Richard Eaton cites diplomatic accounts about the grandeur of Pandua&#x27;s buildings. Eaton observes the influence of both Islamic and pre-Islamic Persian courts. Hindu landlords possessed a large quantity of land even under the Muslim rulers. The Hindu domination was opposed by the Muslim leadership, exemplified by the Faraizi campaign and leaders like Titu Mir in the 1800s.

When the dynasty&#x27;s third ruler died in 1410 there was a conflict over the throne. Raja Ganesh, who was a Hindu feudal, used the successorship conflict to seize control of Bengal. He repelled an incursion on Bengal by the Jaunpur sultanate in north India. His son, Jalaluddin Muhammad Shah who embraced Islam, and then his grandson ruled after him. In 1433, the latter was assassinated and the Ilyas Shahi dynasty was restored.

The dynasty began importing Abyssinian slaves. This population became more significant. They became so important that in 1486 an Abyssinian, Barbak Shahzada, seized power from Jalaluddin Fateh Shah. Barbak Shahzada&#x27;s dynasty was short, lasting for the next seven years. The last Abyssinian ruler, Shamsuddin Muzaffar Shah, lost power to the Arab principal minister, Alauddin Husain.

The initiation in 1493 of the Hussain Shahi dynasty brought a period which has been considered Bengal&#x27;s golden age. The government was genuinely Bengali and while land ownership remained concentrated in Hindu hands, both religious groups had pivotal roles in the government. The sultanate expanded to acquire Cooch Behar and Kamrup. The Sultanate also dominated Orissa, Tripura and the Arakan region.

Babur defeated the Lodhis at Panipat in 1526 and the Mughals established India&#x27;s greatest state since the time of the Mauryas. But during Sheh Shah Suri&#x27;s rebellion against the second Mughal ruler Humayan, he triumphed over the Hussain Shahi dynasty&#x27;s Ghiyasuddin Mahmud Shah in 1538, thus bringing an end to the independent status of Bengal. For a short time Humayun ruled Gaur.

Bengal along with other parts of eastern India was ruled by Sheh Shah Suri. He implemented many reforms such as introducing parganas. These were land survey based local tax units. He is most famous for designing the Grand Trunk Road between Chittagong and Punjab. Humayun retook Delhi in 1556. But the Suris continued ruling Bengal until 1564 when they were replaced by the Karrani dynasty. Like the Suris, they were not native to Bengal. They had been raiders whom the Mughal armies had driven eastwards.

===Turko Afghan rule===
In 1204 CE, the first Muslim ruler, Muhammad Bakhtiyar Khilji, a Turko Afghan, captured Nadia and established Muslim rule. The political influence of Islam began to spread across Bengal with the conquest of Nadia, the capital city of the Sen ruler Lakshmana.

After capturing Nadia, Bakhtiyar advanced towards Gauda (Lakhnuti), another major city of the Sena kingdom, conquered it and made it his capital in 1205. In the following year, Bakhtiyar set out on an expedition to capture Tibet, but this attempt failed and he had to return to Bengal in poor health and with a reduced army. Shortly afterwards, he was killed by one of his commanders, Ali Mardan Khilji. In the meantime, Lakshman Sen and his two sons retreated to Vikramapur (in the present-day Munshiganj District in Bangladesh), where their diminished dominion lasted until the late 13th century.

Khiljis were Turko Afghan. The period after Bakhtiar Khilji&#x27;s death in 1207 involved infighting among the Khiljis. This was typical of a pattern of succession struggles and intra-sultanate intrigues during later Turko Afghan regimes. In this case, Ghiyasuddin Iwaj Khilji prevailed and extended the Sultan&#x27;s domain south to Jessore and made the eastern Bang province a tributary. The capital was established at Lakhnauti on the Ganges near the older Bengal capital of Gaur. He managed to make Kamarupa and Trihut pay tribute to him. But he was later defeated by Shams-ud-Din Iltutmish.

=== Sonargaon Sultanate ===

Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah ruled an independent kingdom in areas that lie within modern-day eastern and south-eastern Bangladesh from 1338 to 1349. He was the first Muslim ruler to conquer Chittagong, the principal port in the Bengal region, in 1340. Fakhruddin&#x27;s capital was Sonargaon which emerged as the principal city of the region and as the capital of an independent sultanate during his reign.

==Bengal Sultanate==

===Ilyas Shahi dynasty===

Shamsuddin Iliyas Shah founded an independent dynasty that lasted from 1342 to 1487. The dynasty successfully repulsed attempts by Delhi to conquer them. They continued to extend their territory across what is modern-day Bengal, reaching to Khulna in the south and Sylhet in the east. The sultans developed civic institutions and became more responsive and &quot;native&quot; in their outlook and became increasingly independent from Delhi influence and control. Considerable architectural projects were completed including the massive Adina Mosque and the Darasbari Mosque which still stands in Bangladesh near the border with India. The Sultans of Bengal were patrons of Bengali literature and began a process in which Bengali culture and identity would flourish. During the rule of this dynasty, Bengal, for the first time, achieved a separate identity. Indeed, Ilyas Shah named this province as &#x27;Bangalah&#x27; and united different parts into a single, unified territory. The Ilyas Shahi Dynasty was interrupted by an uprising by the Hindus under Raja Ganesha. However, the Ilyas Shahi dynasty was restored by Nasiruddin Mahmud Shah. The Moroccan traveller and scholar, Ibn Battuta, arrived in Bengal during Nasiruddin Mahmud Shah&#x27;s reign. In his account of Bengal in his Rihla, he depicts a land full of abundance. Bengal was a progressive state with commercial links to China, Java and Ceylon. Merchant ships arrived and departed from various destinations.

=== Ganesha dynasty ===

The Ganesha dynasty began with Raja Ganesha in 1414. After Raja Ganesha seized control over Bengal, he faced an imminent threat of invasion. Ganesha appealed to a powerful Muslim holy man named Qutb al Alam to stop the threat. The saint agreed on the condition that Raja Ganesha&#x27;s son, Jadu, would convert to Islam and rule in his place. Raja Ganesha agreed and Jadu started ruling Bengal as Jalaluddin Muhammad Shah in 1415. Qutb al Alam died in 1416 and Raja Ganesha was emboldened to depose his son and return to the throne as Danujamarddana Deva. Jalaluddin was reconverted to Hinduism by the &quot;Golden Cow&quot; ritual. After the death of his father Jalaluddin once again converted to Islam and started ruling again. Jalaluddin&#x27;s son, Shamsuddin Ahmad Shah ruled for only 3 years due to chaos and anarchy. The dynasty is known for its liberal policies as well as its focus on justice and charity.

===Hussain Shahi dynasty===
The Habshi rule gave way to the Hussain Shahi dynasty which ruled from 1494 to 1538. Alauddin Hussain Shah is considered one of the greatest sultans of Bengal, for his encouragement of a cultural renaissance. He extended the sultanate to the port of Chittagong, which witnessed the arrival of the first Portuguese merchants. Nasiruddin Nasrat Shah gave refuge to the Afghan lords during the invasion of Babur though he remained neutral. Later, Nasrat Shah made a treaty with Babur which saved Bengal from a Mughal invasion. The last sultan of the dynasty, who continued to rule from Gaur, had to contend with rising Afghan activity on his north-western border. Eventually, the Afghans broke through and sacked the capital in 1538 where they remained for several decades until the arrival of the Mughals.

==Mughal period==

A major Mughal victory in 1576, in which Akbar took Bengal, was followed by four decades of efforts dedicated to vanquishing rebels in the Bhati region. The initial victory was accompanied by destruction and severe violence. The Mughals were opposed by the Bengalis. Akbar appointed a Hindu servant Raja Man Singh as Bengal&#x27;s governor. Singh based his rule at Rajmahal, Bihar, thinking that he could administer the region beyond.

The province of Bengal was especially prosperous from the time of its takeover by the Mughals in 1590 until the British East India Company seized control in 1757. It was the Mughal Empire&#x27;s wealthiest province. Domestically, much of India depended on Bengali products such as rice, silks and cotton textiles.

The Bara Bhuiyan, or twelve landlords, resisted the Mughal attempts to annex Bengal. The landlords were mainly Afghan and Hindu aristocrats. Pratapaditya was one of the Hindu landlords among these leaders. They were led by the landlord Isa Khan, who was based in Sonargaon. Isa Khan is known for his resistance to outside rule, particularly from Delhi and Urdu-speaking soldiers. His actions were to serve as an inspiration in 1971.

The landlords spearheaded an extensive revolt. Both the Mughals and rebels committed atrocities such as massacre, rape and looting. They defeated the Mughal navy in 1584. After this, battles continued on land. In 1597, they again defeated the Mughal navy, however, Isa Khan died in the following year. The struggle against Mughal rule weakened. Man Singh, realising the strategic value of controlling Dhaka to administer eastern Bengal, created a military base there. He also realised its utility in controlling Arakanese and Portuguese influence.

This base became more important in the late 1500s when the Ganges started to change its course. The change in the river&#x27;s course allowed the clearing and harvesting of more land. The waterways of Dhaka allowed easy movement of soldiers to various parts of Bengal. In 1610, Dhaka became a provincial capital. By then several of the internationally known muslin looms had shifted to Dhaka from Sonargaon. Dhaka flourished both as an administrative and handloom center.

The Bengal region was historically an international hub of various activities. Merchants, pilgrims and voyagers traversed Bengal to travel to Nepal and Tibet. Bengal&#x27;s waterways were a place where various peoples interacted. In 1346, the Moroccan voyager Ibn Battuta followed the trade route through Sri Lanka when he traveled to Bengal from the Maldives in 1346. In the 1300s Bengal traded its paddy for cowries from the Maldives. Evidence from the 1500s demonstrates that rice grown in Bengal was eaten as far as eastern Indonesia and Goa. Bengal also exported other materials and food products at the same time. Bengali traders dominated trade with southeast Asia. Chinese merchants in the 1400s and 1500s introduced gold, satin, silks, silver and porcelain. A European traveler in 1586 reported that the quality of the cotton textiles produced in Sonargaon was better than in other parts of the subcontinent. These fabrics were sent to international markets.

According to economic historian Indrajit Ray, Bengal was globally prominent in industries such as textile manufacturing and shipbuilding.

Dhaka was renamed to Jahangirnagar by the governor for Jahangir, the emperor. The governor managed to defeat and make the chieftains accept Mughal authority. During Mughal rule, Dhaka&#x27;s architecture was enriched. In 1678, Aurangzeb&#x27;s son started the construction of the Lalbagh fort, which encloses the tomb of Nur Jahan&#x27;s grand niece. Surviving Mughal buildings are the Bara Katra, Chhota Katra and the Husaini Dalan (a Shi&#x27;a mosque).

During the Mughal rule many civilian and military administrators entered Bengal. A lot of these officials received land grants and became domiciled. Despite the Hindu domination of the landed class, Muslims formed a crucial section and maintained possession of significant land grants until the land reforms after 1947.

The form of Bengal&#x27;s government had been less rigid than the ones in other parts of the Mughal empire. The Mughals asserted a centralised form of rule on top of the differing local administrative structures. Consequently, local rulers administered control in the rural areas. These &quot;zamindars&quot; were autonomous and were a secular elite, differentiated from the general populace by their authority. Surnames in modern Bangladesh such as Chowdhury, Khan, Sarkar and Talukdar originate from the names of ranks in the Mughal elite. This elite functioned alongside the Mughal officials. The latter&#x27;s duty was to keep charge over tax collection. The diwan was the most important tax officer and was directly selected by the Mughal ruler. Each Mughal conquest in Bengal was accompanied with the establishment of a thana (garrison) for the purpose of maintaining peace. After that the territory would be merged into the empire&#x27;s administrative system. In the empire&#x27;s system each province would comprise several regions, called &quot;sarkar&quot;, which in turn would be made up of subdivisions called parganas. The lowest tier in the system was the mouza (revenue village).

The agricultural borderland during Mughal rule in the 1500s started moving towards the eastern portion of Bengal. The region&#x27;s agricultural productivity increased. To increase their revenues the Mughal administration promoted forest clearing and wet-rice farming. The officials gave land grants to entrepreneurs who were willing to give taxes in exchange for rights over the lands. The colonists required labour and this was advantageous for the religious elite. Most communities in the region were boatmen and fishermen on the margins of society who were nominally Hindu but in reality had very weak ties to Hinduism. These were the labourers who cultivated the rice and would make up the bulk of peasantry in eastern Bengal. Land grants would require the construction of a shrine and the colonists would gather settlers around these shrines. Society was ordered around the shrine. New communities would engage in forest clearing and cultivation. Locals either merged with these communities or moved away while keeping trading contacts with the rice cultivators.

The Mughal government had no attitude of encouraging Islam in the region and Hindus made up many of these pioneers who had government backing. But most of the pioneers were Muslim. A large number of them were pirs. Richard Eaton asserts that Islam was understood to be linked with the government-accepted acquisition of land in eastern Bengal which had only weak connections with Hindu civilization. The traditions and rituals of eastern Bengal, mosques and shrines blended together. Islam spread in Bengal because of its localisation. Islamic agencies were inserted into the contemporary cosmology, were then associated with local divinities and eventually the Islamic agencies took over the local culture.

===Two great Mughal Subahdars===
==== Islam Khan ====

Islam Khan was appointed the Subahdar of Bengal in 1608 by Mughal emperor Jahangir. He ruled Bengal from his capital Dhaka which he renamed as Jahangir Nagar. His major task was to subdue the rebellious Rajas, Bara-Bhuiyans, Zamindars and Afghan chiefs. He fought with Musa Khan, the leader of Bara-Bhuiyans, and by the end of 1611 Musa Khan was subdued. Islam Khan also defeated Pratapaditya of Jessore, Ram Chandra of Bakla and Ananta Manikya of Bhulua. He annexed the kingdom of Kamrup and subdued Koch Bihar and Kachhar, thus taking total control over entire Bengal other than Chittagong.

====Shaista Khan====

Shaista Khan was appointed the Subahdar (Governor) of Bengal upon the death of Mir Jumla II in 1663. He was the longest-serving governor of Bengal. He ruled the province from his administrative headquarters in Dhaka for almost 24 years from 1664 to 1688.

Shaista Khan&#x27;s great fame in Bengal chiefly rests on his re-conquest of Chittagong. Though Chittagong came under the control of Bengal during Sultan Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah&#x27;s reign in the mid-14th century, it subsequently fell into the hands of Arakanese rulers. Shaista Khan gave priority to recapturing Chittagong, and was able to do so in January 1666. The conquest brought a relief and peace to the people of Chittagong as pirates had caused a great distress to the local population.

==Nawabs of Bengal==


Mughal appointments of agents in Bengal ceased by 1713 because the empire was weakening. In 1715, the capital was shifted to Murshidabad. This resulted in Dhaka&#x27;s decline. This transfer happened when the province&#x27;s main tax officer, Murshid Quli Khan, who had transferred his office to Maksudabad (renamed Murshidabad after him) became governor. Murshidabad was located at a more central position in Bengal, whose administrative limits at the time also included Bihar and Orissa. In addition to changing the capital, Murshid Quli Khan modified the tax collection system.

Murshid Quli Khan wanted to create a line of governing nawabs like the contemporary governors of Oudh. He was succeeded by family members. However, Alivardi Khan established another nawab family. He collaborated with Jagat Seth to defeat the governor and secured the post of governor from the Mughal ruler through bribery. He also became diwan of Orissa. However, he faced problems from Maratha raiders present in Orissa.

Nawab Alivardi Khan repulsed the first three Maratha invasions of Bengal. But they invaded again, and in 1751, Alivardi Khan signed a peace treaty with the Marathas. He ceded the province of Orissa to the Maratha Empire and agreed to pay twelve lakhs of rupees annually as &quot;chauth&quot; (tribute). 
His maternal grandson Sirajuddaulah succeeded him when he died in 1756. Sirajuddaulah tried to stop uncertified trade in Bengal. Because of this he clashed with British merchants and was eventually defeated by 1757 in Polashi. The British governed Bengal and large areas to its west by 1764.

==Colonial era==
=== Europeans in Bengal ===

In 1517, the Portuguese installed an outpost at Chittagong. A Portuguese settlement was also created at Satgaon. In 1579, with a land grant from Akbar, the Portuguese created another station at Hooghly. The Portuguese traded and proselytised until 1632 when they were expelled by Shah Jahan, who allowed them to re-enter in the next year. The hostility towards them was a consequence of piracy by the Portuguese and Maghs. By 1651 the British obtained control of Hooghly. The Portuguese presence came to an end.

The Portuguese had traded through the government but other European powers traded through companies instead. A Dutch station was established at Chinsura but the Dutch directed their interests to Ceylon and Southeast Asia. In 1825, they exchanged Chinsura with the British for posts in Southeast Asia. In 1755, a Danish station was established at Serampore. In 1845, the British bought it. The French Company lasted longer. Their position was second to the British. The latter overtook the French. The first British factory was established in 1608 in western India. Soon afterwards the British entered Bengal.

The British founded factories in Balasore, Cossimbazar, Dhaka, Hooghly and Patna. In 1681, a &quot;presidency&quot; was established. In 1690, Job Charnock established Calcutta. During this time the British came into conflict with Bengal&#x27;s Mughal governors. In 1652, the British had been exempted from customs payments in exchange for giving yearly sums to the nawab. But the nawab foisted fees upon them, which the British opposed. The British met the nawab Shaista Khan in Dhaka in 1652 and secured the exemption again.

British trading activities expanded during Shaista Khan&#x27;s administration. Alivardi Khan disliked the British and French plans to secure their possessions. Alivardi Khan disputed the British application of Emperor Fakukhsiyar&#x27;s order which had allowed the British unfettered trading privileges in the Mughal empire, as their tax exemptions meant lower revenues for Alivardi Khan.

Alivardi&#x27;s successor Sirajuddaulah set about eliminating the foreign presence. In 1756, he seized Calcutta and incarcerated the resident British population. Robert Clive and his troops took Calcutta back in January 1757. Clive compelled Sirajuddaulah to assent to a treaty which would restore Emperor Fakukhsiyar&#x27;s order allowing the British to trade unrestricted. Clive then conspired with Sirajuddaulah&#x27;s relative, Mir Jafar, and obtained the support of a major banker, Jagat Seth. Robert Clive and Sirajuddaulah&#x27;s troops battled each other at Plassey in June 1757. Mir Jafar abandoned the nawab during the battle, who suffered defeat and was killed. Many historians see this battle as the start of British colonialism in the subcontinent which would last until 1947.

After their triumph at Plassey the British transformed Bengal into the center of their growing Indian colony. The British could fully obtain financial authority in Bengal if the diwani was given to the East India Company in place of the Nawab. When Mir Jafar died in 1765 the Emperor Shah Alam implemented that transfer. This guaranteed British authority in the province. while a semi-feudal association was maintained with the Mughal empire. The diwani was used with the approval of the Mughal ruler. While the British East India Company was nominally a diwan, it was practically independent of the Mughals.

Indian nationalist historiography pinpoints the battle in Plassey as the start of a foreign and exploitative colonialism which ended in 1947. But the Bangladeshi perspective is that the people of Bengal had been used to fleecing administrations run by foreigners before the rise of the British authority. Bangladeshi historians also contend that colonialism persisted during the post-colonial period when the region was included in Pakistan. The Battle of Plassey did not mark an end to native rule in Bengal. It marked an end to the Mughal system.

=== British rule ===

The British goal was to increase the productivity of the Bengali economy. They experimented on Bengal&#x27;s administration and economy. The results of some of the experiments were not always successful. The increased taxation in Bengal&#x27;s unstable climate was a calamity. The taxation was not eased even during the drought and floods of 1769–1770. Along with unmonitored exploitation this caused a severe famine, in which it is believed ten million residents of Bengal died.

The Mughal State was disintegrated, causing the principal governor of Bengal to become the &quot;de facto&quot; ruler. After a replacement was sought by the British East India Company, in the mid-eighteenth century, the border of Cooch Behar was marked the northernmost limit of British Territory. Cooch Behar survived as a princely state till the end of the colonial rule, this was due to the indirect ruling of the British expedition in 1772, when it invaded and conquered the territory: the Maharaja and his administration were thence retained under the control of a British political agent.

Capital amassed from Bengal by the East India Company was invested in various industries such as textile manufacturing in Great Britain during the initial stages of the Industrial Revolution. Company policies in Bengal also led to the deindustrialization of the Bengali textile industry during Company rule.

The famine disaster made British officials look for viable methods of tapping into the colony&#x27;s resources. In 1790, the British introduced &quot;permanent settlement&quot; and made it law three years later. It was a framework for taxation on land. The system was the core of the colonial form of government. It was an agreement between the British and the zamindars who were effectively given landholdings in exchange for timely payment of taxes. The aim of the permanent settlement was that the zamindars would eventually invest in the development of agriculture and improve the economy of Bengal. The aim did not materialise because the zamindars did not have state backing for agrarian growth and because of newfound ways of generating wealth. A multilayered form of landholdings developed, which benefited from the land&#x27;s revenue. This structure was most pronounced in the southern areas of modern Bangladesh. The permanent settlement scheme deprived peasants of any proprietary rights over the land.

While Muslims had comprised most of the landlord class during Mughal rule, Hindus became prominent during the colonial rule. While Muslim landlords and Hindu occupants did exist, eastern Bengal witnessed an amalgamation of religion with class, with Hindu landlords presiding over mainly Muslim peasants. Hindu landlords were also prominent in western Bengal, but most peasants there were Hindus. This factor would become politically important by the end of the colonial rule.

Another change during British rule was the system of cash cropping. During colonial rule cash cropping was organised and produced for international markets. It was significant because of the links it created between the Bengali countryside&#x27;s economy with markets in Asia and Europe. Because of cash cropping the eastern region of modern Bangladesh emerged as the centre for jute cultivation. The western portion of modern Bangladesh produced silk and sugar. The northern areas produced tobacco. Crops were associated with specific types of land organisation. Peasantry in the eastern areas were compelled by financial needs towards market production. The countryside&#x27;s elite in the western and northern areas were protected from the immediate impact of market factors because they provided agrarian credit.

The British abandoned the former official language, Persian, in the 1830s and English medium educational institutions prepared a small part of the Bengali elite for jobs in the lower and middle tiers of government. Muslims took up the British improvements more slowly and lagged behind the Hindus educationally and commercially. Hindus comprised most of the college students. There were changes in health. The population growth during colonial rule was because people had more knowledge of hygiene and increased access to hospitals and medication. Transport became less reliant on the rivers with the construction of bridges and railways. Improvements in technology aided communications. Despite the government&#x27;s authoritarian form, the British tried out limited democratic systems in the later part of their rule due to political constraints.

A vital development under British rule was the rise of Calcutta to political and cultural prominence. It became colonial India&#x27;s capital. From 1757 to 1931 the Government of India was located in the city. Aspiring Bengalis migrated to Calcutta and obtained education and government employment. They are known to historians as the &quot;bhodrolok&quot; and high caste Hindus comprised most of them. Old centers such as Dhaka and Murshidabad declined while the trading class became concentrated in Calcutta.

The authoritarian regime functioning in alliance with the rural elite was susceptible to resistance and revolts happened frequently during the British rule. However, British rule in Bengal faced no threat by the second half of the 1800s. Bengal did not participate in the 1857 revolt which nearly ended British administration over large swathes of India. While there was a revolt by troops in Chittagong it dwindled because the landlords and peasants did not support the rebellion. Instead political grievances nor revolved around peasant rights and the commercialization of agriculture. The struggle was usually characterised by peasants and the middle class in opposition to the landlords, Western businessmen and the British administration. Many campaigns eventually ended the indigo industry. These were led by Wahhabi-influenced Islamic missionaries.

There had been prominent Hindu reformist movements in the early 1800s but no equivalent Muslim movement. A departure from this rule was the Faraizi movement which Haji Shariatullah started in 1828. It was a conservative Islamic movement grounded in Wahhabi ideology. It opposed the exaltation of saints and the repression by landlords and indigo traders. Shariatullah regarded India as a dar al-harb and thus believed that festivals and Friday prayers should cease. His heir, Dudu Mia, expanded the movement and claimed that the landlords did not possess permanent land rights. The Faraizi movement eventually ended after his demise.

Titu Mir led another Wahhabi campaign at the same time as the Faraizi movement. This movement was violent and opposed to the British presence. He died in 1831 during a confrontation with the British. Two years later his followers supported indigo farmers in a clash against the European planters and Hindu landlords. The protest was ultimately muted by 1860 when the peasants were granted more security. But not all rural rebellions were inspired by religion.

By the late 1800s parts of the elite and peasants became politically connected. This link was to become a crucial prototype of later campaigns in Bengal. The movement for self determination joined communist and nationalist movements, several of which were associated with all-India organisations.

===Bengal renaissance===

The Bengal renaissance refers to a social reform movement during the 19th and early 20th centuries in Bengal. Historian Nitish Sengupta describes it as taking place from Raja Ram Mohan Roy (1775–1833) through Rabindranath Tagore (1861–1941). This flowering in Bengal of religious and social reformers, scholars, and writers is described by historian David Kopf as &quot;one of the most creative periods in Indian history&quot;. Bangladeshi people are also very proud of their national poet Kazi Nazrul Islam. He is greatly remembered for his active voice against the oppression of the British rulers in the 20th century. He was imprisoned for writing his most famous poem of &quot;Bidrohee&quot;.

===Partition of Bengal (1905)===
The decision to effect the Partition of Bengal was announced in July 1905 by the Viceroy of India, Lord Curzon. The partition took place on 16 October 1905 and separated the largely Muslim eastern areas from the largely Hindu western areas. The former province of Bengal was divided into two new provinces &quot;Bengal&quot; (comprising western Bengal as well as the province of Bihar and Orissa) and Eastern Bengal and Assam with Dacca as the capital of the latter. Partition was promoted for administrative reasons: Bengal was geographically as large as France and had a significantly larger population. Curzon stated the eastern region was neglected and under-governed. By splitting the province, an improved administration could be established in the east, where subsequently, the population would benefit from new schools and employment opportunities. The Hindus of West Bengal who dominated Bengal&#x27;s business and rural life complained that the division would make them a minority in a province that would incorporate the province of Bihar and Orissa. Indians were outraged at what they recognised as a &quot;divide and rule&quot; policy.

The British regarded politically active Muslims as their supporters and the partition created a Muslim-dominated province. The Muslims universally reacted to the division with approval. Hindus denounced it. The partition highlighted the flaw in the political unity of the members of different religions in Bengal. Hindus and Muslims became distinct political groups. The predominantly Hindu bhodrolok led the anti-partition campaign and connected it with Hindu revivalism. They identified their homeland with Kali and selected Bande Mataram as anthem, which Muslims opposed. 

The British had promoted religion as a grounds for political identification. This had been difficult because Muslim unity had been hindered by significant internal differences. Most Bengali Muslims had been more a member of a religiously diverse Bengali community than a Muslim one, until the end of the 1800s. The Islam they practised had a significant foundation in the culture of the Bengali countryside. The elite Muslims identified themselves as ashraf (of foreign descent) and sought to copy North Indian Islamic culture and they saw themselves as the protectors of the true Islam in Bengal. To them, the Islam practised by the local peasants and craftsmen was contaminated by un-Islamic associations. While a large number of well-taught Muslims remained hesitant to accept the peasants who practised Bengali culture, the idea of a single Muslim community had come to exist just before partition. Economic issues increased Hindu-Muslim conflict in Bengal. The Muslim occupants began to demand their rights against the mainly Hindu landed and moneylending class. Middle class Muslims were unable to achieve their political goals because of the Hindu elite&#x27;s contemptuous attitude. Hindus and Muslims clashed in Comilla and Mymensingh in 1906 and 1907. The violence boosted religious identities and supported stereotyping. The Hindu elite regarded the countryside Muslims as British agents and inferior. To Muslims, the Hindus were cunning exploiters. The British reversed the partition in 1911 and declared they would move India&#x27;s capital to Delhi. New Delhi was inaugurated after two decades of construction in 1931.

==Partition of Bengal (1947)==
The Partition of Bengal in 1947, also known as the Second Partition of Bengal, part of the Partition of India, divided the British Indian Bengal Province along the Radcliffe Line between the Dominion of India and the Dominion of Pakistan. The Bengali Hindu-majority West Bengal became a state of India, and the Bengali Muslim-majority East Bengal (now Bangladesh) became a province of Pakistan.

== Pakistan period ==
Dhaka was the scene of a meeting of Muslim leaders in late 1906. They created a party for Muslims and declared its loyalty to the British, believing that the British could best protect the interests of Muslims. The late 1800s had seen the introduction of a system of elections based on limited franchise. The franchise was broadened later to increase the number of voters. However, universal franchise never materialized but the Muslim leadership did secure a separate voting system for Muslims in 1909. In the Lucknow Pact of 1916 the Muslim League and Indian National Congress accepted both separate electorates and provincial weightage for minorities. This reduced Bengali Muslim seats to forty percent in a Muslim majority province. The Muslim League regretted this decision.

Until 1920, the elections happened on a non-party basis. When party candidature was introduced the independent candidates maintained their importance. They won a third of seats in Bengal in the 1937 elections. Congress had been the main contestant for the general seats while the Muslim League vied with Fazlul Huq&#x27;s Krishak Praja Party (KPP) for the Muslim seats. The 1937 elections showed that no party could establish a ministry on its own. The Krishak Praja Party established a ministry with the Muslim League. The League could not win the three other Muslim provinces. Muslim prime ministers who were not members of the Congress agreed to support the League nationally even as they would keep control of their provincial matters. Fazlul Huq was a member of both the KPP and the Muslim League.

Congress ministries resigned to protest the declaration of war against Germany by viceroy, Lord Linlithgow, which he had done so without seeking the opinion of the provincial governments. The Muslim governments in Punjab, Bengal and Sindh did not resign. But a rift emerged between Fazlul Huq and the League when the viceroy created an advisory council, thus Huq&#x27;s ministry fell. According to Fazlul Huq, who resigned from the party, the Muslim League represented the interests of Muslim minority provinces more than the Muslim provinces. Fazlul Huq had advanced the Lahore Resolution in 1940, before resigning. The resolution had used the word &quot;states&quot; which indicated that a united Pakistan was not intended by this resolution.

Fazlul Huq recreated his government, this time without the Muslim League, in late 1941. Muslim League members led by Khawaja Nazimuddin and Suhrawardy campaigned against Fazlul Huq. Huq resigned in 1943 under pressure from the governor. On 24 April 1943 Nazimuddin inaugurated his own ministry at the governor&#x27;s invitation. Nazimuddin&#x27;s ministry was seen unfavourably by both the viceroy, Lord Wavell, and the governor. In particular, the Viceroy was disturbed by Nazimuddin&#x27;s response to the famine. Bengal experienced a great famine during the second world war. Approximately 3 and a half million died, mainly in the countryside of east Bengal.

The 1945-1946 elections restored a responsible provincial government. In the 1946 elections the politics was dominated by two organisations. They were the Indian National Congress and the Muslim League. The Congress was never able to win Bengal. The 1946 election was mainly contended over the question of creating a Muslim homeland: Pakistan. To many it represented a plebiscite. Bengal&#x27;s Muslim League ignored local matters in its campaign over partition. The KPP of Fazlul Huq was defeated. The Muslim League captured 110 out of the 117 seats for Muslims. Out of all Muslim provinces, Bengal was the biggest supporter of the Muslim League. The majority of East Bengal&#x27;s peasantry saw Pakistan as a good way of eliminating the feudal system. More than religious reasons, it had been because of economic factors they supported the Muslim League and Pakistan.

In 1946, the British government sent a mission, which ultimately advanced a scheme for a united India. The scheme encapsulated a loose union. A key point for Bengal was the maintenance of its unity under the scheme. The plan was agreed to by Jinnah but Nehru negated it. The Muslim League declared Direct Action Day on 16 August. Rioting followed in Calcutta and many died. The Bhodrolok decided that dividing Bengal would be better than accepting the rule of Muslims. The Muslim League did not want Bengal to be divided, and wanted it fully included in Pakistan. However, the Congress demanded the partition of the province. A few leaders of the Muslim League and Congress started advocating an independent United Bengal. While some politicians like Jinnah and Gandhi supported this idea, the national Congress rejected it in favour of partition. Eastern Bengal was to join Pakistan while Western Bengal would join India. Most of Assam&#x27;s mainly Muslim Sylhet district opted for Bengal in a plebiscite. The rest joined India with Assam.

===Bengali Language Movement===
A rift developed over the question of the national language. The Bengali Language Movement was a political effort in Bangladesh (then known as East Pakistan), advocating the recognition of the Bengali language as an official language of Pakistan. Such recognition would allow Bengali to be used in government affairs. It was led by Mufti Nadimul Quamar Ahmed.

When the state of Pakistan was formed in 1947, its two regions, East Pakistan (also called East Bengal) and West Pakistan, were split along cultural, geographical, and linguistic lines. On 23 February 1948, the Government of Pakistan ordained Urdu as the sole national language, sparking extensive protests among the Bengali-speaking majority of East Pakistan. Facing rising sectarian tensions and mass discontent with the new law, the government outlawed public meetings and rallies. The students of the University of Dhaka and other political activists defied the law and organised a protest on 21 February 1952. The movement reached its climax when police opened fire on the students that day. The deaths provoked widespread civil unrest led by the Awami Muslim League, later renamed the Awami League. After years of conflict, the central government relented and granted official status to the Bengali language in 1956. On 17 November 1999, UNESCO declared 21 February International Mother Language Day.

===Politics: 1954–1971===
The 1952 events caused the people of East Pakistan to abandon the Muslim League. In East Pakistan&#x27;s 1954 provincial elections, the League captured only 7 out of the 390 seats. The United Front won the elections. Until 1956, when the state declared that both Bengali and Urdu would be state languages, the language movement continued.

Great differences began developing between the two wings of Pakistan. While the west had a minority share of Pakistan&#x27;s total population, it had the largest share of revenue allocation, industrial development, agricultural reforms and civil development projects. Pakistan&#x27;s military and civil services were dominated by the Punjabis. Bengalis had been designated as a &quot;non-martial&quot; race by the British. Bengali participation in the military was very low. The British preferred to recruit Punjabi Muslims. The Punjabis dominated the army Pakistan inherited from British India&#x27;s military. Because Bengalis did not have a tradition of military service in their families, it was hard to recruit Bengali officers.

By the middle of the 1960s the East Pakistani elite concluded that the protection of their interests lay in autonomy. Abdul Momen Khan, who was governor in the 1962-1968 period, persecuted opposition and censored media. The regime became more unpopular during 1965, in the year of a war between India and Pakistan. Patriotism was high in East Pakistan during the war against India, but this was one of the last cases of national solidarity. East Pakistanis felt they had not been protected by the army from a possible Indian invasion.

In 1966, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the leader of the Awami League, proclaimed a 6-point plan titled &quot;Our Charter of Survival&quot; at a national conference of opposition political parties at Lahore, in which he demanded self-government and considerable political, economic and defence autonomy for East Pakistan in a Pakistani federation with a weak central government. This led to the historic Six point movement. The six points for a confederation were more extreme than previous calls for autonomy.

In early 1968, the Agartala Conspiracy Case was filed against Mujib with the allegation that the accused was conspiring for the secession of East Pakistan with Indian aid. The government expected this to harm Mujib&#x27;s popularity. But popular demonstrations made the government drop the case.

A West Pakistani movement aimed at removing Ayub Khan spread to East Pakistan where it adopted Bengali nationalist connotations. Ayub Khan resigned in March 1969 and his position was taken by General Yahya Khan. Yahya tried to reconcile the politicians. He announced that elections would be held in 1970 and political organisation would be permitted. He declared that his own position was temporary and that his job was to run elections for an assembly who would be tasked with creating a new constitution. He ended the One Unit Scheme and permitted popular representation, thereby allowing East Pakistan 162 of the 300 seats. Yahya created a legal framework order (LFO) as a guideline for the assembly. It stipulated principles such as the federalism of the state, paramountcy of Islam, provincial autonomy with sufficient provisions for the federal government to carry out its duties and defend the country&#x27;s integrity. The latter point clashed with Mujib&#x27;s points. Yahya highlighted that a constitution would not be accepted if it did not adhere to the LFO. Mujib&#x27;s party had drafted its own constitution based on six points.

===Independence movement===

The Awami League captured 160 of East Pakistan&#x27;s 162 seats in the 1970 Pakistani general election. Nurul Amin won one of the remaining seats. The Pakistan Peoples Party, led by Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, won a majority of seats in West Pakistan. Yahya organised talks between Bhutto and Mujib to arrive at a consensus on the form of the future constitution. Mujib asserted his majority and intent to base the constitution on his six points. Bhutto&#x27;s argument was that there were two majorities. The talks failed. Mujib rejected Bhutto&#x27;s demands for a share in power. Bhutto boycotted the National Assembly session of 3 March and intimidated other West Pakistani politicians from participating. Bhutto requested that Yahya delay the National Assembly session. On 1 March protests and confrontations broke out when Yahya did this.

Leftists in East Pakistan pressured Mujib to immediately declare independence. The West Pakistani government deployed soldiers to deter such a possibility. Mujib chose a middle-ground option by starting a non-cooperation movement. The movement was successful, freezing the machinery of government and effectively giving Mujib command over East Pakistan. Mujib announced that East Pakistanis would fight for independence but he simultaneously attempted to achieve a solution within a united Pakistan.

Yahya Khan and Bhutto went to Dhaka in March as a last attempt to obtain a resolution. However, the three parties could not arrive at a consensus on the transfer of power. On 23 March the Awami League told Yahya that he was to issue regional autonomy within 2 days or East Pakistan would turn lawless. While the talks were still underway, Yahya opted for a military solution for the problem. On the night of 25 March, Yahya secretly went back to West Pakistan and commanded the military to attack the core members of the autonomy campaign.

On 3 March, student leader Shahjahan Siraj read the &#x27;Sadhinotar Ishtehar&#x27; (Declaration of Independence) at Paltan Maidan in front of Mujib at a public gathering under the direction of the Swadhin Bangla Biplobi Parishad.

On 7 March, there was a public gathering in Suhrawardy Udyan to hear updates on the ongoing movement from Sheikh Mujib, the leader of the movement. Although he avoided directly referring to independence, as the talks were still underway, he warned his listeners to prepare for any imminent war. The speech is considered a key moment in the War of Liberation, and is remembered for the phrase,

:::&quot;Ebarer Shongram Amader Muktir Shongram, Ebarer Shongram Shadhinotar Shongram...&quot;
:::&quot;Our struggle this time is a struggle for our freedom, our struggle this time is a struggle for our independence...&quot;

===Formal Declaration of Independence===

In the early hours of 26 March 1971, a military crackdown by the Pakistan army began. Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was arrested and the political leaders dispersed, mostly fleeing to neighbouring India where they organised a provisional government. Before being arrested by the Pakistani Army, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman passed a hand written note which contained the Bangladesh&#x27;s Declaration of Independence. This note was widely circulated and transmitted by the then East Pakistan Rifles&#x27; wireless transmitter. The world press reports from late March 1971 also made sure that Bangladesh&#x27;s declaration of independence by Bangabandhu was widely reported throughout the world. Bengali Army officer Major Ziaur Rahman captured the Kalurghat Radio Station in Chittagong and read the declaration of independence of Bangladesh during the evening hours on 27 March.

&quot;This is Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra. I, Major Ziaur Rahman, at the direction of Bangobondhu Mujibur Rahman, hereby declare that the Independent People&#x27;s Republic of Bangladesh has been established. At his direction, I have taken command as the temporary Head of the Republic. In the name of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, I call upon all Bengalees to rise against the attack by the West Pakistani Army. We shall fight to the last to free our motherland. Victory is, by the Grace of Allah, ours. Joy Bangla.&quot;

The Provisional Government of the People&#x27;s Republic of Bangladesh was formed on 10 April in Meherpur (later renamed as Mujibnagar, a town adjacent to the Indian border). Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was announced to be the Head of the State. Tajuddin Ahmed became the Prime Minister, Syed Nazrul Islam became the acting president and Khondaker Mostaq Ahmed the Foreign Minister. There the war plan was sketched out with Bangladesh armed forces established and named &quot;Muktifoujo&quot;. Later these forces were named &quot;Muktibahini&quot; (freedom fighters). M. A. G. Osmani was appointed as the Chief of the Armed Forces. The training and most of the arms and ammunitions were arranged by the Meherpur government which was supported by India. As fighting grew between the Pakistan Army and the Bengali Mukti Bahini, an estimated ten million Bengalis, mainly Hindus, sought refuge in the Indian states of Assam, Tripura and West Bengal.

The freedom fighters were not able to beat the military. The Pakistani military created civilian and paramilitary groups to neutralise the freedom fighters. They recruited Biharis and Bengalis who did not support the separation of East Pakistan.

When it became clear that neither the Pakistani military nor the freedom fighters could win, India gradually started its invasion. It increased its efforts at the international level and increased its military activities in East Pakistan but did not declare war out of fear of the geopolitical aftermath. India had its opportunity to declare war when Pakistan attacked Indian airfields on 3 December. The Indian military and Mukti Bahini had the edge with better weaponry, complete air and naval supremacy and support from most locals. The Pakistani army killed and raped many Bengalis. Pro-Pakistan militias killed Bengali intellectuals near the war&#x27;s end. Pakistan&#x27;s administration collapsed and the army surrendered on 16 December.

===Pakistani capitulation and aftermath===
On 16 December 1971, Lt. Gen A. A. K. Niazi, CO of Pakistan Army forces located in East Pakistan, signed the Instrument of Surrender and the nation of &quot;Bangla Desh&quot; (&quot;Country of Bengal&quot;) was finally established the following day. At the time of surrender only a few countries had provided diplomatic recognition to the new nation. Over 90,000 Pakistani troops surrendered to the Indian forces making it the largest surrender since World War II.
The new country changed its name to Bangladesh on 11 January 1972 and became a parliamentary democracy under a constitution. Shortly thereafter on 19 March Bangladesh signed a friendship treaty with India. Bangladesh sought admission in the UN with most voting in its favour, but China vetoed this as Pakistan was its key ally. The United States, also a key ally of Pakistan, was one of the last nations to accord Bangladesh recognition. To ensure a smooth transition, in 1972 the Simla Agreement was signed between India and Pakistan. The treaty ensured that Pakistan recognised the independence of Bangladesh in exchange for the return of the Pakistani PoWs. India treated all the PoWs in strict accordance with the Geneva Convention, rule 1925. It released more than 93,000 Pakistani PoWs in five months.

Furthermore, as a gesture of goodwill, nearly 200 soldiers who were sought for war crimes by Bengalis were also pardoned by India. The accord also gave back more than of land that Indian troops had seized in West Pakistan during the war, though India retained a few strategic areas; most notably Kargil (which would in turn again be the focal point for a war between the two nations in 1999).

The real number of victims during the war is still not certain. and estimates of those killed range from Bangladeshi estimates of 3 million to Pakistani estimates of 26,000. According to one source 1.7 million died. A large number of women had been raped by Pakistani, Bengali and Biharis. The government conferred upon them an honorary title of birangina (&quot;brave heroines&quot;) but they suffered discrimination afterwards.

Besides the Pakistani prisoner of wars there were still collaborators in Bangladesh. In 1973, the Bangladeshi government announced an amnesty for them in exchange for Pakistani recognition. Demands that these be collaborators be tried resurfaced in the 1990s. There was also a large population of non-Bengali Muslims who mostly supported Pakistan. Bengali mobs, who identified them as &quot;Bihari&quot;, had killed them before the war and the Biharis had aided the Pakistani army during it. Thousands suffered a counter genocide and at least a million were made homeless.

== People&#x27;s Republic of Bangladesh ==
===Constitution, early democracy and socialism===
====Provisional Government====
The Provisional Government of Bangladesh was the country&#x27;s first government. The Provisional Government was formed in Mujibnagar on 17 April 1971. It issued the proclamation of independence and drafted an interim constitution, declaring &quot;Equality, Human Dignity and Social Justice&quot; as its fundamental principles. Its prime minister was Tajuddin Ahmad and military chief of staff was M A G Osmani. Other important cabinet members included Syed Nazrul Islam and Muhammad Mansur Ali. It included the newly formed Bangladesh Civil Service with defecting members of the Civil Service of Pakistan. It also had a prominent diplomatic corps, led by Abu Sayeed Chowdhury, Humayun Rashid Choudhury and Rehman Sobhan among others. The Bangladesh Forces included eleven sector commanders, among whom prominent figures included Ziaur Rahman, Khaled Mosharraf and K M Shafiullah.

Neighboring India provided diplomatic, economic and military support for the Provisional Government. The government&#x27;s capital in exile was Calcutta. The Indian military intervened in the final two weeks of the war in December 1971, ensuring the surrender of Pakistan.

====Sheikh Mujib administration====
The left-wing Awami League, which had won the 1970 election in Pakistan, formed the first post-independence government in Bangladesh. Awami League leader Sheikh Mujibur Rahman became the 2nd Prime Minister of Bangladesh on 12 January 1972 and is widely regarded as the nation&#x27;s independence hero and founding father. Nation-building under his regime was based on secular Bengali nationalist principles. The original Constitution of Bangladesh, drafted by Kamal Hossain, laid down the structure of a liberal democratic parliamentary republic with socialist influences in 1972.

On the international stage, Rahman and his Indian counterpart Indira Gandhi signed the 25-year Indo-Bangladeshi Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Peace. Bangladesh joined the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the Commonwealth of Nations and the Non-Aligned Movement. Rahman was invited to Washington DC and Moscow for talks with American and Soviet leaders. In the Delhi Agreement of 1974, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan pledged to work for regional stability and peace. The agreement paved the way for the return of interned Bengali officials and their families stranded in Pakistan, as well as the establishing of diplomatic relations between Dhaka and Islamabad. Japan became a major aid provider to the new country. Although Israel was one of early countries to recognise Bangladesh, the government in Dhaka strongly supported Egypt during the Arab-Israeli War of 1973. In return, Egypt gifted Bangladesh&#x27;s military with 44 tanks. The Soviet Union supplied several squadrons of MiG-21 planes.

Domestically, Rahman&#x27;s regime became increasingly authoritarian. There was an insurgency by the radical socialist Jashod, as well as agitation by pro-business and conservative forces, who felt the Awami League was unfairly taking exclusive credit for the liberation struggle. Rahman imposed a three-month state of emergency in 1974 to clean up mismanagement and corruption. He formed the para-military Jatiya Rakkhi Bahini, which was accused of human rights abuses. The Jatiya Rakkhi Bahini was also distrusted by many in the Bangladesh Army.

Economically, Rahman embarked on a huge nationalisation programme that failed to deliver the benefits intended. Soviet and Indian aid also failed to materialise in the desired quantity. The Bangladesh famine of 1974 was a major economic blow and humanitarian crisis.

In January 1975, Sheikh Mujib assumed the presidency with extraordinary powers, dissolved the parliamentary system, and established a one party state. Various political parties were merged into a sole legal national party, the Bangladesh Krishak Sramik Awami League, popularly known by its acronym BAKSAL. Most Bangladeshi newspapers were banned. The failure of Sheikh Mujib&#x27;s economic policies alienated the population. By 1975 journalist Anthony Mascarenhas described him as &quot;the most hated man in Bangladesh&quot;. On 15 August 1975, a group of junior army rebels assassinated Sheikh Mujib.

===Military coups and presidential regimes===
====First martial law and Zia administration====

The coup leaders installed Vice-President Khondaker Mostaq Ahmad as Sheikh Mujib&#x27;s immediate successor. A staunch conservative, Ahmad promulgated martial law and jailed many prominent confidantes of Sheikh Mujib, including Bangladesh&#x27;s first Prime Minister Tajuddin Ahmad. The jailed leaders were executed on 3 November 1975. Ahmad reshuffled the leadership of the Bangladesh Armed Forces, paving the way for the country&#x27;s future military dictatorship.

A counter-coup led by Brigadier General Khaled Mosharraf overthrew Ahmad from the presidency on 6 November 1975. The chief justice, Abu Sadat Mohammad Sayem, was installed as president. Mosharraf was killed by renegade socialist troops led by Abu Taher on 7 November 1975. The army chief, Lieutenant General Ziaur Rahman, emerged as the country&#x27;s most powerful figure in 1976.

Under the dramatically altered dispensation, Bangladesh feared an invasion from India backed by the Soviet Union, as the new government in Dhaka received recognition from Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and China. According to declassified US records, Bangladesh received assurances from the United States of Western support for its sovereignty and territorial integrity. The dispute over the sharing the water of the Ganges, due to India&#x27;s construction of the Farakka Barrage, led Bangladesh to seek the intervention of the United Nations in 1976. The dispute was addressed through a bilateral agreement in 1977.

Lt Gen Ziaur Rahman (popularly known as Zia) assumed the presidency from Justice Sayem on 21 April 1977. Zia formed the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP). Parliamentary elections were held in 1979, in which the BNP gained a landslide majority and the Awami League became the principal opposition party.

President Zia restored free markets, redefined socialism as &quot;economic and social justice&quot; in the constitution and crafted a foreign policy which emphasised solidarity with Muslim majority countries and regional co-operation in South Asia. Bangladesh achieved rapid economic and industrial growth under Zia&#x27;s presidency. The government built the country&#x27;s first export processing zones. It operated a popular food-for-work programme, reversed the collectivisation of farms and promoted private sector development.

Zia faced twenty one attempted coups against his government, including one by the air force. The final coup attempt resulted in his assassination in 1981: Zia was killed by troops loyal to Major General Abul Manzoor on 30 May 1981. The mutiny was later suppressed by army chief Lieutenant General Hussain Muhammad Ershad.

====Sattar administration====
Zia was succeeded by Vice-President Abdus Sattar. President Sattar received a popular mandate during the 1981 presidential election. The 1982 Bangladesh coup d&#x27;état deposed President Sattar and his civilian government.

====Second martial law and Ershad administration====
Sattar was replaced by the chief justice A. F. M. Ahsanuddin Chowdhury. Lieutenant General Hussain Muhammad Ershad proclaimed martial law and became the Chief Martial Law Administrator. He appointed himself as the President of the Council of Ministers and the naval and air force chiefs as deputy martial law administrators. Ershad geared Bangladesh&#x27;s foreign policy more towards the anti-Soviet bloc.

In 1983, Ershad assumed the presidency. Political repression was rife under Ershad&#x27;s martial law regime. However, the government implemented a series of administrative reforms, particularly in terms of devolution. The eighteen districts of the country were divided into sixty-four districts. The upazila system was also created.

Among his major actions were to privatise the largely state-owned economy (up to 70% of industry was in public ownership) and encourage private investment in heavy industries along with light manufacturing, raw materials, and newspapers. Foreign companies were invited to invest in Bangladeshi industry as well, and stiff protectionist measures were put in place to safeguard manufacturing. All political parties and trade unions were banned, with the death penalty to be administered for corruption and political agitation. Ershad&#x27;s takeover was generally viewed as a positive development, as Bangladesh was in a state of serious economic difficulty. The country was facing significant food shortages. The government also faced a severe budget deficit to the tune of 4 billion takas, and the IMF declared that it would not provide any more loans until Bangladesh paid down some of its existing debts. During most of 1984, Ershad sought the opposition parties&#x27; participation in local elections under martial law. The opposition&#x27;s refusal to participate, however, forced Ershad to abandon these plans. Ershad sought public support for his regime in a national referendum on his leadership in March 1985. He won overwhelmingly, although turnout was small. Two months later, Ershad held elections for local council chairmen. Pro-government candidates won a majority of the posts, setting in motion the President&#x27;s ambitious decentralisation programme.
Political life was further liberalised in early 1986, and additional political rights, including the right to hold large public rallies, were restored. At the same time, the Jatiya (National) Party, designed as Ershad&#x27;s political vehicle for the transition from martial law, was established. Despite a boycott by the BNP, led by President Zia&#x27;s widow, Begum Khaleda Zia, parliamentary elections were held on schedule in May 1986. The Jatiya Party won a modest majority of the 300 elected seats in the National Assembly. The participation of the Awami League—led by the late President Mujib&#x27;s daughter, Sheikh Hasina Wajed—lent the elections some credibility, despite widespread charges of voting irregularities.

Ershad resigned as Chief of Army Staff and retired from military service in preparation for the 1986 presidential elections, scheduled for October. Protesting that martial law was still in effect, both the BNP and the AL refused to put up opposing candidates. Ershad easily outdistanced the remaining candidates, taking 84% of the vote. Although Ershad&#x27;s government claimed a turnout of more than 50%, opposition leaders, and much of the foreign press, estimated a far lower percentage and alleged voting irregularities.

In November 1986, his government mustered the necessary two-thirds majority in the National Assembly to pass the seventh constitutional amendment bill, protecting Ershad and his regime from prosecution for actions taken under the years of military rule. Martial law was subsequently lifted on 11 November and the opposition parties took their elected seats in the National Assembly.

In July 1987, however, after the government hastily pushed through a controversial legislative bill to include military representation on local administrative councils, the opposition walked out of Parliament. Passage of the bill helped spark an opposition movement that quickly gathered momentum, uniting Bangladesh&#x27;s opposition parties for the first time. The government began to arrest scores of opposition activists under the country&#x27;s Special Powers Act of 1974. Despite these arrests, opposition parties continued to organise protest marches and nationwide strikes. In order to prevent a 72-hour strike planned for 29 November, Ershad declared a state of emergency on 27 November. Parliament was dissolved on 6 December, and fresh elections scheduled for March 1988.

All major opposition parties refused government overtures to participate in these polls, maintaining that the government was incapable of holding free and fair elections. Despite the opposition boycott, the parliamentary elections proceeded. The ruling Jatiya Party won 251 of the 300 seats. The Parliament, while still regarded by the opposition as an illegitimate body, held its sessions as scheduled, and passed numerous bills, including, in June 1988, the controversial eighth amendment to the Constitution, which made Islam the state religion, in contrast to the original secular nature of the Constitution.

By 1989, the local council elections were generally considered by international observers to have been less violent and more free and fair than previous elections. However, opposition to Ershad&#x27;s rule began to regain momentum, escalating by the end of 1990 in frequent general strikes, increased campus protests, public rallies, and a general disintegration of law and order.

====Chittagong Hill Tracts conflict====
The Chittagong Hill Tracts is the south-eastern mountainous frontier of Bangladesh with Myanmar and Northeast India. The area enjoyed autonomy under British Bengal. Its autonomous status was revoked by Pakistan, which built the controversial Kaptai Dam that displaced the area&#x27;s indigenous people. When Bangladesh became independent, the government of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman adopted a Bengali nationalist constitution, which denied recognition of the country&#x27;s ethnic minorities. Manabendra Narayan Larma, a member of parliament form the hill tracts, called for constitutional recognition of the indigenous people of the area. He gave a notable speech at the Constituent Assembly of Bangladesh demanding the use of &quot;Bangladeshi&quot; as the country&#x27;s nationality definition, instead of Bengali. During the 1970s and &#x27;80s, there were attempts by the government to settle with the Bengali people. These attempts were resisted by the hill tribes, who, with the latent support of neighbouring India, formed a guerrilla force called Shanti Bahini. As a result of the tribal resistance movement, successive governments turned the Hill Tracts into a militarised zone.

Following years of unrest, the Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord was signed in 1997 between the government of Bangladesh and the tribal leaders which granted a limited level of autonomy to the elected council of the three hill districts.

===Return of parliamentary republic and Battle of the Begums===
====First caretaker government (1990–1991)====

Ershad resigned under the pressure from the military and international community, as the pro-democracy movement spearheaded by Khaleda Zia and Sheikh Hasina engulfed the entire country and drew the participation of the middle and upper classes.

The chief justice, Shahabuddin Ahmed, was sworn in as acting president and formed the first caretaker government of Bangladesh. Ahmed placed Ershad under arrest and organised free and fair elections in 1991.

====Khaleda administration (1991–1996)====
The centre-right BNP won the 1991 Bangladeshi general election with 140 seats, but was short of an overall parliamentary majority. However, they formed a government with support from the Islamic party Jamaat-e-Islami, with Khaleda Zia, widow of Ziaur Rahman, obtaining the post of prime minister. Only four parties had more than 10 members elected to the 1991 Parliament: The BNP, led by Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia; the AL, led by Sheikh Hasina; the Jamaat-I-Islami (JI), led by Ghulam Azam; and the Jatiya Party (JP), led by acting chairman Mizanur Rahman Choudhury while its founder, former President Ershad, served out a prison sentence on corruption charges. Khaleda Zia became the first female prime minister in Bangladeshi history.

In September 1991 a constitutional referendum was held, which sought the transfer of executive powers from the President, which had been held by the Office since 1975, to the Prime Minister – making the President largely a ceremonial role. The vote was overwhelmingly in favour of the constitutional amendment and Bangladesh was restored to a Parliamentary democracy, as per its founding constitution. In October 1991, members of Parliament elected a new head of state, President Abdur Rahman Biswas. Finance Minister Saifur Rahman launched a series of liberal economic reforms, which set a precedent in South Asia and was seen as a model in India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.

In March 1994, controversy over a parliamentary by-election, which the opposition claimed the government had rigged, led to an indefinite boycott of Parliament by the entire opposition. The opposition also began a programme of repeated general strikes to press its demand that Khaleda Zia&#x27;s government resign and a caretaker government supervise a general election. Efforts to mediate the dispute, under the auspices of the Commonwealth Secretariat, failed. After another attempt at a negotiated settlement failed narrowly in late December 1994, the opposition resigned en masse from Parliament. The opposition then continued a campaign of marches, demonstrations, and strikes in an effort to force the government to resign. All major opposition parties, including Sheikh Hasina&#x27;s Awami League, pledged to boycott national elections scheduled for 15 February 1996.

In February, Khaleda Zia was re-elected by a landslide in voting boycotted and denounced as unfair by the three main opposition parties. This administration was short-lived however, only lasting 12 days and in March 1996, following escalating political turmoil, the sitting Parliament enacted a constitutional amendment to allow a neutral caretaker government to assume power and conduct new parliamentary elections in June 1996.

====Second caretaker government (1996)====
The chief justice Muhammad Habibur Rahman became the 1st Chief Advisor of Bangladesh under the country&#x27;s constitutional caretaker government system. During this period, President Abdur Rahman Biswas sacked army chief Lieutenant General Abu Saleh Mohammad Nasim for alleged political activities, causing the general to attempt a coup in response. The sacked army chief ordered troops in Bogra, Mymensingh and Jessore to march towards Dhaka. However, the military commander of Savar sided with the president and deployed tanks in the capital and its surrounding highways, and also suspended ferry services, as part of operations to deter the coup forces. Lt Gen Nasim was later arrested in Dhaka Cantonment.
The Chief Advisor successfully held free and fair elections on 12 June 1996. The Awami League emerged as the single largest party, with 146 seats in parliament, followed by the BNP with 116 seats and Jatiya Party with 32 seats.

====Hasina administration (1996–2001)====
Sheikh Hasina&#x27;s Awami League won 146 of 300 seats in the June 1996 elections, just short of a majority. However, with the support of Jatiya party she formed what she called a &quot;Government of National Consensus&quot; in June 1996. International and domestic election observers found the June 1996 election free and fair. The BNP soon charged that police and Awami League activists were engaged in large-scale harassment and jailing of opposition activists. At the end of 1996, the BNP staged a parliamentary walkout over this and other grievances but returned in January 1997 under a four-point agreement with the ruling party. The BNP asserted that this agreement was never implemented and later staged another walkout in August 1997. The BNP returned to Parliament under another agreement in March 1998.

The first Hasina administration is credited for landmark initiatives in environmental and inter-ethnic peacemaking. It was responsible for signing the Ganges Water Sharing Treaty with India and the Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord with ethnic insurgents, for which Hasina won the UNESCO Peace Prize. Hasina was also one of the founding leaders of the Developing 8 Countries. In 1998, Hasina hosted a rare and unprecedented trilateral economic summit in Dhaka with Prime Ministers Nawaz Sharif of Pakistan and I. K. Gujral of India. Her summits with US President Bill Clinton in Dhaka and Washington DC focused on American energy investments for Bangladesh&#x27;s natural gas reserves and the extradition of her father&#x27;s killers. However, Hasina was not keen to allow the export of Bangladeshi natural gas, despite demands from multinational firms.

In June 1999, the BNP and other opposition parties again began to abstain from attending Parliament. Opposition parties staged an increasing number of nationwide general strikes, rising from six days of general strikes in 1997 to 27 days in 1999. A four-party opposition alliance formed at the beginning of 1999 announced that it would boycott parliamentary by-elections and local government elections unless the government took steps demanded by the opposition to ensure electoral fairness. The government did not take these steps, and the opposition subsequently boycotted all elections.

In July 2001, the Awami League government stepped down to allow a caretaker government to preside over parliamentary elections. Political violence that had increased during the Awami League government&#x27;s tenure continued to increase through the summer in the run up to the election. In August, Khaleda Zia and Sheikh Hasina agreed during a visit of former President Jimmy Carter to respect the results of the election, join Parliament win or lose, forswear the use of hartals (violently enforced strikes) as political tools, and if successful in forming a government allow for a more meaningful role for the opposition in Parliament.

====Third caretaker government (2001)====
The caretaker government, led by Chief Advisor Latifur Rahman, was successful in containing the violence, which allowed a parliamentary general election to be successfully held on 1 October 2001. The election saw a landslide victory of the BNP-led coalition, which included the far-right Jamaat-e-Islami and Islami Oikya Jote. The BNP won 193 seats and the Jamaat won 17 seats.

====Khaleda administration (2001–2006)====

Following the September 11 attacks, the government of Prime Minister Khaleda Zia allowed the United States to use Bangladeshi airports and airspace for combat operations in Afghanistan. Bangladesh was also quick to respond to relief efforts in Afghanistan after the overthrow of the Taliban, with BRAC becoming the largest development agency in the war-torn country. The United States praised Bangladesh as an &quot;elegant, compelling and greatly needed voice of moderation&quot; in the Muslim world. Khaleda Zia also developed a strategic partnership with China and signed a Defense Cooperation Agreement with Beijing.

Despite her August 2001 pledge and all election monitoring groups declaring the election free and fair, Sheikh Hasina condemned the last election, rejected the results, and boycotted Parliament. In 2002, however, she led her party legislators back to Parliament, but the Awami League again walked out in June 2003 to protest derogatory remarks about Hasina by a State Minister and the allegedly partisan role of the Parliamentary Speaker. In June 2004, the AL returned to Parliament without having any of their demands met. They then attended Parliament irregularly before announcing a boycott of the entire June 2005 budget session.

Khaleda Zia&#x27;s administration was marked by improved economic growth, corruption allegations and growing rifts between the country&#x27;s secular and conservative forces. A series of high-profile assassinations targeted the Awami League-led opposition. Former Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina narrowly escaped an assassination attempt in 2004. The Jamaatul Mujahadeen Bangladesh launched several terrorist attacks in 2005. The League accused the BNP and Jamaat of having complicity in the rise of militancy. Relations with neighbouring India deteriorated over allegations that Bangladeshi territory was allowed to be used by Northeast Indian insurgents.

==== Fourth caretaker regime (2006–2008) ====

A major political crisis erupted after the end of the BNP&#x27;s tenure, as the Awami League-led coalition demanded a neutral candidate for Chief Advisor. Weeks of strikes, protests and blockades paralysed the country. President Iajuddin Ahmed assumed the responsibilities of Chief Advisor but failed to allay the fears of the opposition of an impending rigged election. The Bangladeshi press accused the president of acting under the influence of the BNP. Violent protests continued even as the military was deployed in aid of civil administration.

On 11 January 2007, a state of emergency was declared by President Ahmed, who resigned from the office of chief advisor under widely reported pressure from the military, particularly the army chief General Moeen U Ahmed. The former governor of the central bank, Fakhruddin Ahmed, was appointed as the Chief Advisor and the cabinet was reshuffled with many technocrats. The military-backed caretaker government started an anti-corruption drive, which saw the arrest of over 160 politicians, businessmen and bureaucrats, including former prime ministers Khaleda Zia and Sheikh Hasina, as well as Khaleda&#x27;s two sons. Student protests in Dhaka University demanded the restoration of democracy in August 2007, but were suppressed by a curfew. Khaleda and Hasina were released in 2008.

The state of emergency lasted for two years. The December 2008 general election saw a landslide victory for the Awami League-led coalition, which also included the Jatiya Party.

====Hasina administration (2009–2024)====
Within two months of assuming office, Sheikh Hasina&#x27;s second government faced the BDR Mutiny, which provoked tensions with sections of the military. Hasina successfully tackled the threat from mutineers and enraged elements in the military. She formed the international crimes tribunal to prosecute surviving Bengali Islamist collaborators of the 1971 genocide. The tribunal has criticism over its fairness and impartiality.

An anti-terror crackdown dramatically improved relations with neighbouring India. Bangladesh and India have increasingly focused on regional connectivity and trade.

In 2010, the Supreme Court of Bangladesh reaffirmed secularism as a fundamental principle in the constitution. The war crimes tribunal mobilised public opinion in favour of secularism, which was manifested in the March 2013 Shahbag protests. In response, a huge Islamist mobilisation also took place led by the Hefazat-e-Islam group in May 2013.

The intense bickering between the League and BNP, often dubbed the Battle of the Begums, has continued. The Hasina government abolished the provision of caretaker government in the constitution through the controversial Fifteenth Amendment. The move was seen by the BNP as an attempt to corrupt the election process in favour of the League.

In 2013, the hard-line, right-wing, Islamic party, Jamaat-e-Islami was banned from registering and therefore contesting in elections by the High Court, citing their charter violates the constitution. Street violence between the League, BNP and the Jamaat intensified in the run up to the general election. In 2014, the general elections were boycotted by the BNP. The elections were criticized by the United States, United Kingdom, European Union and the United Nations. Sheikh Hasina was sworn in for a third tenure as prime minister.

In 2015 and 2016, Bangladesh saw increasing assassinations targeting minorities and secularists. The country&#x27;s worst terrorist attack saw the death of 20 people after an upmarket restaurant was sieged by gunmen in July 2016. The Islamic State of Iraq and Levant has claimed responsibility for many of the attacks, although the Hasina government insists local terror outfits are more likely to be responsible. Since this attack, the Government took stricter measures against extremists as the security forces led a numerous raids on suspected militant hide-outs. The measures led to reduction in extremist attacks and fatalities.
In 2017, the country faced fresh challenge from incoming Rohingya refugees. Starting in early August 2017, the Myanmar security forces began &quot;clearance operations&quot; against the Rohingya in northern Rakhine state – killing thousands of Rohingya, brutalizing thousands more, and driving hundreds of thousands out of the country into neighboring Bangladesh. In the first four weeks of the conflict, over 400,000 Rohingya refugees (approximately 40% of the remaining Rohingya in Myanmar) fled the country (chiefly to Bangladesh) creating a major humanitarian crisis. The governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh signed a memorandum of understanding on 23 November 2017 regarding the repatriation of Rohingya refugees to Rakhine State. However, till the end of the decade over 740,000 refugees remained in Bangladesh creating pressure on the country&#x27;s economy and infrastructure.

The 2018 General elections brought another landslide victory for the Awami League led by Sheikh Hasina. While the opposition was already weak due to key leaders being in either jail or exile, the elections were further marred by violence and claims of vote rigging. However, this gave the Awami League Government stability and opportunity to complete key infrastructure projects for the country including the Padma Bridge and the Dhaka Metro Rail.

Anti-government protests broke out in Bangladesh on 10 December 2022. In December 2022, tens of thousands marched in Dhaka demanding the resignation of Sheikh Hasina. 

In January 2024, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina secured her fourth straight term in Bangladesh&#x27;s controversial general election, which was boycotted by the main opposition Bangladesh Nationalist Party.

====The fall of Hasina administration (2024)====
In June 2024, protests began in response to the Supreme Court of Bangladesh reinstating a 30% quota for government jobs for descendants of freedom fighters, reversing the government decision made in response to the 2018 Bangladesh quota reform movement. Students began to feel like they have a limited opportunity based on merit. The protest, which initially began as a response to the reestablished quota system for government jobs, quickly spread throughout the entire country because of the government&#x27;s violent response, as well as growing public dissatisfaction against an oppressive government. The situation was further complicated by many other ongoing issues, like the government&#x27;s inability to manage a prolonged economic downturn, reports of rampant corruption and human rights violations, and the absence of democratic channels for initiating changes.

On 3 August 2024, coordinators of the Anti-discrimination Students Movement announced a one-point demand for the resignation and called for &quot;comprehensive non-cooperation&quot;. The following day, violent clashes broke out, resulting in the deaths of 97 people, including students. The coordinators called for a long march to Dhaka to force Hasina out of power on 5 August. That day, a large crowd of protesters made its way through the capital. At 2:30 p.m. BST, Sheikh Hasina resigned and fled to India.

On 5 August, the chief of army staff, Waker-uz-Zaman, convened a meeting with representatives from the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP), Jatiya Party (Ershad), and Jamaat-e-Islami and called for the creation of an interim government within 48 hours, excluding the Awami League. Subsequent reports indicated that Muhammad Yunus, a Nobel laureate, had been approached to be the head of the interim government. The nomination of Yunus, who accepted the advisory role in the interim government, has also been supported by prominent figures within the student movement. In addition, Waker-uz-Zaman pledged an investigation by the military into the preceding incidents of violence and issued an order prohibiting security forces from opening fire on crowds.

== See also ==

* Elections in Bangladesh
* History of Asia
* History of Assam
* History of Bengal
* History of Bangladesh after independence
* History of India
* History of Pakistan
* History of South Asia
* List of presidents of Bangladesh
* List of prime ministers of Bangladesh
* List of rulers of Bengal
* Politics of Bangladesh
* Timeline of Bangladeshi history
* Timeline of Dhaka
* Poverty in Bangladesh
==References==
== Sources ==
* CIA World Factbook (July 2005). Bangladesh
* US Department of State (August 2005). &quot;Background Note: Bangladesh&quot;
* Library of Congress (1988). A Country Study: Bangladesh

== Further reading ==
* Ali, S. Mahmud. Understanding Bangladesh. London: C. Hurst, 2010.
* Chatterji, Joya. Bengal Divided: Hindu Communalism and Partition, 1932—1947. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press 2002
* Guhaṭhākuratā, Meghanā., and Willem van Schendel. &quot;The Bangladesh Reader : History, Culture, Politics&quot;. Durham ;: Duke University Press, 2013.
* Hussain, Aklam. &quot;History of Bangladesh, 1704–1971&quot; (Vol. 1. Asiatic Society of Bangladesh, 1997).
* Ikram, S. M. &quot;Makers of Pakistan and Modern Muslim India&quot;, Lahore, 1970
* Islam, Sirajul. &quot;History of Bangladesh 1701-1971&quot;, Dhaka 1992
* Khan, Muhammad Mojlum. Muslim Heritage of Bengal : the Lives, Thoughts and Achievements of Great Muslim Scholars, Writers and Reformers of Bangladesh and West Bengal. Leicestershire: Kube Publishing, 2013.
* Khan, Muin-ud-din Ahmad. Muslim Struggle for Freedom Bengal from Plassey to Pakistan, A.D. 1757-1947, Dacca 1960
* Muhith, A. M. A. Bangladesh : Emergence of a Nation. 2nd rev. ed. Dhaka, Bangladesh: University Press, 1992.
* Raghavan, Srinath. &quot;1971: A Global History of the Creation of Bangladesh&quot; (Harvard University Press; 2014) 258 pages; scholarly history with worldwide perspective.
* Rahman, Mahmudur. The Political History of Muslim Bengal : An Unfinished Battle of Faith. Newcastle-upon-Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publisher, 2018.
* Rahman, Syedur, and Craig. Baxter. Historical Dictionary of Bangladesh. 4th ed. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2010.
* Rashid, Harun-or-. &quot;The Foreshadowing of Bangladesh: Bengal Muslim League and Muslim Politics, 1906–1947&quot;, Dhaka 1987
* Rashid, Harun-or-. &quot;Inside Bengal Politics 1936–1947: Unpublished Correspondence of Partition Leaders&quot;, Dhaka 2003
* Sisson, Richard, and Leo E. Rose. War and Secession : Pakistan, India, and the Creation of Bangladesh. Berkeley, Calif. ;: University of California Press, 1990.
* D. K. Chakrabarti, 1992 Ancient Bangladesh: A Study of the Archaeological Sources (1992) Delhi: Oxford University Press

== External links ==
* Banglapedia
* Rulers.org — Bangladesh List of rulers for Bangladesh</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q839809" start="4" end="25" title="History of Bangladesh" label="history of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="64" end="76" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="154" end="159" title="Hindus" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="164" end="172" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="227" end="240" title="Bengal region" label="Bengal region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234153" start="242" end="247" title="Islam in Bangladesh" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698200" start="359" end="375" title="Bakhtiyar Khalji" label="Bakhtiyar Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="398" end="403" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461285" start="422" end="432" title="Shah Jalal" label="Shah Jalal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4083686" start="570" end="586" title="Bengal Sultanate" label="Bengal Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431562" start="599" end="622" title="Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah" label="Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487786" start="712" end="733" title="Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah" label="Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="909" end="922" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086468" start="951" end="962" title="C. A. Bayly" label="C. A. Bayly"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="1083" end="1089" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637089" start="1132" end="1148" title="Nawabs of Bengal" label="Nawabs of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998495" start="1168" end="1183" title="Siraj ud-Daulah" label="Siraj ud-Daulah"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="1215" end="1241" title="British East India Company" label="British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q203233" start="1252" end="1269" title="Battle of Plassey" label="Battle of Plassey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="1315" end="1336" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909102" start="1376" end="1395" title="deindustrialization" label="deindustrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q817165" start="1401" end="1418" title="Bengal Presidency" label="Bengal Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="1479" end="1489" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596142" start="1516" end="1535" title="Partition of Bengal (1947)" label="partition of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="1574" end="1592" title="Partition of India" label="Partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q842931" start="1632" end="1645" title="East Pakistan" label="East Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006542" start="1674" end="1691" title="Dominion of Pakistan" label="State of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="1717" end="1743" title="British Raj" label="British rule in the region"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855429" start="1749" end="1789" title="Proclamation of Bangladeshi Independence" label="Proclamation of Bangladeshi Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="1831" end="1856" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="Bangladesh Liberation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="1899" end="1935" title="Republic of Bangladesh" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q198313" start="2174" end="2194" title="Ziaur Rahman" label="General Ziaur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q461816" start="2199" end="2230" title="Hussain Muhammad Ershad" label="General Hussain Muhammad Ershad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281480" start="2320" end="2332" title="Awami League" label="Awami League"/>
<link wikidata="Q496810" start="2342" end="2370" title="Bangladesh Nationalist Party" label="Bangladesh Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855422" start="2521" end="2537" title="Textile industry in Bangladesh" label="garment industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="2826" end="2842" title="authoritarianism" label="authoritarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090049" start="2927" end="2950" title="Rohingya refugee crisis" label="Rohingya refugee crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071385" start="4673" end="4688" title="Chandraketugarh" label="Chandraketugarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495995" start="4792" end="4820" title="Northern Black Polished Ware" label="Northern Black Polished Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="4850" end="4869" title="Indian Subcontinent" label="Indian Subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="4900" end="4908" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q846025" start="5034" end="5047" title="mahajanapadas" label="mahajanapadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="5098" end="5112" title="Mauryan Empire" label="Mauryan Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q118278" start="5191" end="5197" title="Tamluk" label="Tamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638978" start="6565" end="6579" title="Ancient Bengal" label="Ancient Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="6620" end="6624" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="6626" end="6633" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155700" start="6638" end="6642" title="Rattanakosin Kingdom" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="6655" end="6663" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782817" start="6679" end="6688" title="Mahavamsa" label="Mahavamsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q888673" start="6707" end="6720" title="Vijaya of Sri Lanka" label="Vijaya Singha"/>
<link wikidata="Q721272" start="6731" end="6736" title="Lanka" label="Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="6749" end="6758" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524320" start="6794" end="6801" title="Sinhala Kingdom" label="Sinhala"/>
<link wikidata="Q402913" start="6824" end="6838" title="Bengali people" label="Bengali people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="6855" end="6878" title="Maritime Southeast Asia" label="Maritime Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="6883" end="6887" title="Siam" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="7140" end="7159" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q835313" start="7330" end="7340" title="Gangaridai" label="Gangaridai"/>
<link wikidata="Q561955" start="7434" end="7440" title="Coenus (general)" label="Coenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="7486" end="7502" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q949268" start="7589" end="7601" title="Nanda Empire" label="Nanda Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q835313" start="7602" end="7612" title="Gangaridai" label="Gangaridai"/>
<link wikidata="Q835313" start="8055" end="8065" title="Gangaridai" label="Gangaridai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151572" start="8160" end="8173" title="Eastern India" label="Eastern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="10347" end="10355" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="10375" end="10386" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="10448" end="10460" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347909" start="10535" end="10549" title="East Bengal" label="Eastern Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470658" start="10589" end="10597" title="Samatata" label="Samatata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495832" start="10602" end="10610" title="Harikela" label="Harikela"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076645" start="10621" end="10626" title="Gauda Kingdom" label="Gauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350691" start="10672" end="10684" title="Karnasuvarna" label="Karnasuvarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017175" start="10698" end="10709" title="Murshidabad" label="Murshidabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599441" start="10712" end="10721" title="Shashanka" label="Shashanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q216895" start="10888" end="10902" title="Harshavardhana" label="Harshavardhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747098" start="11155" end="11161" title="Manava (king)" label="Manava"/>
<link wikidata="Q668412" start="11269" end="11280" title="Pala Empire" label="Pala Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="11628" end="11636" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="11641" end="11648" title="Vajrayana" label="Tantric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352284" start="11670" end="11676" title="Gopala (Pala king)" label="Gopala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496277" start="11742" end="11746" title="Gaur, West Bengal" label="Gaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q15649142" start="12227" end="12235" title="Devapala (Pala dynasty)" label="Devapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="12808" end="12819" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="12828" end="12841" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765271" start="12881" end="12887" title="Utkala Kingdom" label="Utkala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895847" start="12914" end="12919" title="Huna people" label="Hunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q69798" start="12925" end="12933" title="Dravidian peoples" label="Dravidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194765" start="12939" end="12947" title="Kamarupa" label="Kamarupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12957820" start="12973" end="12981" title="Kamboja Pala dynasty" label="Kambojas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324" start="12990" end="12998" title="Gurjara-Pratihara" label="Gurjaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902305" start="13010" end="13021" title="B. P. Sinha" label="B. P. Sinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806806" start="13717" end="13729" title="Chola Empire" label="Chola Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032034" start="13988" end="14002" title="Candra Dynasty" label="Candra Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600532" start="14110" end="14125" title="Vikramaditya VI" label="Vikramaditya VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="14185" end="14194" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495832" start="14403" end="14411" title="Harikela" label="Harikela"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586352" start="14624" end="14634" title="Srichandra" label="Srichandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350679" start="14729" end="14738" title="Vikrampur" label="Vikrampur"/>
<link wikidata="Q256060" start="14747" end="14757" title="Munshiganj" label="Munshiganj"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589877" start="14881" end="14895" title="Govindachandra (Chandra dynasty)" label="Govindachandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156330" start="16105" end="16117" title="Deva dynasty" label="Deva Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="16124" end="16129" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428714" start="16207" end="16218" title="Sena Empire" label="Sena Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350679" start="16252" end="16261" title="Bikrampur" label="Bikrampur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990519" start="16277" end="16296" title="Munshiganj District" label="Munshiganj District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480778" start="16397" end="16404" title="Comilla District" label="Comilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q68585" start="16405" end="16413" title="Noakhali district" label="Noakhali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074991" start="16414" end="16424" title="Chittagong District" label="Chittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226586" start="16497" end="16511" title="Dasharathadeva" label="Dasharathadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347909" start="16550" end="16561" title="East Bengal" label="East Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143880" start="16647" end="16652" title="Nadia district" label="Nadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q120108658" start="16662" end="16687" title="Ghurid invasion of Bengal" label="Ghurid invasion of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="16701" end="16707" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="16732" end="16747" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="16832" end="16845" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="16879" end="16884" title="Sindh" label="Sindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="17012" end="17028" title="Mahmud of Ghazni" label="Mahmud of Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q199443" start="17078" end="17085" title="Ghurids" label="Ghurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q12844800" start="17099" end="17109" title="Ghaznavids" label="Ghaznavids"/>
<link wikidata="Q668412" start="17245" end="17250" title="Pala Empire" label="Palas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="17254" end="17259" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428714" start="17296" end="17301" title="Sena dynasty" label="Senas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350679" start="17556" end="17565" title="Vikrampur" label="Vikrampur"/>
<link wikidata="Q919071" start="17721" end="17728" title="Khalji dynasty" label="Khaljis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124402" start="17758" end="17773" title="Tughlaq dynasty" label="Tughluq dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11709" start="17844" end="17857" title="Lodi dynasty" label="Lodhi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487786" start="18031" end="18052" title="Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah" label="Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227534" start="18354" end="18360" title="Pandua, Hooghly" label="Pandua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="18558" end="18563" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q357320" start="18661" end="18673" title="Adina Mosque" label="Adina mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434764" start="18998" end="19005" title="Faraizi movement" label="Faraizi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346553" start="19032" end="19040" title="Titumir" label="Titu Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285440" start="19143" end="19154" title="Raja Ganesha" label="Raja Ganesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q167134" start="19282" end="19299" title="Jaunpur Sultanate" label="Jaunpur sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="19303" end="19314" title="north India" label="north India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126005" start="19325" end="19349" title="Jalaluddin Muhammad Shah" label="Jalaluddin Muhammad Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859654" start="19454" end="19473" title="Ilyas Shahi dynasty" label="Ilyas Shahi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702431" start="19517" end="19527" title="Abyssinia" label="Abyssinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462358" start="19630" end="19645" title="Shahzada Barbak" label="Barbak Shahzada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125987" start="19665" end="19686" title="Jalaluddin Fateh Shah" label="Jalaluddin Fateh Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487787" start="19791" end="19815" title="Shamsuddin Muzaffar Shah" label="Shamsuddin Muzaffar Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060542" start="19860" end="19875" title="Alauddin Husain Shah" label="Alauddin Husain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5949588" start="19908" end="19929" title="Hussain Shahi dynasty" label="Hussain Shahi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q509572" start="20192" end="20203" title="Cooch Behar State" label="Cooch Behar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247441" start="20208" end="20214" title="Kamrup district" label="Kamrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="20245" end="20251" title="Odisha" label="Orissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363" start="20253" end="20260" title="Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q40632742" start="20269" end="20275" title="Arakan" label="Arakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="20285" end="20290" title="Babur" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11709" start="20304" end="20310" title="Lodi dynasty" label="Lodhis"/>
<link wikidata="Q139706" start="20314" end="20321" title="Panipat" label="Panipat"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="20338" end="20345" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughals"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="20408" end="20415" title="Maurya Empire" label="Mauryas"/>
<link wikidata="Q83680" start="20428" end="20442" title="Sher Shah Suri" label="Sheh Shah Suri"/>
<link wikidata="Q486188" start="20492" end="20499" title="Humayun" label="Humayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227256" start="20552" end="20575" title="Ghiyasuddin Mahmud Shah" label="Ghiyasuddin Mahmud Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496277" start="20674" end="20678" title="Gauḍa (city)" label="Gaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351566" start="20805" end="20813" title="Pargana" label="parganas"/>
<link wikidata="Q300701" start="20897" end="20913" title="Grand Trunk Road" label="Grand Trunk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q376749" start="20922" end="20932" title="Chittagong" label="Chittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="20937" end="20943" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="20960" end="20965" title="Delhi City" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373352" start="21055" end="21070" title="Karrani dynasty" label="Karrani dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698200" start="21248" end="21273" title="Ikhtiyar Uddin Muhammad bin Bakhtiyar Khilji" label="Muhammad Bakhtiyar Khilji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143880" start="21488" end="21493" title="Nadia district" label="Nadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035301" start="21522" end="21527" title="Gauḍa (region)" label="Gauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724998" start="21857" end="21874" title="Ali Mardan Khilji" label="Ali Mardan Khilji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990519" start="21936" end="21946" title="Munshiganj District" label="Vikramapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990519" start="21967" end="21986" title="Munshiganj District" label="Munshiganj District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556787" start="22325" end="22348" title="Ghiyasuddin Iwaj Shah" label="Ghiyasuddin Iwaj Khilji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688300" start="22406" end="22413" title="Jessore (city)" label="Jessore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496277" start="22493" end="22502" title="Gauḍa (city)" label="Lakhnauti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496277" start="22550" end="22554" title="Gaur, West Bengal" label="Gaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194765" start="22575" end="22583" title="Kamarupa" label="Kamarupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q336312" start="22657" end="22666" title="Iltutmish" label="Iltutmish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431562" start="22698" end="22721" title="Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah" label="Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350313" start="22976" end="22985" title="Sonargaon" label="Sonargaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487786" start="23151" end="23173" title="Shamsuddin Iliyas Shah" label="Shamsuddin Iliyas Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q243325" start="23392" end="23398" title="Khulna" label="Khulna"/>
<link wikidata="Q466221" start="23416" end="23422" title="Sylhet" label="Sylhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q357320" start="23687" end="23699" title="Adina Mosque" label="Adina Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222105" start="23708" end="23724" title="Darasbari Mosque" label="Darasbari Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144248" start="23824" end="23842" title="Bengali literature" label="Bengali literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285440" start="24207" end="24219" title="Raja Ganesha" label="Raja Ganesha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6734507" start="24270" end="24292" title="Mahmud Shah (Sultan of Bengal)" label="Nasiruddin Mahmud Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="24330" end="24341" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Battuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745914" start="24437" end="24442" title="Rihla" label="Rihla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126005" start="25047" end="25071" title="Jalaluddin Muhammad Shah" label="Jalaluddin Muhammad Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487783" start="25403" end="25424" title="Shamsuddin Ahmad Shah" label="Shamsuddin Ahmad Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5949588" start="25626" end="25647" title="Hussain Shahi dynasty" label="Hussain Shahi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060542" start="25679" end="25700" title="Alauddin Hussain Shah" label="Alauddin Hussain Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q376749" start="25844" end="25854" title="Chittagong" label="Chittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572299" start="25919" end="25941" title="Nasiruddin Nasrat Shah" label="Nasiruddin Nasrat Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="25997" end="26002" title="Babur" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496277" start="26177" end="26181" title="Gaur, West Bengal" label="Gaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505660" start="29692" end="29713" title="textile manufacturing" label="textile manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="29718" end="29730" title="shipbuilding" label="shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q6081695" start="33542" end="33552" title="Islam Khan I" label="Islam Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585847" start="33571" end="33579" title="Subahdar" label="Subahdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83653" start="33616" end="33624" title="Jahangir" label="Jahangir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862041" start="33752" end="33765" title="Bara-Bhuiyans" label="Bara-Bhuiyans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939933" start="33811" end="33820" title="Musa Khan (Bengal Ruler)" label="Musa Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238612" start="33922" end="33934" title="Pratapaditya" label="Pratapaditya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688300" start="33938" end="33945" title="Jessore (city)" label="Jessore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849478" start="33962" end="33967" title="Bakla, Bangladesh" label="Bakla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749646" start="33972" end="33986" title="Manikya Dynasty" label="Ananta Manikya"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951299" start="33990" end="33996" title="Bhulua Kingdom" label="Bhulua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424763" start="34024" end="34030" title="Koch Hajo" label="Kamrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q509572" start="34043" end="34053" title="Cooch Behar State" label="Koch Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581002" start="34058" end="34065" title="Barak Valley" label="Kachhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462487" start="34158" end="34170" title="Shaista Khan" label="Shaista Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346563" start="34237" end="34249" title="Mir Jumla II" label="Mir Jumla II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431562" start="34568" end="34591" title="Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah" label="Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q233838" start="34669" end="34678" title="Rakhine State" label="Arakanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265028" start="35905" end="35912" title="Maratha" label="Maratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088399" start="36220" end="36226" title="chauth" label="chauth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="37874" end="37882" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q313640" start="41308" end="41319" title="Cooch Behar" label="Cooch Behar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708483" start="41771" end="41792" title="Textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution" label="textile manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="41796" end="41809" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="41843" end="41864" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909102" start="41909" end="41928" title="deindustrialization" label="deindustrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q817169" start="47937" end="47955" title="Bengal renaissance" label="Bengal renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342197" start="48053" end="48068" title="Nitish Sengupta" label="Nitish Sengupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q335269" start="48103" end="48121" title="Raja Ram Mohan Roy" label="Raja Ram Mohan Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="48142" end="48161" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236109" start="48283" end="48293" title="David Kopf" label="David Kopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q334818" start="48423" end="48440" title="Kazi Nazrul Islam" label="Kazi Nazrul Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="48745" end="48761" title="Viceroy of India" label="Viceroy of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q271878" start="48763" end="48774" title="George Nathaniel Curzon, 1st Marquess Curzon of Kedleston" label="Lord Curzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907084" start="49043" end="49059" title="Bihar and Orissa" label="Bihar and Orissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126447" start="49065" end="49089" title="Eastern Bengal and Assam" label="Eastern Bengal and Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="49095" end="49100" title="Dacca" label="Dacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q369988" start="54922" end="54940" title="Khawaja Nazimuddin" label="Khawaja Nazimuddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q522837" start="55321" end="55354" title="Bengal famine of 1943" label="Bengal experienced a great famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352021" start="56378" end="56385" title="1946 Cabinet Mission to India" label="mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q842931" start="57557" end="57570" title="East Pakistan" label="East Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="57607" end="57623" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali language"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="57630" end="57647" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="57651" end="57659" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="57806" end="57812" title="Partition of India" label="formed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342822" start="57883" end="57896" title="West Pakistan" label="West Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250182" start="57986" end="58008" title="Government of Pakistan" label="Government of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="58018" end="58022" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480421" start="58280" end="58299" title="University of Dhaka" label="University of Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281480" start="58527" end="58546" title="Bangladesh Awami League" label="Awami Muslim League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281480" start="58566" end="58578" title="Awami League" label="Awami League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="58719" end="58725" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q42375" start="58747" end="58780" title="International Mother Language Day" label="International Mother Language Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q854323" start="59483" end="59491" title="Punjabi people" label="Punjabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191375" start="60429" end="60450" title="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman" label="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350205" start="60817" end="60835" title="Six point movement" label="Six point movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348100" start="60944" end="60968" title="Agartala Conspiracy Case" label="Agartala Conspiracy Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q333981" start="61414" end="61432" title="Yahya Khan" label="General Yahya Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298505" start="61742" end="61757" title="One Unit" label="One Unit Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125892" start="62467" end="62498" title="1970 Pakistani general election" label="1970 Pakistani general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392189" start="62500" end="62510" title="Nurul Amin" label="Nurul Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186591" start="62547" end="62569" title="Pakistan Peoples Party" label="Pakistan Peoples Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q131355" start="62578" end="62597" title="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto" label="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto"/>
<link wikidata="Q39089731" start="63440" end="63464" title="Non-cooperation movement (1971)" label="non-cooperation movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128762" start="64394" end="64407" title="Paltan Maidan" label="Paltan Maidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q642832" start="64475" end="64506" title="Swadhin Bangla Biplobi Parishad" label="Swadhin Bangla Biplobi Parishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347064" start="64553" end="64569" title="Suhrawardy Udyan" label="Suhrawardy Udyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10974750" start="64808" end="64814" title="7 March Speech of Bangabandhu" label="speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q191375" start="65269" end="65290" title="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman" label="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855429" start="65539" end="65584" title="Bangladeshi Declaration of Independence" label="Bangladesh&amp;#x27;s Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244404" start="65646" end="65666" title="East Pakistan Rifles" label="East Pakistan Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q198313" start="65890" end="65902" title="Ziaur Rahman" label="Ziaur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7652911" start="66062" end="66089" title="Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra" label="Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349507" start="66569" end="66635" title="Provisional Government of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Bangladesh" label="Provisional Government of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305760" start="66689" end="66699" title="Mujibnagar" label="Mujibnagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975772" start="66805" end="66819" title="Tajuddin Ahmed" label="Tajuddin Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346340" start="66847" end="66864" title="Syed Nazrul Islam" label="Syed Nazrul Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427042" start="66897" end="66919" title="Khondaker Mostaq Ahmed" label="Khondaker Mostaq Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q140085" start="67127" end="67142" title="M. A. G. Osmani" label="M. A. G. Osmani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428759" start="67371" end="67383" title="Mukti Bahini" label="Mukti Bahini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="67473" end="67478" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="67492" end="67503" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641946" start="68571" end="68585" title="A. A. K. Niazi" label="A. A. K. Niazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247470" start="68587" end="68589" title="Commanding Officer" label="CO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351237" start="68651" end="68674" title="Instrument of Surrender (1971)" label="Instrument of Surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058726" start="68851" end="68873" title="diplomatic recognition" label="diplomatic recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="68993" end="69005" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470998" start="69488" end="69503" title="Simla Agreement" label="Simla Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="69895" end="69904" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650798" start="70112" end="70118" title="Kargil district" label="Kargil"/>
<link wikidata="Q404517" start="70169" end="70174" title="Kargil War" label="a war"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349507" start="71343" end="71379" title="Provisional Government of Bangladesh" label="Provisional Government of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305760" start="71462" end="71472" title="Mujibnagar" label="Mujibnagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975772" start="71690" end="71704" title="Tajuddin Ahmad" label="Tajuddin Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q112119463" start="71718" end="71732" title="chief of staff" label="chief of staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q140085" start="71737" end="71749" title="M A G Osmani" label="M A G Osmani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346340" start="71792" end="71809" title="Syed Nazrul Islam" label="Syed Nazrul Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093162" start="71814" end="71833" title="Muhammad Mansur Ali" label="Muhammad Mansur Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855284" start="71864" end="71888" title="Bangladesh Civil Service" label="Bangladesh Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q938711" start="71970" end="71986" title="diplomatic corps" label="diplomatic corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q335379" start="71995" end="72015" title="Abu Sayeed Chowdhury" label="Abu Sayeed Chowdhury"/>
<link wikidata="Q174381" start="72017" end="72041" title="Humayun Rashid Choudhury" label="Humayun Rashid Choudhury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309819" start="72046" end="72059" title="Rehman Sobhan" label="Rehman Sobhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428759" start="72078" end="72095" title="Bangladesh Forces" label="Bangladesh Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q198313" start="72169" end="72181" title="Ziaur Rahman" label="Ziaur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349723" start="72183" end="72199" title="Khaled Mosharraf" label="Khaled Mosharraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q13057556" start="72204" end="72218" title="K M Shafiullah" label="K M Shafiullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="72365" end="72373" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281480" start="72545" end="72557" title="Awami League" label="Awami League"/>
<link wikidata="Q191375" start="72685" end="72706" title="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman" label="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14565638" start="72722" end="72750" title="Prime Minister of Bangladesh" label="Prime Minister of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q343436" start="72836" end="72851" title="founding father" label="founding father"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752412" start="72853" end="72868" title="Nation-building" label="Nation-building"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995170" start="72952" end="72978" title="Constitution of Bangladesh" label="Constitution of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q327967" start="72991" end="73004" title="Kamal Hossain" label="Kamal Hossain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="73054" end="73076" title="parliamentary republic" label="parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="73175" end="73188" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025450" start="73208" end="73268" title="Indo-Bangladeshi Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Peace" label="Indo-Bangladeshi Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="73292" end="73330" title="Organization of the Islamic Conference" label="Organization of the Islamic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="73336" end="73359" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="73368" end="73388" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="73465" end="73471" title="Soviet" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253731" start="73488" end="73503" title="Delhi Agreement" label="Delhi Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="73954" end="73959" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="73971" end="73995" title="Arab-Israeli War of 1973" label="Arab-Israeli War of 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="74067" end="74079" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q150609" start="74110" end="74116" title="MiG-21" label="MiG-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q6164619" start="74245" end="74251" title="Jashod" label="Jashod"/>
<link wikidata="Q18737138" start="74533" end="74553" title="Jatiya Rakkhi Bahini" label="Jatiya Rakkhi Bahini"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="74576" end="74595" title="human rights abuses" label="human rights abuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="74715" end="74730" title="nationalisation" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855418" start="74865" end="74890" title="Bangladesh famine of 1974" label="Bangladesh famine of 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="75077" end="75092" title="one party state" label="one party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346366" start="75170" end="75208" title="Bangladesh Krishak Sramik Awami League" label="Bangladesh Krishak Sramik Awami League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852899" start="75388" end="75407" title="Anthony Mascarenhas" label="Anthony Mascarenhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808521" start="75520" end="75545" title="Assassination of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman" label="assassinated Sheikh Mujib"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427042" start="75686" end="75708" title="Khondaker Mostaq Ahmad" label="Khondaker Mostaq Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123590" start="75931" end="75959" title="Jail Killing Day" label="jailed leaders were executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349723" start="76153" end="76169" title="Khaled Mosharraf" label="Khaled Mosharraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641682" start="76245" end="76269" title="Abu Sadat Mohammad Sayem" label="Abu Sadat Mohammad Sayem"/>
<link wikidata="Q198313" start="76421" end="76433" title="Ziaur Rahman" label="Ziaur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="76667" end="76675" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="76677" end="76689" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070577" start="76880" end="76911" title="sharing the water of the Ganges" label="sharing the water of the Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638941" start="76953" end="76968" title="Farakka Barrage" label="Farakka Barrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q496810" start="77227" end="77255" title="Bangladesh Nationalist Party" label="Bangladesh Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="77435" end="77446" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q145700" start="77624" end="77659" title="SAARC" label="regional co-operation in South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="77793" end="77815" title="export processing zone" label="export processing zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808524" start="78078" end="78099" title="Assassination of Ziaur Rahman" label="assassination in 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670603" start="78149" end="78161" title="Abul Manzoor" label="Abul Manzoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q461816" start="78243" end="78266" title="Hussain Muhammad Ershad" label="Hussain Muhammad Ershad"/>
<link wikidata="Q317969" start="78335" end="78347" title="Abdus Sattar (president)" label="Abdus Sattar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376786" start="78404" end="78430" title="1981 Bangladeshi presidential election" label="1981 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580321" start="78436" end="78468" title="1982 Bangladesh coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1982 Bangladesh coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q278218" start="78618" end="78647" title="A. F. M. Ahsanuddin Chowdhury" label="A. F. M. Ahsanuddin Chowdhury"/>
<link wikidata="Q461816" start="78668" end="78691" title="Hussain Muhammad Ershad" label="Hussain Muhammad Ershad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78730" end="78761" title="Chief Martial Law Administrator#Bangladesh" label="Chief Martial Law Administrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="79192" end="79202" title="devolution" label="devolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q152732" start="79260" end="79280" title="Districts of Bangladesh" label="sixty-four districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q620471" start="79286" end="79293" title="upazila" label="upazila"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="80118" end="80121" title="IMF" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393806" start="80526" end="80536" title="1985 Bangladeshi military rule referendum" label="March 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361491" start="80963" end="80986" title="Jatiya Party (Ershad)" label="Jatiya (National) Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q234814" start="81157" end="81168" title="Khaleda Zia" label="Khaleda Zia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855468" start="81219" end="81227" title="1986 Bangladeshi general election" label="May 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376788" start="81613" end="81640" title="1986 Bangladeshi presidential election" label="1986 presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855469" start="83419" end="83442" title="1988 Bangladeshi general election" label="parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361491" start="83465" end="83477" title="Jatiya Party (Ershad)" label="Jatiya Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q13058880" start="83693" end="83722" title="Amendments to the Constitution of Bangladesh" label="amendment to the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995170" start="83811" end="83823" title="Constitution of Bangladesh" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074977" start="84252" end="84274" title="Chittagong Hill Tracts" label="Chittagong Hill Tracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="84336" end="84343" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="84348" end="84363" title="Northeast India" label="Northeast India"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="84450" end="84458" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734089" start="84490" end="84500" title="Kaptai Dam" label="Kaptai Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746562" start="84737" end="84761" title="Manabendra Narayan Larma" label="Manabendra Narayan Larma"/>
<link wikidata="Q31727191" start="84916" end="84950" title="Constituent Assembly of Bangladesh" label="Constituent Assembly of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855428" start="84978" end="84989" title="Bangladeshis" label="Bangladeshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q402913" start="85053" end="85060" title="Bengalis" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489063" start="85300" end="85313" title="Shanti Bahini" label="Shanti Bahini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102393" start="85465" end="85500" title="Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord" label="Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064441" start="85876" end="85889" title="pro-democracy" label="pro-democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q465481" start="86052" end="86069" title="Shahabuddin Ahmed" label="Shahabuddin Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153784" start="86087" end="86103" title="acting president" label="acting president"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039068" start="86125" end="86159" title="caretaker government of Bangladesh" label="caretaker government of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855471" start="86314" end="86347" title="1991 Bangladeshi general election" label="1991 Bangladeshi general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475664" start="86486" end="86501" title="Jamaat-e-Islami Bangladesh" label="Jamaat-e-Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q234814" start="86508" end="86519" title="Khaleda Zia" label="Khaleda Zia"/>
<link wikidata="Q234814" start="86688" end="86705" title="Begum Khaleda Zia" label="Begum Khaleda Zia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231505" start="87033" end="87047" title="1991 Bangladeshi constitutional referendum" label="September 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q317891" start="87510" end="87529" title="Abdur Rahman Biswas" label="Abdur Rahman Biswas"/>
<link wikidata="Q462068" start="87548" end="87561" title="Saifur Rahman (Bangladeshi politician)" label="Saifur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855474" start="88561" end="88577" title="February 1996 Bangladeshi general election" label="15 February 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039068" start="88919" end="88939" title="Caretaker government of Bangladesh" label="caretaker government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855475" start="88999" end="89008" title="June 1996 Bangladeshi general election" label="June 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093175" start="89072" end="89095" title="Muhammad Habibur Rahman" label="Muhammad Habibur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096655" start="89111" end="89138" title="Chief Advisor of Bangladesh" label="Chief Advisor of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q317891" start="89238" end="89257" title="Abdur Rahman Biswas" label="Abdur Rahman Biswas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670336" start="89295" end="89319" title="Abu Saleh Mohammad Nasim" label="Abu Saleh Mohammad Nasim"/>
<link wikidata="Q52183" start="90036" end="90056" title="Sheikh Hasina" label="Sheikh Hasina&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855475" start="90098" end="90117" title="June 1996 Bangladeshi general election" label="June 1996 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102393" start="91049" end="91084" title="Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord" label="Chittagong Hill Tracts Peace Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q577526" start="91205" end="91227" title="Developing 8 Countries" label="Developing 8 Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q134068" start="91334" end="91346" title="Nawaz Sharif" label="Nawaz Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q248484" start="91363" end="91375" title="I. K. Gujral" label="I. K. Gujral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="91416" end="91428" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906459" start="91517" end="91537" title="Natural gas in Bangladesh" label="natural gas reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093148" start="93027" end="93041" title="Latifur Rahman" label="Latifur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855473" start="93160" end="93174" title="2001 Bangladeshi general election" label="1 October 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127208" start="93268" end="93283" title="Jamaat-e-Islami" label="Jamaat-e-Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351343" start="93288" end="93305" title="Islami Oikya Jote" label="Islami Oikya Jote"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="93417" end="93437" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="93891" end="93903" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602700" start="94973" end="94994" title="2004 Dhaka grenade attack" label="assassination attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q165672" start="95591" end="95605" title="Iajuddin Ahmed" label="Iajuddin Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6890056" start="96119" end="96132" title="Moeen U Ahmed" label="Moeen U Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q560060" start="96175" end="96191" title="Fakhruddin Ahmed" label="Fakhruddin Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412850" start="96748" end="96778" title="2008 Bangladeshi general election" label="December 2008 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385882" start="97007" end="97017" title="BDR Mutiny" label="BDR Mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q11106243" start="97181" end="97210" title="International Crimes Tribunal (Bangladesh)" label="international crimes tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346963" start="97530" end="97557" title="Supreme Court of Bangladesh" label="Supreme Court of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="97569" end="97579" title="secularism" label="secularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337415" start="97736" end="97757" title="2013 Shahbag protests" label="2013 Shahbag protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q13033873" start="97828" end="97843" title="Hefazat-e-Islam Bangladesh" label="Hefazat-e-Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268735" start="98346" end="98356" title="High Court of Bangladesh" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q14942753" start="98525" end="98542" title="2014 Bangladeshi general election" label="general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="98638" end="98652" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q19882156" start="98827" end="98838" title="Attacks on secularists in Bangladesh" label="secularists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="98977" end="99009" title="Islamic State of Iraq and Levant" label="Islamic State of Iraq and Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467243" start="99434" end="99451" title="Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh" label="Rohingya refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q617059" start="99928" end="99947" title="humanitarian crisis" label="humanitarian crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="100000" end="100027" title="memorandum of understanding" label="memorandum of understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906000" start="100268" end="100290" title="2018 Bangladeshi general election" label="2018 General elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281480" start="100333" end="100345" title="Awami League" label="Awami League"/>
<link wikidata="Q52183" start="100353" end="100366" title="Sheikh Hasina" label="Sheikh Hasina"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227319" start="100493" end="100501" title="2018 Bangladesh election violence" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123825" start="100673" end="100685" title="Padma Bridge" label="Padma Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268740" start="100694" end="100710" title="Dhaka Metro Rail" label="Dhaka Metro Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q106696120" start="100996" end="101012" title="2024 Bangladeshi general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346963" start="101185" end="101212" title="Supreme Court of Bangladesh" label="Supreme Court of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q127514201" start="101225" end="101256" title="Quota system of Bangladesh Civil Service" label="a 30% quota for government jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428759" start="101276" end="101292" title="Mukti Bahini" label="freedom fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q51755376" start="101352" end="101389" title="2018 Bangladesh quota reform movement" label="2018 Bangladesh quota reform movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q128401881" start="102050" end="102087" title="Anti-discrimination Students Movement" label="Anti-discrimination Students Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248716" start="102476" end="102479" title="Bangladesh Standard Time" label="BST"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794111" start="102541" end="102560" title="Chief of Army Staff (Bangladesh)" label="chief of army staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q104596552" start="102562" end="102576" title="Waker-uz-Zaman" label="Waker-uz-Zaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q496810" start="102627" end="102655" title="Bangladesh Nationalist Party" label="Bangladesh Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361491" start="102663" end="102684" title="Jatiya Party (Ershad)" label="Jatiya Party (Ershad)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475664" start="102690" end="102705" title="Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami" label="Jamaat-e-Islami"/>
<link wikidata="Q128602144" start="102740" end="102758" title="2024 Bangladesh Interim Government" label="interim government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281480" start="102790" end="102802" title="Awami League" label="Awami League"/>
<link wikidata="Q43969" start="102838" end="102852" title="Muhammad Yunus" label="Muhammad Yunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="102856" end="102861" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354628" start="103297" end="103320" title="Elections in Bangladesh" label="Elections in Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q627531" start="103323" end="103338" title="History of Asia" label="History of Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629083" start="103341" end="103357" title="History of Assam" label="History of Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638978" start="103360" end="103377" title="History of Bengal" label="History of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775201" start="103380" end="103420" title="History of Bangladesh after independence" label="History of Bangladesh after independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="103423" end="103439" title="History of India" label="History of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q726994" start="103442" end="103461" title="History of Pakistan" label="History of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="103464" end="103485" title="History of South Asia" label="History of South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976884" start="103488" end="103520" title="List of presidents of Bangladesh" label="List of presidents of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q142678" start="103523" end="103560" title="List of prime ministers of Bangladesh" label="List of prime ministers of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637016" start="103563" end="103587" title="List of rulers of Bengal" label="List of rulers of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154632" start="103590" end="103612" title="Politics of Bangladesh" label="Politics of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805638" start="103615" end="103646" title="Timeline of Bangladeshi history" label="Timeline of Bangladeshi history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805709" start="103649" end="103666" title="Timeline of Dhaka" label="Timeline of Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235845" start="103669" end="103690" title="Poverty in Bangladesh" label="Poverty in Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="103722" end="103740" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="103767" end="103789" title="US Department of State" label="US Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="103847" end="103866" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276804" start="105850" end="105867" title="D. K. Chakrabarti" label="D. K. Chakrabarti"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40097" wikidata="Q208165" url="?curid=40097" title="Collecting">
<text>The hobby of collecting includes seeking, locating, acquiring, organizing, cataloging, displaying, storing, and maintaining items that are of interest to an individual &quot;collector&quot;. Collections differ in a wide variety of respects, most obviously in the nature and scope of the objects contained, but also in purpose, presentation, and so forth. The range of possible subjects for a collection is practically unlimited, and collectors have realised a vast number of these possibilities in practice, although some are much more popular than others.

In collections of manufactured items, the objects may be antique or simply collectable. Antiques are collectable items at least 100 years old, while other collectables are arbitrarily recent. The word &quot;vintage&quot; describes relatively old collectables that are not yet antiques.

Collecting is a childhood hobby for some people, but for others, it is a lifelong pursuit or something started in adulthood. Collectors who begin early in life often modify their goals when they get older. Some novice collectors start by purchasing items that appeal to them and then slowly work at learning how to build a collection, while others prefer to develop some background in the field before starting to buy items. The emergence of the internet as a global forum for different collectors has resulted in many isolated enthusiasts finding each other.

==Types of collection==

The most obvious way to categorize collections is by the type of objects collected. Most collections are of manufactured commercial items, but natural objects such as birds&#x27; eggs, butterflies, rocks, and seashells can also be the subject of a collection. For some collectors, the criterion for inclusion might not be the type of object but some incidental property such as the identity of its original owner.

Some collectors are generalists with very broad criteria for inclusion, while others focus on a subtopic within their area of interest. Some collectors accumulate arbitrarily many objects that meet the thematic and quality requirements of their collection, others—called &quot;completists&quot; or &quot;completionists&quot;—aim to acquire all items in a well-defined set that can in principle be completed, and others seek a limited number of items per category (e.g. one representative item per year of manufacture or place of purchase). Collecting items by country (e.g. one collectible per country) is very common. The monetary value of objects is important to some collectors but irrelevant to others. Some collectors maintain objects in pristine condition, while others use the items they collect.

== Value of collected items==
After a collectable has been purchased, its retail price no longer applies and its value is linked to what is called the secondary market. There is no secondary market for an item unless someone is willing to buy it, and an object&#x27;s value is whatever the buyer is willing to pay. Depending on age, condition, supply, demand, and other factors, individuals, auctioneers, and secondary retailers may sell a collectable for either more or less than what they originally paid for it. Special or limited edition collectables are created with the goal of increasing demand and value of an item due to its rarity. A &quot;price guide&quot; is a resource such as a book or website that lists typical selling prices.

Products often become more valuable with age. The term &quot;antique&quot; generally refers to manufactured items made over 100 years ago, although in some fields, such as antique cars, the time frame is less stringent. For antique furniture, the limit has traditionally been set in the 1830s. Collectors and dealers may use the word &quot;vintage&quot; to describe older collectables that are too young to be called antiques, including Art Deco and Art Nouveau items, Carnival and Depression glass, etc. Items which were once everyday objects but may now be collectable, as almost all examples produced have been destroyed or discarded, are called &quot;ephemera&quot;.

==Psychological aspects==
Psychological factors can play a role in both the motivation for keeping a collection and the impact it has on the collector&#x27;s life. These factors can be positive or negative.

The hobby of collecting often goes hand-in-hand with an interest in the objects collected and what they represent, for example collecting postcards may reflect an interest in different places and cultures. For this reason, collecting can have educational benefits, and some collectors even become experts in their field.

Maintaining a collection can be a relaxing activity that counteracts the stress of life, while providing a purposeful pursuit which prevents boredom. The hobby can lead to social connections between people with similar interests and the development of new friendships. It has also been shown to be particularly common among academics.

Collecting for most people is a choice, but for some it can be a compulsion, sharing characteristics with obsessive hoarding. When collecting is passed between generations, it might sometimes be that children have inherited symptoms of obsessive–compulsive disorder. Collecting can sometimes reflect a fear of scarcity, or of discarding something and then later regretting it.

Carl Jung speculated that the widespread appeal of collecting is connected to the hunting and gathering that was once necessary for human survival. Collecting is also associated with memory by association and the need for the human brain to catalogue and organise information and give meaning to ones actions.

==History==
Collecting is a practice with a very old cultural history. In Mesopotamia, collecting practices have been noted among royalty and elites as far back as the 3rd millennium BCE. The Egyptian Ptolemaic dynasty collected books from all over the known world at the Library of Alexandria. The Medici family, in Renaissance Florence, made the first effort to collect art by private patronage, this way artists could be free for the first time from the money given by the Church and Kings; this citizenship tradition continues today with the work of private art collectors. Many of the world&#x27;s popular museums—from the Metropolitan in New York City to the Thyssen in Madrid or the Franz Mayer in Mexico City—have collections formed by the collectors that donated them to be seen by the general public.

The collecting hobby is a modern descendant of the &quot;cabinet of curiosities&quot; which was common among scholars with the means and opportunities to acquire unusual items from the 16th century onwards. Planned collecting of ephemeral publications goes back at least to George Thomason in the reign of Charles I and Samuel Pepys in that of Charles II. Collecting engravings and other prints by those whose means did not allow them to buy original works of art also goes back many centuries. The progress in 18th-century Paris of collecting both works of art and of &quot;curiosité&quot;, dimly echoed in the English &quot;curios&quot;, and the origins in Paris, Amsterdam and London of the modern art market have been increasingly well documented and studied since the mid-19th century.

The involvement of larger numbers of people in collecting activities came with the prosperity and increased leisure for some in the later 19th century in industrial countries. That was when collecting such items as antique china, furniture and decorative items from oriental countries became established. The first price guide was the Stanley Gibbons catalogue issued in November 1865.

The history of collecting is chronicled in the book &quot;Lock, Stock, and Barrel: The story of collecting&quot;. This well-researched book on collecting, written by Elizabeth and Douglas Rigby, was published by J. B. Lippincott &amp; Co., a major publisher in Philadelphia. &quot;An important book as well as a delightful one. I recommend it urgently as the best all around volume in its field,&quot; wrote Vincent Starrett of the Chicago Tribune in a review of the book. In addition to being reviewed by newspapers, magazines, and journals -- such as The Chicago Tribune, The New York Times, The Saturday Review, New York History, The Pennsylvania Magazine of History, and The American Scholar -- the book also has been cited in academic studies on collecting.

==Notable collectors== 

*Alfred Chester Beatty — various collections
*Barry Halper — baseball memorabilia
*Bella Clara Landauer — various, primarily ephemera
*Charles Wesley Powell — orchids
*Christopher Ross, Imperial militaria 
*Demi Moore — dolls
*Donald Kaufman — antique toys
*Forrest J Ackerman — books and movie memorabilia
*Geddy Lee — bass guitars
*George Gustav Heye — Native American artifacts
*George Weare Braikenridge — primarily art of Bristol
*Hans Sachs — posters
*Hans Sloane — natural history
*Harvey H. Nininger — meteorites
*Henry Wellcome — medical objects
*James Allen — antiques and photographs
*Joaquín Rubio y Muñoz — antique coins
*J. P. Morgan — various, primarily gems
*Kenneth W. Rendell — historical documents, primarily World War II
*King George V — stamps
*Magnus Walker — Porsches
*Margaret Bentinck, Duchess of Portland — primarily natural history
*Martin Hill — cameras
*Philipp von Ferrary — stamps and coins
*Raleigh DeGeer Amyx — historical memorabilia
*Sam Wagstaff — various collections
*Tim Rowett — children&#x27;s toys and novelties
*Tom Hanks — typewriters
*William Dixson — primarily Australiana
==See also==
* Antique toy show
* Collectable
* Ephemera
* Hoarding
* Scientific collection
* :Category:Collectors

==Bibliography==
*Blom, Philipp (2005) &quot;To Have and To Hold: an intimate History of collectors and collecting&quot;. 
* Castruccio, Enrico (2008) &quot;I Collezionisti: usi, costumi, emozioni&quot;. Cremona: Persico Edizioni 
* Chaney, Edward, ed. (2003) &quot;The Evolution of English Collecting&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press
*Schulz, Charles M. (1984) &quot;Charlie Brown&#x27;s Super Book of Things to Do and Collect: based on the Charles M. Schulz characters&quot;. New York: Random House, 1984, paperback, , (hardcover in library binding )
* Redman, Samuel J. (2016) &quot;Bone Rooms: From Scientific Racism to Human Prehistory in Museums.&quot; Cambridge: Harvard University Press 
* Rigby, Douglas and Rigby, Elizabeth (1944) &quot;Lock, Stock and Barrel: The Story of Collecting. Philadelphia:&quot; J B Lippincott. 
* Shamash, Jack, (2013) &quot;George V&#x27;s Obsession – a King and His Stamps&quot;
* Shamash, Jack (2014) &quot;The Sociology of Collecting&quot;
* Thomason, Alison Karmel (2005) &quot;Luxury and Legitimation: Royal Collecting in Ancient Mesopotamia.&quot; Hampshire, U.K.: Ashgate Publishing Limited.
* van der Grijp, Paul (2006) &quot;Passion and Profit: Towards an Anthropology of Collecting&quot;. Berlin: LIT Verlag. 

==Notes and references==
==External links==
* Journal of the History of Collections (archived 12 April 2009)
* Center for the History of Collecting at the Frick Collection (Art collecting) (archived 6 February 2009)
* &quot;Amass Appeal&quot; Essay by Richard Rubin, AARP Magazine, March/April 2008 (archived 7 September 2012).
*Mueller, Shirley M. (2019). &quot;Inside the Head of a Collector : Neuropsychological Forces at Play.&quot; Seattle. . OCLC 1083575943.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47728" start="4" end="9" title="hobby" label="hobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q208165" start="13" end="23" title="Collecting" label="collecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q472760" start="615" end="622" title="antique" label="antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342494" start="633" end="644" title="collectable" label="collectable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342494" start="2689" end="2700" title="collectable" label="collectable"/>
<link wikidata="Q472760" start="3456" end="3463" title="antique" label="antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q5352998" start="3567" end="3578" title="antique car" label="antique car"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775179" start="3619" end="3636" title="antique furniture" label="antique furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="3832" end="3840" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="3845" end="3856" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044103" start="3864" end="3872" title="carnival glass" label="Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260909" start="3877" end="3887" title="depression glass" label="Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523267" start="4050" end="4058" title="ephemera" label="ephemera"/>
<link wikidata="Q246396" start="4413" end="4422" title="deltiology" label="postcards"/>
<link wikidata="Q195941" start="5039" end="5057" title="Compulsive hoarding" label="obsessive hoarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q178190" start="5169" end="5198" title="obsessive–compulsive disorder" label="obsessive–compulsive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="5696" end="5707" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131976" start="5823" end="5840" title="Ptolemaic dynasty" label="Ptolemaic dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q435" start="5894" end="5915" title="Library of Alexandria" label="Library of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="5921" end="5934" title="Medici family" label="Medici family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146002" start="6491" end="6513" title="cabinet of curiosities" label="cabinet of curiosities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545169" start="6708" end="6723" title="George Thomason (book collector)" label="George Thomason"/>
<link wikidata="Q106143" start="6754" end="6766" title="Samuel Pepys" label="Samuel Pepys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239532" start="7135" end="7145" title="art market" label="art market"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7561" end="7586" title="Stanley Gibbons#Stamp catalogues" label="Stanley Gibbons catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q15077094" start="7825" end="7851" title="J. B. Lippincott &amp;amp; Co." label="J. B. Lippincott &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q2526744" start="8021" end="8037" title="Vincent Starrett" label="Vincent Starrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846515" start="8207" end="8226" title="Saturday Review (U.S. magazine)" label="The Saturday Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387981" start="8403" end="8424" title="Alfred Chester Beatty" label="Alfred Chester Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864290" start="8448" end="8460" title="Barry Halper" label="Barry Halper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8463" end="8483" title="baseball memorabilia" label="baseball memorabilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883347" start="8485" end="8505" title="Bella Clara Landauer" label="Bella Clara Landauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386872" start="8537" end="8558" title="Charles Wesley Powell" label="Charles Wesley Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="8561" end="8568" title="orchids" label="orchids"/>
<link wikidata="Q41557227" start="8570" end="8586" title="Christopher Ross (sculptor)" label="Christopher Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q598227" start="8597" end="8606" title="militaria" label="militaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43044" start="8609" end="8619" title="Demi Moore" label="Demi Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q168658" start="8622" end="8627" title="dolls" label="dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294627" start="8629" end="8643" title="Donald Kaufman (collector)" label="Donald Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18227" start="8660" end="8678" title="Forrest J Ackerman" label="Forrest J Ackerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854371" start="8691" end="8708" title="movie memorabilia" label="movie memorabilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q320895" start="8710" end="8719" title="Geddy Lee" label="Geddy Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4497074" start="8736" end="8754" title="George Gustav Heye" label="George Gustav Heye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546096" start="8784" end="8809" title="George Weare Braikenridge" label="George Weare Braikenridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q118124" start="8838" end="8848" title="Hans Sachs (poster collector)" label="Hans Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q310326" start="8860" end="8871" title="Hans Sloane" label="Hans Sloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677258" start="8891" end="8909" title="Harvey H. Nininger" label="Harvey H. Nininger"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="8912" end="8922" title="meteorites" label="meteorites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133145" start="8924" end="8938" title="Henry Wellcome" label="Henry Wellcome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128627" start="8958" end="8969" title="James Allen (collector)" label="James Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206531" start="8998" end="9019" title="Joaquín Rubio y Muñoz" label="Joaquín Rubio y Muñoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="9030" end="9035" title="coins" label="coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="9037" end="9049" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390785" start="9077" end="9095" title="Kenneth W. Rendell" label="Kenneth W. Rendell"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="9144" end="9157" title="King George V" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q37427111" start="9168" end="9181" title="Magnus Walker" label="Magnus Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="9184" end="9191" title="Porsche" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q126219" start="9194" end="9232" title="Margaret Bentinck, Duchess of Portland" label="Margaret Bentinck, Duchess of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17478669" start="9262" end="9273" title="Martin Hill (camera collector)" label="Martin Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q44105" start="9285" end="9304" title="Philipp von Ferrary" label="Philipp von Ferrary"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="9307" end="9313" title="postage stamp" label="stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="9318" end="9323" title="coins" label="coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286908" start="9325" end="9344" title="Raleigh DeGeer Amyx" label="Raleigh DeGeer Amyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228550" start="9371" end="9383" title="Sam Wagstaff" label="Sam Wagstaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405316" start="9407" end="9417" title="Tim Rowett" label="Tim Rowett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="9456" end="9465" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="9468" end="9479" title="typewriters" label="typewriters"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007859" start="9481" end="9495" title="William Dixson" label="William Dixson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775184" start="9535" end="9551" title="Antique toy show" label="Antique toy show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342494" start="9554" end="9565" title="Collectable" label="Collectable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523267" start="9568" end="9576" title="Ephemera" label="Ephemera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343347" start="9579" end="9587" title="Hoarding" label="Hoarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438125" start="9590" end="9611" title="Scientific collection" label="Scientific collection"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9614" end="9634" title=":Category:Collectors" label=":Category:Collectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q72001" start="9654" end="9667" title="Philipp Blom" label="Blom, Philipp"/>
<link wikidata="Q298920" start="9979" end="9997" title="Charles M. Schulz" label="Schulz, Charles M."/>
<link wikidata="Q682827" start="11058" end="11074" title="Frick Collection" label="Frick Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328773" start="11155" end="11168" title="Richard Rubin (writer)" label="Richard Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190593" start="11351" end="11355" title="OCLC (identifier)" label="OCLC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40112" wikidata="Q5577" url="?curid=40112" title="Salvador Dalí">
<text>Salvador Domingo Felipe Jacinto Dalí i Domènech, Marquess of Dalí of Púbol (11 May 190423 January 1989), known as Salvador Dalí ( ; ; ), was a Spanish surrealist artist renowned for his technical skill, precise draftsmanship, and the striking and bizarre images in his work. 

Born in Figueres in Catalonia, Dalí received his formal education in fine arts in Madrid. Influenced by Impressionism and the Renaissance masters from a young age, he became increasingly attracted to Cubism and avant-garde movements. He moved closer to Surrealism in the late 1920s and joined the Surrealist group in 1929, soon becoming one of its leading exponents. His best-known work, &quot;The Persistence of Memory&quot;, was completed in August 1931. Dalí lived in France throughout the Spanish Civil War (1936 to 1939) before leaving for the United States in 1940 where he achieved commercial success. He returned to Spain in 1948 where he announced his return to the Catholic faith and developed his &quot;nuclear mysticism&quot; style, based on his interest in classicism, mysticism, and recent scientific developments.

Dalí&#x27;s artistic repertoire included painting, sculpture, film, graphic arts, animation, fashion, and photography, at times in collaboration with other artists. He also wrote fiction, poetry, autobiography, essays, and criticism. Major themes in his work include dreams, the subconscious, sexuality, religion, science and his closest personal relationships. To the dismay of those who held his work in high regard, and to the irritation of his critics, his eccentric and ostentatious public behavior often drew more attention than his artwork. His public support for the Francoist regime, his commercial activities and the quality and authenticity of some of his late works have also been controversial. His life and work were an important influence on other Surrealists, pop art, popular culture, and contemporary artists such as Jeff Koons and Damien Hirst.

There are two major museums devoted to Salvador Dalí&#x27;s work: the Dalí Theatre-Museum in Figueres, Spain, and the Salvador Dalí Museum in St. Petersburg, Florida, U.S.

== Biography ==
=== Early life ===
Salvador Dalí was born on 11 May 1904, at 8:45 am, on the first floor of Carrer Monturiol, 20 in the town of Figueres, in the Empordà region, close to the French border in Catalonia, Spain. Dalí&#x27;s older brother, who had also been named Salvador (born 12 October 1901), had died of gastroenteritis nine months earlier, on 1 August 1903. His father, Salvador Luca Rafael Aniceto Dalí Cusí (1872–1950) was a middle-class lawyer and notary, an anti-clerical atheist and Catalan federalist, whose strict disciplinary approach was tempered by his wife, Felipa Domènech Ferrés (1874–1921), who encouraged her son&#x27;s artistic endeavors. In the summer of 1912, the family moved to the top floor of Carrer Monturiol 24 (presently 10). Dalí later attributed his &quot;love of everything that is gilded and excessive, my passion for luxury and my love of oriental clothes&quot; to an &quot;Arab lineage&quot;, claiming that his ancestors were descendants of the Moors.

Dalí was haunted by the idea of his dead brother throughout his life, mythologizing him in his writings and art. Dalí said of him, &quot;[we] resembled each other like two drops of water, but we had different reflections.&quot; He &quot;was probably the first version of myself but conceived too much in the absolute&quot;. Images of his brother would reappear in his later works, including &quot;Portrait of My Dead Brother&quot; (1963).

Dalí also had a sister, Ana María, who was three years younger, and whom Dalí painted 12 times between 1923 and 1926.

His childhood friends included future FC Barcelona footballers Emili Sagi-Barba and Josep Samitier. During holidays at the Catalan resort town of Cadaqués, the trio played football together.

Dalí attended the Municipal Drawing School at Figueres in 1916 and also discovered modern painting on a summer vacation trip to Cadaqués with the family of Ramon Pichot, a local artist who made regular trips to Paris. The next year, Dalí&#x27;s father organized an exhibition of his charcoal drawings in their family home. He had his first public exhibition at the Municipal Theatre in Figueres in 1918, a site he would return to decades later. In early 1921 the Pichot family introduced Dalí to Futurism. That same year, Dalí&#x27;s uncle Anselm Domènech, who owned a bookshop in Barcelona, supplied him with books and magazines on Cubism and contemporary art.

On 6 February 1921, Dalí&#x27;s mother died of uterine cancer. Dalí was 16 years old and later said his mother&#x27;s death &quot;was the greatest blow I had experienced in my life. I worshipped her... I could not resign myself to the loss of a being on whom I counted to make invisible the unavoidable blemishes of my soul.&quot; After the death of Dalí&#x27;s mother, Dalí&#x27;s father married her sister. Dalí did not resent this marriage, because he had great love and respect for his aunt.

=== Madrid, Barcelona and Paris ===

In 1922, Dalí moved into the Residencia de Estudiantes (Students&#x27; Residence) in Madrid and studied at the Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando (San Fernando Royal Academy of Fine Arts). A lean tall, Dalí already drew attention as an eccentric and dandy. He had long hair and sideburns, coat, stockings, and knee-breeches in the style of English aesthetes of the late 19th century.

At the Residencia, he became close friends with Pepín Bello, Luis Buñuel, Federico García Lorca, and others associated with the Madrid avant-garde group Ultra. The friendship with Lorca had a strong element of mutual passion, but Dalí said he rejected the poet&#x27;s sexual advances. Dalí&#x27;s friendship with Lorca was to remain one of his most emotionally intense relationships until the poet&#x27;s death at the hands of Nationalist forces in 1936 at the beginning of the Spanish Civil War.

Also in 1922, he began what would become a lifelong relationship with the Prado Museum, which he felt was, &#x27;incontestably the best museum of old paintings in the world.&#x27; Each Sunday morning, Dalí went to the Prado to study the works of the great masters. &#x27;This was the start of a monk-like period for me, devoted entirely to solitary work: visits to the Prado, where, pencil in hand, I analyzed all of the great masterpieces, studio work, models, research.&#x27;

Those paintings by Dalí in which he experimented with Cubism earned him the most attention from his fellow students, since there were no Cubist artists in Madrid at the time. &quot;Cabaret Scene&quot; (1922) is a typical example of such work. Through his association with members of the Ultra group, Dalí became more acquainted with avant-garde movements, including Dada and Futurism. One of his earliest works to show a strong Futurist and Cubist influence was the watercolor &quot;Night-Walking Dreams&quot; (1922). At this time, Dalí also read Freud and Lautréamont who were to have a profound influence on his work.

In May 1925, Dalí exhibited eleven works in a group exhibition held by the newly formed &quot;Sociedad Ibérica de Artistas&quot; in Madrid. Seven of the works were in his Cubist mode and four in a more realist style. Several leading critics praised his work. Dalí held his first solo exhibition at Galeries Dalmau in Barcelona, from 14 to 27 November 1925. This exhibition, before his exposure to Surrealism, included twenty-two works and was a critical and commercial success.

In April 1926, Dalí made his first trip to Paris where he met Pablo Picasso, whom he revered. Picasso had already heard favorable reports about Dalí from Joan Miró, a fellow Catalan who later introduced him to many Surrealist friends. As he developed his own style over the next few years, Dalí made some works strongly influenced by Picasso and Miró. Dalí was also influenced by the work of Yves Tanguy, and he later allegedly told Tanguy&#x27;s niece, &quot;I pinched everything from your uncle Yves.&quot;

Dalí left the Royal Academy in 1926, shortly before his final exams. His mastery of painting skills at that time was evidenced by his realistic &quot;The Basket of Bread&quot;, painted in 1926.

Later that year he exhibited again at Galeries Dalmau, from 31 December 1926 to 14 January 1927, with the support of the art critic . The show included twenty-three paintings and seven drawings, with the &quot;Cubist&quot; works displayed in a separate section from the &quot;objective&quot; works. The critical response was generally positive with &quot;Composition with Three Figures (Neo-Cubist Academy)&quot; singled out for particular attention.

From 1927, Dalí&#x27;s work became increasingly influenced by Surrealism. Two of these works, &quot;Honey is Sweeter than Blood&quot; (1927) and &quot;Gadget and Hand&quot; (1927), were shown at the annual Autumn Salon (Saló de tardor) in Barcelona in October 1927. Dalí described the earlier of these works, &quot;Honey is Sweeter than Blood&quot;, as &quot;equidistant between Cubism and Surrealism&quot;. The works featured many elements that were to become characteristic of his Surrealist period including dreamlike images, precise draftsmanship, idiosyncratic iconography (such as rotting donkeys and dismembered bodies), and lighting and landscapes strongly evocative of his native Catalonia. The works provoked bemusement among the public and debate among critics about whether Dalí had become a Surrealist.

Influenced by his reading of Freud, Dalí increasingly introduced suggestive sexual imagery and symbolism into his work. He submitted &quot;Dialogue on the Beach (Unsatisfied Desires)&quot; (1928) to the Barcelona Autumn Salon for 1928; however, the work was rejected because &quot;it was not fit to be exhibited in any gallery habitually visited by the numerous public little prepared for certain surprises.&quot; The resulting scandal was widely covered in the Barcelona press and prompted a popular Madrid illustrated weekly to publish an interview with Dalí.

Some trends in Dalí&#x27;s work that would continue throughout his life were already evident in the 1920s. Dalí was influenced by many styles of art, ranging from the most academically classic, to the most cutting-edge avant-garde. His classical influences included Raphael, Bronzino, Francisco de Zurbarán, Vermeer and Velázquez. Exhibitions of his works attracted much attention and a mixture of praise and puzzled debate from critics who noted an apparent inconsistency in his work by the use of both traditional and modern techniques and motifs between works and within individual works.

In the mid-1920s Dalí grew a neatly trimmed mustache. In later decades he cultivated a more flamboyant one in the manner of 17th-century Spanish master painter Diego Velázquez, and this mustache became a well known Dalí icon.

=== 1929 to World War II ===
In 1929, Dalí collaborated with Surrealist film director Luis Buñuel on the short film (&quot;An Andalusian Dog&quot;). His main contribution was to help Buñuel write the script for the film. Dalí later claimed to have also played a significant role in the filming of the project, but this is not substantiated by contemporary accounts. In August 1929, Dalí met his lifelong muse and future wife Gala, born Elena Ivanovna Diakonova. She was a Russian immigrant ten years his senior, who at that time was married to Surrealist poet Paul Éluard.

In works such as &quot;The First Days of Spring&quot;, &quot;The Great Masturbator&quot; and &quot;The Lugubrious Game&quot; Dalí continued his exploration of the themes of sexual anxiety and unconscious desires. Dalí&#x27;s first Paris exhibition was at the recently opened Goemans Gallery in November 1929 and featured eleven works. In his preface to the catalog, André Breton described Dalí&#x27;s new work as &quot;the most hallucinatory that has been produced up to now&quot;. The exhibition was a commercial success but the critical response was divided. In the same year, Dalí officially joined the Surrealist group in the Montparnasse quarter of Paris. The Surrealists hailed what Dalí was later to call his paranoiac-critical method of accessing the subconscious for greater artistic creativity.

Meanwhile, Dalí&#x27;s relationship with his father was close to rupture. Don Salvador Dalí y Cusi strongly disapproved of his son&#x27;s romance with Gala and saw his connection to the Surrealists as a bad influence on his morals. The final straw was when Don Salvador read in a Barcelona newspaper that his son had recently exhibited in Paris a drawing of the &quot;Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ&quot;, with a provocative inscription: &quot;Sometimes, I spit for fun on my mother&#x27;s portrait&quot;. Outraged, Don Salvador demanded that his son recant publicly. Dalí refused, perhaps out of fear of expulsion from the Surrealist group, and was violently thrown out of his paternal home on 28 December 1929. His father told him that he would be disinherited and that he should never set foot in Cadaqués again. The following summer, Dalí and Gala rented a small fisherman&#x27;s cabin in a nearby bay at Port Lligat. He soon bought the cabin, and over the years enlarged it by buying neighboring ones, gradually building his beloved villa by the sea. Dalí&#x27;s father would eventually relent and come to accept his son&#x27;s companion.

In 1931, Dalí painted one of his most famous works, &quot;The Persistence of Memory&quot;, which developed a surrealistic image of soft, melting pocket watches. The general interpretation of the work is that the soft watches are a rejection of the assumption that time is rigid or deterministic. This idea is supported by other images in the work, such as the wide expanding landscape, and other limp watches shown being devoured by ants.

Dalí had two important exhibitions at the Pierre Colle Gallery in Paris in June 1931 and May–June 1932. The earlier exhibition included sixteen paintings of which &quot;The Persistence of Memory&quot; attracted the most attention. Some of the notable features of the exhibitions were the proliferation of images and references to Dalí&#x27;s muse Gala and the inclusion of Surrealist Objects such as &quot;Hypnagogic Clock&quot; and &quot;Clock Based on the Decomposition of Bodies&quot;. Dalí&#x27;s last, and largest, the exhibition at the Pierre Colle Gallery was held in June 1933 and included twenty-two paintings, ten drawings, and two objects. One critic noted Dalí&#x27;s precise draftsmanship and attention to detail, describing him as a &quot;paranoiac of geometrical temperament&quot;. Dalí&#x27;s first New York exhibition was held at Julien Levy&#x27;s gallery in November–December 1933. The exhibition featured twenty-six works and was a commercial and critical success. The &quot;New Yorker&quot; critic praised the precision and lack of sentimentality in the works, calling them &quot;frozen nightmares&quot;.

Dalí and Gala, having lived together since 1929, were civilly married on 30 January 1934 in Paris. They later remarried in a Church ceremony on 8 August 1958 at Sant Martí Vell. In addition to inspiring many artworks throughout her life, Gala would act as Dalí&#x27;s business manager, supporting their extravagant lifestyle while adeptly steering clear of insolvency. Gala, who herself engaged in extra-marital affairs, seemed to tolerate Dalí&#x27;s dalliances with younger muses, secure in her own position as his primary relationship. Dalí continued to paint her as they both aged, producing sympathetic and adoring images of her. The &quot;tense, complex and ambiguous relationship&quot; lasting over 50 years would later become the subject of an opera, &quot;Jo, Dalí&quot; (&quot;I, Dalí&quot;) by Catalan composer Xavier Benguerel.
Dalí&#x27;s first visit to the United States in November 1934 attracted widespread press coverage. His second New York exhibition was held at the Julien Levy Gallery in November–December 1934 and was again a commercial and critical success. Dalí delivered three lectures on Surrealism at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) and other venues during which he told his audience for the first time that &quot;[t]he only difference between me and a madman is that I am not mad.&quot; The heiress Caresse Crosby, the inventor of the brassiere, organized a farewell fancy dress ball for Dalí on 18 January 1935. Dalí wore a glass case on his chest containing a brassiere and Gala dressed as a woman giving birth through her head. A Paris newspaper later claimed that the Dalís had dressed as the Lindbergh baby and his kidnapper, a claim which Dalí denied.

While the majority of the Surrealist group had become increasingly associated with leftist politics, Dalí maintained an ambiguous position on the subject of the proper relationship between politics and art. Leading Surrealist André Breton accused Dalí of defending the &quot;new&quot; and &quot;irrational&quot; in &quot;the Hitler phenomenon&quot;, but Dalí quickly rejected this claim, saying, &quot;I am Hitlerian neither in fact nor intention&quot;. Dalí insisted that Surrealism could exist in an apolitical context and refused to explicitly denounce fascism. Later in 1934, Dalí was subjected to a &quot;trial&quot;, in which he narrowly avoided being expelled from the Surrealist group. To this, Dalí retorted, &quot;The difference between the Surrealists and me is that I am a Surrealist.&quot;
In 1936, Dalí took part in the &quot;London International Surrealist Exhibition&quot;. His lecture, titled , was delivered while wearing a deep-sea diving suit and helmet. He had arrived carrying a billiard cue and leading a pair of Russian wolfhounds and had to have the helmet unscrewed as he gasped for breath. He commented that &quot;I just wanted to show that I was &#x27;plunging deeply into the human mind.&quot;

Dalí&#x27;s first solo London exhibition was held at the Alex, Reid, and Lefevre Gallery the same year. The show included twenty-nine paintings and eighteen drawings. The critical response was generally favorable, although the Daily Telegraph critic wrote: &quot;These pictures from the subconscious reveal so skilled a craftsman that the artist&#x27;s return to full consciousness may be awaited with interest.&quot;

In December 1936, Dalí participated in the &quot;Fantastic Art, Dada, Surrealism&quot; exhibition at MoMA and a solo exhibition at the Julien Levy Gallery in New York. Both exhibitions attracted large attendances and widespread press coverage. The painting &quot;Soft Construction with Boiled Beans (Premonition of Civil War)&quot; (1936) attracted particular attention. Dalí later described it as, &quot;a vast human body breaking out into monstrous excrescences of arms and legs tearing at one another in a delirium of auto-strangulation&quot;. On 14 December, Dalí, aged 32, was featured on the cover of &quot;Time&quot; magazine.

From 1933, Dalí was supported by Zodiac, a group of affluent admirers who each contributed to a monthly stipend for the painter in exchange for a painting of their choice. From 1936 Dalí&#x27;s main patron in London was the wealthy Edward James who would support him financially for two years. One of Dalí&#x27;s most important paintings from the period of James&#x27; patronage was &quot;The Metamorphosis of Narcissus&quot; (1937). They also collaborated on two of the most enduring icons of the Surrealist movement: the &quot;Lobster Telephone&quot; and the &quot;Mae West Lips Sofa&quot;.

Dalí was in London when the Spanish Civil War broke out in July 1936. When he later learned that his friend Lorca had been executed by Nationalist forces, Dalí&#x27;s claimed response was to shout: &quot;Olé!&quot; Dalí was to include frequent references to the poet in his art and writings for the remainder of his life. Nevertheless, Dalí avoided taking a public stand for or against the Republic for the duration of the conflict.

In January 1938, Dalí unveiled &quot;Rainy Taxi&quot;, a three-dimensional artwork consisting of an automobile and two mannequin occupants being soaked with rain from within the taxi. The piece was first displayed at the Galerie Beaux-Arts in Paris at the &quot;Exposition Internationale du Surréalisme&quot;, organized by André Breton and Paul Éluard. The Exposition was designed by artist Marcel Duchamp, who also served as host.

In March that year, Dalí met Sigmund Freud thanks to Stefan Zweig. As Dalí sketched Freud&#x27;s portrait, Freud whispered, &quot;That boy looks like a fanatic.&quot; Dalí was delighted upon hearing later about this comment from his hero. The following day Freud wrote to Zweig &quot;...until now I have been inclined to regard the Surrealists, who have apparently adopted me as their patron saint, as complete fools...That young Spaniard, with his candid fanatical eyes and his undeniable technical mastery, has changed my estimate. It would indeed be very interesting to investigate analytically how he came to create that picture [i.e. &quot;Metamorphosis of Narcissus&quot;].&quot;

In September 1938, Salvador Dalí was invited by Gabrielle Coco Chanel to her house &quot;La Pausa&quot; in Roquebrune on the French Riviera. There he painted numerous paintings he later exhibited at Julien Levy Gallery in New York. This exhibition in March–April 1939 included twenty-one paintings and eleven drawings. Life reported that no exhibition in New York had been so popular since Whistler&#x27;s &quot;Mother&quot; was shown in 1934.

At the 1939 New York World&#x27;s Fair, Dalí debuted his &quot;Dream of Venus&quot; Surrealist pavilion, located in the Amusements Area of the exposition. It featured bizarre sculptures, statues, mermaids, and live nude models in &quot;costumes&quot; made of fresh seafood, an event photographed by Horst P. Horst, George Platt Lynes, and Murray Korman. Dalí was angered by changes to his designs, railing against mediocrities who thought that &quot;a woman with the tail of a fish is possible; a woman with the head of a fish impossible.&quot;

Soon after Franco&#x27;s victory in the Spanish Civil War in April 1939, Dalí wrote to Luis Buñuel denouncing socialism and Marxism and praising Catholicism and the Falange. As a result, Buñuel broke off relations with Dalí.

In the May issue of the Surrealist magazine &quot;Minotaure&quot;, André Breton announced Dalí&#x27;s expulsion from the Surrealist group, claiming that Dalí had espoused race war and that the over-refinement of his paranoiac-critical method was a repudiation of Surrealist automatism. This led many Surrealists to break off relations with Dalí. In 1949 Breton coined the derogatory nickname &quot;Avida Dollars&quot; (avid for dollars), an anagram for &quot;Salvador Dalí&quot;. This was a derisive reference to the increasing commercialization of Dalí&#x27;s work, and the perception that Dalí sought self-aggrandizement through fame and fortune.

=== World War II ===
The outbreak of World War II in September 1939 saw the Dalís in France. Following the German invasion, they were able to escape because on 20 June 1940 they were issued visas by Aristides de Sousa Mendes, Portuguese consul in Bordeaux, France. They crossed into Portugal and subsequently sailed on the &quot;Excambion&quot; from Lisbon to New York in August 1940. Dalí and Gala were to live in the United States for eight years, splitting their time between New York and the Monterey Peninsula, California.

Dalí spent the winter of 1940–41 at Hampton Manor, the residence of Caresse Crosby, in Caroline County, Virginia, where he worked on various projects including his autobiography and paintings for his upcoming exhibition.

Dalí announced the death of the Surrealist movement and the return of classicism in his exhibition at the Julien Levy Gallery in New York in April–May 1941. The exhibition included nineteen paintings (among them &quot;Slave Market with the Disappearing Bust of Voltaire&quot; and &quot;The Face of War&quot;) and other works&quot;.&quot; In his catalog essay and media comments, Dalí proclaimed a return to form, control, structure and the Golden Section. Sales however were disappointing and the majority of critics did not believe there had been a major change in Dalí&#x27;s work.

On 2 September 1941, he hosted &quot;A Surrealistic Night in an Enchanted Forest&quot; in Monterey, a charity event which attracted national attention but raised little money for charity.

The Museum of Modern Art held two major, simultaneous retrospectives of Dalí and Joan Miró from November 1941 to February 1942, Dalí being represented by forty-two paintings and sixteen drawings. Dalí&#x27;s work attracted significant attention of critics and the exhibition later toured eight American cities, enhancing his reputation in America.

In October 1942, Dalí&#x27;s autobiography, &quot;The Secret Life of Salvador Dalí&quot; was published simultaneously in New York and London and was reviewed widely by the press. Time magazine&#x27;s reviewer called it &quot;one of the most irresistible books of the year&quot;. George Orwell later wrote a scathing review in the &quot;Saturday Book&quot;. A passage in the autobiography in which Dalí claimed that Buñuel was solely responsible for the anti-clericalism in the film L&#x27;Age d&#x27;Or may have indirectly led to Buñuel resigning his position at MoMA in 1943 under pressure from the State Department. Dalí also published a novel &quot;Hidden Faces&quot; in 1944 with less critical and commercial success.

In the catalog essay for his exhibition at the Knoedler Gallery in New York in 1943, Dalí continued his attack on the Surrealist movement, writing: &quot;Surrealism will at least have served to give experimental proof that total sterility and attempts at automatizations have gone too far and have led to a totalitarian system. ... Today&#x27;s laziness and the total lack of technique have reached their paroxysm in the psychological signification of the current use of the college [collage]&quot;. The critical response to the society portraits in the exhibition, however, was generally negative.

In November–December 1945 Dalí exhibited new work at the Bignou Gallery in New York. The exhibition included eleven oil paintings, watercolors, drawings, and illustrations. Works included &quot;Basket of Bread&quot;, &quot;Atomic and Uranian Melancholic Ideal&quot;, and &quot;My Wife Nude Contemplating her own Body Transformed into Steps, the Three Vertebrae of a Column, Sky and Architecture&quot;. The exhibition was notable for works in Dalí&#x27;s new classicism style and those heralding his &quot;atomic period&quot;.

During the war years, Dalí was also engaged in projects in various other fields. He executed designs for a number of ballets including &quot;Labyrinth&quot; (1942), &quot;Sentimental Colloquy&quot;, &quot;Mad Tristan&quot;, and &quot;The Cafe of Chinitas&quot; (all 1944). In 1945 he created the dream sequence for Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s film &quot;Spellbound&quot;. He also produced artwork and designs for products such as perfumes, cosmetics, hosiery and ties.

=== Postwar in United States (1946–48) ===
In 1946, Dalí worked with Walt Disney and animator John Hench on an unfinished animated film &quot;Destino&quot;.

Dalí exhibited new work at the Bignou Gallery from November 1947 to January 1948. The 14 oil paintings and other works in the exhibition reflected Dalí&#x27;s increasing interest in atomic physics. Notable works included &quot;Dematerialization Near the Nose of Nero (The Separation of the Atom)&quot;, &quot;Intra-Atomic Equilibrium of a Swan&#x27;s Feather&quot;, and a study for &quot;Leda Atomica&quot;. The proportions of the latter work were worked out in collaboration with a mathematician.

In early 1948, Dalí&#x27;s &quot;50 Secrets of Magic Craftsmanship&quot; was published. The book was a mixture of anecdotes, practical advice on painting, and Dalínian polemics.

=== Later years in Spain ===
In 1948, Dalí and Gala moved back into their house in Port Lligat, on the coast near Cadaqués. For the next three decades, they would spend most of their time there, spending winters in Paris and New York. Dalí&#x27;s decision to live in Spain under Franco and his public support for the regime prompted outrage from many anti-Francoist artists and intellectuals. Pablo Picasso refused to mention Dalí&#x27;s name or acknowledge his existence for the rest of his life. In 1960, André Breton unsuccessfully fought against the inclusion of Dalí&#x27;s &quot;Sistine Madonna&quot; in the &quot;Surrealist Intrusion in the Enchanter&#x27;s Domain&quot; exhibition organized by Marcel Duchamp in New York. Breton and other Surrealists issued a tract to coincide with the exhibition denouncing Dalí as &quot;the ex-apologist of Hitler... and friend of Franco&quot;.

In December 1949, Dalí&#x27;s sister Anna Maria published her book &quot;Salvador Dalí Seen by his Sister&quot;. Dalí was angered by passages that he considered derogatory towards his wife Gala and broke off relations with his family. When Dalí&#x27;s father died in September 1950, Dalí learned that he had been virtually disinherited in his will. A two-year legal dispute followed over paintings and drawings Dalí had left in his family home, during which Dalí was accused of assaulting a public notary.

As Dalí moved further towards embracing Catholicism he introduced more religious iconography and themes in his painting. In 1949, he painted a study for &quot;The Madonna of Port Lligat&quot; (first version, 1949) and showed it to Pope Pius XII during an audience arranged to discuss Dalí &#x27;s marriage to Gala. This work was a precursor to the phase Dalí dubbed &quot;Nuclear Mysticism&quot;, a fusion of Einsteinian physics, classicism, and Catholic mysticism. In paintings such as &quot;The Madonna of Port Lligat&quot;, &quot;The Christ of Saint John on the Cross&quot; and &quot;The Disintegration of the Persistence of Memory&quot;, Dalí sought to synthesize Christian iconography with images of material disintegration inspired by nuclear physics. His later Nuclear Mysticism works included &quot;La Gare de Perpignan&quot; (1965) and &quot;The Hallucinogenic Toreador&quot; (1968–70).

Dalí&#x27;s keen interest in natural science and mathematics was further manifested by the proliferation of images of DNA and rhinoceros horn shapes in works from the mid-1950s. According to Dalí, the rhinoceros horn signifies divine geometry because it grows in a logarithmic spiral. Dalí was also fascinated by the Tesseract (a four-dimensional cube), using it, for example, in &quot;Crucifixion (Corpus Hypercubus)&quot;.

Dalí had been extensively using optical illusions such as double images, anamorphosis, negative space, visual puns and &quot;trompe-l&#x27;œil&quot; since his Surrealist period and this continued in his later work. At some point, Dalí had a glass floor installed in a room near his studio in Port Lligat. He made extensive use of it to study foreshortening, both from above and from below, incorporating dramatic perspectives of figures and objects into his paintings. He also experimented with the bulletist technique pointillism, enlarged half-tone dot grids and stereoscopic images. He was among the first artists to employ holography in an artistic manner. In Dalí&#x27;s later years, young artists such as Andy Warhol proclaimed him an important influence on pop art.

In 1960, Dalí began work on his Theatre-Museum in his home town of Figueres. It was his largest single project and a main focus of his energy through to 1974, when it opened. He continued to make additions through the mid-1980s.

In 1955, Dalí met Nanita Kalaschnikoff, who was to become a close friend, muse, and model. At a French nightclub in 1965 Dalí met Amanda Lear, a fashion model then known as Peki Oslo. Lear became his protégée and one of his muses. According to Lear, she and Dalí were united in a &quot;spiritual marriage&quot; on a deserted mountaintop.

=== Final years and death ===


In 1968, Dalí bought a castle in Púbol for Gala, and from 1971 she would retreat there for weeks at a time, Dalí having agreed not to visit without her written permission. His fears of abandonment and estrangement from his longtime artistic muse contributed to depression and failing health.

In 1980, at age 76, Dalí&#x27;s health deteriorated sharply and he was treated for depression, drug addiction, and Parkinson-like symptoms, including a severe tremor in his right arm. There were also allegations that Gala had been supplying Dalí with pharmaceuticals from her own prescriptions.

Gala died on 10 June 1982, at the age of 87. After her death, Dalí moved from Figueres to the castle in Púbol, where she was entombed.

In 1982, King Juan Carlos bestowed on Dalí the title of &quot;Marqués de Dalí de Púbol&quot; (&quot;Marquess of Dalí of Púbol&quot;) in the nobility of Spain, Púbol being where Dalí then lived. The title was initially hereditary, but at Dalí&#x27;s request was changed to life-only in 1983.

In May 1983, what was said to be Dalí&#x27;s last painting, &quot;The Swallow&#x27;s Tail&quot;, was revealed. The work was heavily influenced by the mathematical catastrophe theory of René Thom. However, some critics have questioned how Dalí could have executed a painting with such precision given the severe tremor in his painting arm.

From early 1984, Dalí&#x27;s depression worsened and he refused food, leading to severe undernourishment. Dalí had previously stated his intention to put himself into a state of suspended animation as he had read that some microorganisms could do. In August 1984 a fire broke out in Dalí&#x27;s bedroom and he was hospitalized with severe burns. Two judicial inquiries found that the fire was caused by an electrical fault and no findings of negligence were made. After his release from hospital Dalí moved to the Torre Galatea, an annex to the Dalí Theatre-Museum.

There have been allegations that Dalí was forced by his guardians to sign blank canvases that could later be used in forgeries. It is also alleged that he knowingly sold otherwise-blank lithograph paper which he had signed, possibly producing over 50,000 such sheets from 1965 until his death. As a result, art dealers tend to be wary of late graphic works attributed to Dalí.

In July 1986, Dalí had a pacemaker implanted. On his return to his Theatre-Museum he made a brief public appearance, saying:

In November 1988, Dalí entered hospital with heart failure. On 5 December 1988, he was visited by King Juan Carlos, who confessed that he had always been a serious devotee of Dalí. Dalí gave the king a drawing, &quot;Head of Europa&quot;, which would turn out to be Dalí&#x27;s final drawing.

On the morning of 23 January 1989, Dalí died of cardiac arrest at the age of 84. He is buried in the crypt below the stage of his Theatre-Museum in Figueres. The location is across the street from the church of &quot;Sant Pere&quot;, where he had his baptism, first communion, and funeral, and is only from the house where he was born.

==== Exhumation ====
On 26 June 2017, it was announced that a judge in Madrid had ordered the exhumation of Dalí&#x27;s body in order to obtain samples for a paternity suit. Joan Manuel Sevillano, manager of the &quot;Fundación Gala Salvador Dalí&quot; (The Gala-Salvador Dalí Foundation), denounced the exhumation as inappropriate. The exhumation took place on the evening of 20 July, and his DNA was extracted. On 6 September 2017, the Foundation stated that the tests carried out proved conclusively that Dalí and the claimant were not related. On 18 May 2020, a Spanish court dismissed an appeal from the claimant and ordered her to pay the costs of the exhumation.

== Symbolism ==
From the late 1920s, Dalí progressively introduced many bizarre or incongruous images into his work which invite symbolic interpretation. While some of these images suggest a straightforward sexual or Freudian interpretation (Dalí read Freud in the 1920s) others (such as locusts, rotting donkeys, and sea urchins) are idiosyncratic and have been variously interpreted. Some commentators have cautioned that Dalí&#x27;s own comments on these images are not always reliable.

=== Food ===
Food and eating have a central place in Dalí&#x27;s thoughts and work. He associated food with beauty and sex and was obsessed with the image of the female praying mantis eating her mate after copulation. Bread was a recurring image in Dalí&#x27;s art, from his early work &quot;The Basket of Bread&quot; to later public performances such as in 1958 when he gave a lecture in Paris using a 12-meter-long baguette an illustrative prop. He saw bread as &quot;the elementary basis of continuity&quot; and &quot;sacred subsistence&quot;.

The egg is another common Dalínian image. He connects the egg to the prenatal and intrauterine, thus using it to symbolize hope and love. It appears in &quot;The Great Masturbator&quot;, &quot;The Metamorphosis of Narcissus&quot; and many other works. There are also giant sculptures of eggs in various locations at Dalí&#x27;s house in Portlligat as well as at the Dalí Theatre-Museum in Figueres.

The radial symmetry of the sea urchin intrigued Dalí. He had enjoyed eating them with his father at Cadaqués and, along with other foods, they became a recurring theme in his work.

The famous &quot;melting watches&quot; that appear in &quot;The Persistence of Memory&quot; suggest Einstein&#x27;s theory that time is relative and not fixed. Dalí later claimed that the idea for clocks functioning symbolically in this way came to him when he was contemplating Camembert cheese.

=== Animals ===
The rhinoceros and rhinoceros horn shapes began to proliferate in Dalí&#x27;s work from the mid-1950s. According to Dalí, the rhinoceros horn signifies divine geometry because it grows in a logarithmic spiral. He linked the rhinoceros to themes of chastity and to the Virgin Mary. However, he also used it as an obvious phallic symbol as in &quot;Young Virgin Auto-Sodomized by the Horns of Her Own Chastity.&quot;

Various other animals appear throughout Dalí&#x27;s work: rotting donkeys and ants have been interpreted as pointing to death, decay, and sexual desire; the snail as connected to the human head (he saw a snail on a bicycle outside Freud&#x27;s house when he first met him); and locusts as a symbol of waste and fear. The elephant is also a recurring image in his work; for example, &quot;Dream Caused by the Flight of a Bee Around a Pomegranate a Second Before Awakening&quot;. The elephants are inspired by Gian Lorenzo Bernini&#x27;s sculpture base in Rome of an elephant carrying an ancient obelisk.

=== Science ===
Dalí&#x27;s life-long interest in science and mathematics was often reflected in his work. His soft watches have been interpreted as references to Einstein&#x27;s theory of the relativity of time and space. Images of atomic particles appeared in his work soon after the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and strands of DNA appeared from the mid-1950s. In 1958 he wrote in his &quot;Anti-Matter Manifesto&quot;: &quot;In the Surrealist period, I wanted to create the iconography of the interior world and the world of the marvelous, of my father Freud. Today, the exterior world and that of physics have transcended the one of psychology. My father today is Dr. Heisenberg.&quot;

&quot;The Disintegration of the Persistence of Memory&quot; (1954) harks back to &quot;The Persistence of Memory&quot; (1931) and in portraying that painting in fragmentation and disintegration has been interpreted as a reference to Heisenberg&#x27;s quantum mechanics.

== Endeavors outside painting ==
Dalí was a versatile artist. Some of his more popular works are sculptures and other objects, and he is also noted for his contributions to theater, fashion, and photography, among other areas.

=== Sculptures and other objects ===
From the early 1930s, Dalí was an enthusiastic proponent of the proliferation of three-dimensional Surrealist Objects to subvert perceptions of conventional reality, writing: &quot;museums will fast fill with objects whose uselessness, size and crowding will necessitate the construction, in deserts, of special towers to contain them.&quot; His more notable early objects include &quot;Board of Demented Associations&quot; (1930–31), &quot;Retrospective Bust of a Woman&quot; (1933), &quot;Venus de Milo with Chest of Drawers&quot; (1936) and &quot;Aphrodisiac Dinner Jacket&quot; (1936). Two of the most popular objects of the Surrealist movement were &quot;Lobster Telephone&quot; (1936) and &quot;Mae West Lips Sofa&quot; (1937) which were commissioned by art patron Edward James. Lobsters and telephones had strong sexual connotations for Dalí who drew a close analogy between food and sex. The telephone was functional, and James purchased four of them from Dalí to replace the phones in his home. The &quot;Mae West Lips Sofa&quot; was shaped after the lips of actress Mae West, who was previously the subject of Dalí&#x27;s watercolor, &quot;The Face of Mae West which may be used as a Surrealist Apartment (1934–35)&quot;. In December 1936 Dalí sent Harpo Marx a Christmas present of a harp with barbed-wire strings.
After World War II Dalí authorized many sculptures derived from his most famous works and images. In his later years other sculptures also appeared, often in large editions, whose authenticity has sometimes been questioned.

Between 1941 and 1970, Dalí created an ensemble of 39 pieces of jewelry, many of which are intricate, some containing moving parts. The most famous assemblage, &quot;The Royal Heart&quot;, is made of gold and is encrusted with 46 rubies, 42 diamonds, and four emeralds, created in such a way that the center &quot;beats&quot; like a heart.

Dalí ventured into industrial design in the 1970s with a 500-piece run of &quot;Suomi&quot; tableware by Timo Sarpaneva that Dalí decorated for the German Rosenthal porcelain maker&#x27;s &quot;Studio Linie&quot;. In 1969 he designed the Chupa Chups logo. He facilitated the design of the advertising campaign for the 1969 Eurovision Song Contest and created a large on-stage metal sculpture that stood at the Teatro Real in Madrid.

=== Theater and film ===
In theater, Dalí designed the scenery for Federico García Lorca&#x27;s 1927 romantic play &quot;Mariana Pineda&quot;. For &quot;Bacchanale&quot; (1939), a ballet based on and set to the music of Richard Wagner&#x27;s 1845 opera &quot;Tannhäuser&quot;, Dalí provided both the set design and the libretto. He executed designs for a number of other ballets including &quot;Labyrinth&quot; (1942), &quot;Sentimental Colloquy&quot;, &quot;Mad Tristan&quot;, &quot;The Cafe of Chinitas&quot; (all 1944) and &quot;The Three-Cornered Hat&quot; (1949).
Dalí became interested in film when he was young, going to the theater most Sundays. By the late 1920s he was fascinated by the potential of film to reveal &quot;the unlimited fantasy born of things themselves&quot; and went on to collaborate with the director Luis Buñuel on two Surrealist films: the 17-minute short &quot;Un Chien Andalou&quot; (1929) and the feature film &quot;L&#x27;Age d&#x27;Or&quot; (1930). Dalí and Buñuel agree that they jointly developed the script and imagery of &quot;Un Chien Andalou&quot;, but there is controversy over the extent of Dalí&#x27;s contribution to &quot;L&#x27;Age d&#x27;Or&quot;. &quot;Un Chien Andalou&quot; features a graphic opening scene of a human eyeball being slashed with a razor and develops surreal imagery and irrational discontinuities in time and space to produce a dreamlike quality. &quot;L&#x27;Age d&#x27;Or&quot; is more overtly anti-clerical and anti-establishment, and was banned after right-wing groups staged a riot in the Parisian theater where it was being shown. Summarizing the impact of these two films on the Surrealist film movement, one commentator has stated: &quot;If Un Chien Andalou stands as the supreme record of Surrealism&#x27;s adventures into the realm of the unconscious, then L&#x27;Âge d&#x27;Or is perhaps the most trenchant and implacable expression of its revolutionary intent.&quot;

After he collaborated with Buñuel, Dalí worked on several unrealized film projects including a published script for a film, &quot;Babaouo&quot; (1932); a scenario for Harpo Marx called &quot;Giraffes on Horseback Salad&quot; (1937); and an abandoned dream sequence for the film &quot;Moontide&quot; (1942). In 1945 Dalí created the dream sequence in Hitchcock&#x27;s &quot;Spellbound&quot;, but neither Dalí nor the director was satisfied with the result. Dalí also worked with Walt Disney and animator John Hench on the short film &quot;Destino&quot; in 1946. After initially being abandoned, the animated film was completed in 2003 by Baker Bloodworth and Walt Disney&#x27;s nephew Roy E. Disney. Between 1954 and 1961 Dalí worked with photographer Robert Descharnes on &quot;The Prodigious History of the Lacemaker and the Rhinoceros&quot;, but the film was never completed.

In the 1960s Dalí worked with some directors on documentary and performance films including with Philippe Halsman on &quot;Chaos and Creation&quot; (1960), Jack Bond on &quot;Dalí in New York&quot; (1966) and Jean-Christophe Averty on &quot;Soft Self-Portrait of Salvador Dalí&quot; (1966).

Dalí collaborated with director José-Montes Baquer on the pseudo-documentary film &quot;Impressions of Upper Mongolia&quot; (1975), in which Dalí narrates a story about an expedition in search of giant hallucinogenic mushrooms. In the mid-1970s film director Alejandro Jodorowsky initially cast Dalí in the role of the Padishah Emperor in a production of &quot;Dune&quot;, based on the novel by Frank Herbert. However, Jodorowsky changed his mind after Dalí publicly supported the execution of alleged ETA terrorists in December 1975. The film was ultimately never made.

In 1972 Dalí began to write the scenario for an opera-poem called &quot;Être Dieu&quot; (&quot;To Be God&quot;). The Spanish writer Manuel Vázquez Montalbán wrote the libretto and Igor Wakhévitch the music. The opera poem was recorded in Paris in 1974 with Dalí in the role of the protagonist.

=== Fashion and photography ===

Fashion designer Elsa Schiaparelli worked with Dalí from the 1930s and commissioned him to produce a white dress with a lobster print. Other designs Dalí made for her include a shoe-shaped hat and a pink belt with lips for a buckle. He was also involved in creating textile designs and perfume bottles. In 1950, Dalí created a special &quot;costume for the year 2045&quot; with Christian Dior.

Photographers with whom he collaborated include Man Ray, Brassaï, Cecil Beaton, and Philippe Halsman. Halsman produced the &quot;Dalí Atomica&quot; series (1948) – inspired by Dalí&#x27;s painting &quot;Leda Atomica&quot;  – which in one photograph depicts &quot;a painter&#x27;s easel, three cats, a bucket of water, and Dalí himself floating in the air&quot;.

=== Architecture ===

Dalí&#x27;s architectural achievements include his Port Lligat house near Cadaqués, as well as his Theatre Museum in Figueres. A major work outside of Spain was the temporary &quot;Dream of Venus&quot; Surrealist pavilion at the 1939 New York World&#x27;s Fair, which contained several unusual sculptures and statues, including live performers posing as statues. In 1958, Dalí completed &quot;Crisalida,&quot; a temporary installation promoting a drug, which was exhibited at a medical convention in San Francisco.

=== Literary works ===
In his only novel, &quot;Hidden Faces&quot; (1944), Dalí describes the intrigues of a group of eccentric aristocrats whose extravagant lifestyle symbolizes the decadence of the 1930s. The Comte de Grandsailles and Solange de Cléda pursue a love affair, but interwar political turmoil and other vicissitudes drive them apart. It is variously set in Paris, rural France, Casablanca in North Africa, and Palm Springs in the United States. Secondary characters include aging widow Barbara Rogers, her bisexual daughter Veronica, Veronica&#x27;s sometime female lover Betka, and Baba, a disfigured U.S. fighter pilot. The novel was written in New York, and translated by Haakon Chevalier.

His other literary works include &quot;The Secret Life of Salvador Dalí&quot; (1942), &quot;Diary of a Genius&quot; (1966), and &quot;Oui: The Paranoid-Critical Revolution&quot; (1971). Dalí also published poetry, essays, art criticism, and a technical manual on art.

=== Graphic arts ===
Dalí worked extensively in the graphic arts, producing many drawings, etchings, and lithographs. Among the most notable of these works are forty etchings for an edition of Lautréamont&#x27;s &quot;The Songs of Maldoror&quot; (1933) and eighty drypoint reworkings of Goya&#x27;s &quot;Caprichos&quot; (1973–77). From the 1960s, however, Dalí would often sell the rights to images but not be involved in the print production itself. In addition, a large number of fakes were produced in the 1980s and 1990s, thus further confusing the Dalí print market.

Book illustrations were an important part of Dalí&#x27;s work throughout his career. His first book illustration was for the 1924 publication of the Catalan poem &quot;&quot; (&quot;The Witches of Liers&quot;) by his friend and schoolmate, poet Carles Fages de Climent. His other notable book illustrations, apart from &quot;The Songs of Maldoror&quot;, include 101 watercolors and engravings for &quot;The Divine Comedy&quot; (1960) and 100 drawings and watercolors for &quot;The Arabian Nights&quot; (1964).

== Politics and personality ==
=== Politics and religion ===

As a youth, Dalí identified as communist, anti-monarchist and anti-clerical, and in 1924 he was briefly imprisoned by the Primo de Rivera dictatorship as a person &quot;intensely liable to cause public disorder&quot;. When Dalí officially joined the Surrealist group in 1929 his political activism initially intensified. In 1931, he became involved in the Workers&#x27; and Peasants&#x27; Front, delivering lectures at meetings and contributing to their party journal. However, as political divisions within the Surrealist group grew, Dalí soon developed a more apolitical stance, refusing to publicly denounce fascism. In 1934, André Breton accused him of being sympathetic to Hitler and Dalí narrowly avoided being expelled from the group. In 1935 Dalí wrote a letter to Breton suggesting that non-white races should be enslaved. After the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936, Dalí avoided taking a public stand for or against the Republic. However, immediately after Franco&#x27;s victory in 1939, Dalí praised Catholicism and the Falange and was expelled from the Surrealist group.

After Dalí&#x27;s return to his native Catalonia in 1948, he publicly supported Franco&#x27;s regime and announced his return to the Catholic faith. Dalí was granted an audience with Pope Pius XII in 1949 and with Pope John XXIII in 1959. He had official meetings with General Franco in June 1956, October 1968, and May 1974. In 1968, Dalí stated that on Franco&#x27;s death there should be no return to democracy and Spain should become an absolute monarchy. In September 1975, Dalí publicly supported Franco&#x27;s decision to execute three alleged Basque terrorists and repeated his support for an absolute monarchy, adding: &quot;Personally, I&#x27;m against freedom; I&#x27;m for the Holy Inquisition.&quot; In the following days, he fled to New York after his home in Port Lligat was stoned and he had received numerous death threats. When King Juan Carlos visited the ailing Dalí in August 1981, Dalí told him: &quot;I have always been an anarchist and a monarchist.&quot;

Dalí espoused a mystical view of Catholicism and in his later years he claimed to be a Catholic and an agnostic. He was interested in the writings of the Jesuit priest and philosopher Teilhard de Chardin and his Omega Point theory. Dalí&#x27;s painting &quot;Tuna Fishing (Homage to Meissonier)&quot; (1967) was inspired by his reading of Chardin.

=== Sexuality ===
Dalí&#x27;s sexuality had a profound influence on his work. He stated that as a child he saw a book with graphic illustrations of venereal diseases and this provoked a life-long disgust of female genitalia and a fear of impotence and sexual intimacy. Dalí frequently stated that his main sexual activity involved voyeurism and masturbation and his preferred sexual orifice was the anus. Dalí said that his wife Gala was the only person with whom he had achieved complete coitus. From 1927, Dalí&#x27;s work featured graphic and symbolic sexual images usually associated with other images evoking shame and disgust. Anal and fecal imagery is prominent in his work from this time. Some of the most notable works reflecting these themes include &quot;The First Days of Spring&quot; (1929), &quot;The Great Masturbator&quot; (1929), and &quot;The Lugubrious Game&quot; (1929). Several of Dalí&#x27;s intimates in the 1960s and 1970s have stated that he would arrange for selected guests to perform choreographed sexual activities to aid his voyeurism and masturbation.

===Personality===

Dalí was renowned for his eccentric and ostentatious behavior throughout his career. In 1941, the Director of Exhibitions and Publications at MoMA wrote: &quot;The fame of Salvador Dalí has been an issue of particular controversy for more than a decade...Dalí&#x27;s conduct may have been undignified, but the greater part of his art is a matter of dead earnest.&quot; When Dalí was elected to the French Academy of Fine Arts in 1979, one of his fellow academicians stated that he hoped Dalí would now abandon his &quot;clowneries&quot;.

In 1936, at the premiere screening of Joseph Cornell&#x27;s film &quot;Rose Hobart&quot; at Julien Levy&#x27;s gallery in New York City, Dalí knocked over the projector in a rage. &quot;My idea for a film is exactly that,&quot; he said shortly afterward, &quot;I never wrote it down or told anyone, but it is as if he had stolen it!&quot; In 1939, after creating a window display for Bonwit Teller, he became so enraged by unauthorized changes to his work that he pushed a display bathtub through a plate glass window. In 1955, he delivered a lecture at the Sorbonne, arriving in a Rolls-Royce full of cauliflowers. To promote Robert Descharnes&#x27; 1962 book &quot;The World of Salvador Dalí&quot;, he appeared in a Manhattan bookstore on a bed, wired up to a machine that traced his brain waves and blood pressure. He would autograph books while thus monitored, and the book buyer would also be given the paper chart recording.

After World War II, Dalí became one of the most recognized artists in the world, and his long cape, walking stick, haughty expression, and upturned waxed mustache became icons of his brand. His boastfulness and public declarations of his genius became essential elements of the public Dalí persona: &quot;every morning upon awakening, I experience a supreme pleasure: that of being Salvador Dalí&quot;.

Dalí frequently traveled with his pet ocelot Babou, even bringing it aboard the luxury ocean liner SS &quot;France&quot;.

Dalí&#x27;s fame meant he was a frequent guest on television in Spain, France and the United States, including appearances on &quot;The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson&quot; on 7 January 1963, &quot;The Mike Wallace Interview&quot; and the panel show &quot;What&#x27;s My Line?&quot;. Dalí appeared on &quot;The Dick Cavett Show&quot; on 6 March 1970 carrying an anteater. He also appeared in numerous advertising campaigns such as chocolates and Braniff International Airlines in 1968.

==Legacy==
Two major museums are devoted to Dalí&#x27;s work: the Dalí Theatre-Museum in Figueres, Catalonia, Spain, and the Salvador Dalí Museum in St. Petersburg, Florida, U.S.

Dalí&#x27;s life and work have been an important influence on pop art, other Surrealists, and contemporary artists such as Jeff Koons and Damien Hirst. He has also had a continuing influence on contemporary culture. He has been portrayed on film by Robert Pattinson in &quot;Little Ashes&quot; (2008), by Adrien Brody in &quot;Midnight in Paris&quot; (2011), and by Ben Kingsley in &quot;Dalíland&quot;. The Spanish television series &quot;Money Heist&quot; (2017–2021) includes characters wearing a costume of red jumpsuits and Dalí masks. The creator of the series stated that the Dalí mask was chosen because it was an iconic Spanish image. The Salvador Dalí Desert in Bolivia and the Dalí crater on the planet Mercury are named for him. The container ship MV Dali was also named after him in 2015.

The Gala-Salvador Dalí Foundation currently serves as his official estate. The US copyright representative for the Gala-Salvador Dalí Foundation is the Artists Rights Society.

== Honors ==

* 1964: Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Isabella the Catholic
* 1972: Associate member of the Royal Academy of Science, Letters and Fine Arts of Belgium
* 1978: Associate member of the Académie des Beaux-Arts of the Institut de France
* 1981: Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Charles III
* 1982: Created 1st Marquess of Dalí of Púbol, by King Juan Carlos

== Selected works ==

Dalí produced over 1,600 paintings and numerous graphic works, sculptures, three-dimensional objects, and designs. Some of his major works are:

* (&quot;An Andalusian Dog&quot;) (1929) (film in collaboration with Luis Buñuel)
* &quot;The Great Masturbator&quot; (1929)
* &quot;L&#x27;Age d&#x27;Or&quot; (&quot;The Golden Age&quot;) (1930) (film in collaboration with Luis Buñuel)
* &quot;The Persistence of Memory&quot; (1931)
* &quot;Lobster Telephone&quot; (1936)
* &quot;Soft Construction with Boiled Beans (Premonition of Civil War)&quot; (1936)
* &quot;Metamorphosis of Narcissus&quot; (1937)
* &quot;The Burning Giraffe&quot; (1937)
* &quot;Mae West Lips Sofa&quot; (1937)
* Dream Caused by the Flight of a Bee (1944)
* &quot;The Madonna of Port Lligat&quot; (1949)
* &quot;Crucifixion (Corpus Hypercubus)&quot; (c. 1954) (also known as Hypercubic Christ)
* &quot;Young Virgin Auto-Sodomized by the Horns of Her Own Chastity&quot; (1954)
* &quot;The Discovery of America by Christopher Columbus&quot; (1958)
* &quot;Perpignan Railway Station&quot; (c. 1965)
* &quot;The Hallucinogenic Toreador&quot; (1970)

== Dalí museums and permanent exhibitions ==

* Dalí Theatre-Museum – Figueres, Catalonia, Spain, holds the largest collection of Dalí&#x27;s work
* Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofia (Reina Sofia Museum) – Madrid, Spain, holds a significant collection
* Salvador Dalí House Museum – Port Lligat, Catalonia, Spain
* Salvador Dalí Museum – St Petersburg, Florida, contains the collection of Reynolds and Eleanor Morse, and over 1500 works by Dalí, including seven large &quot;masterworks&quot;.

== Gallery ==

== See also ==
* List of Spanish artists
* Salvador Dalí and Dance

==Notes==
==References==
== Further reading ==
Important books by or about Salvador Dalí readily available in English include:

* Ades, Dawn, &quot;Salvador Dalí&quot;, Thames and Hudson, 1995 (2nd ed.)
* Dalí, Salvador, &quot;Oui: the paranoid-critical revolution: writings 1927–1933,&quot; (edited by Robert Descharnes, translated by Yvonne Shafir), Boston: Exact Change, 1998
*Dalí, Salvador, &quot;The Secret Life of Salvador Dalí&quot;, New York, Dover, 1993 (translated by Haakon M. Chevalier, first published 1942)
* Dalí, Salvador, &quot;The Diary of a Genius&quot;, London, Hutchinson, 1990 (translated by Richard Howard, first published 1964)
* Dalí, Salvador, &quot;The Unspeakable Confessions of Salvador Dalí&quot;, London, Quartet Books, 1977 (first published 1973)
* Descharnes, Robert, &quot;Salvador Dalí&quot; (translated by Eleanor R. Morse), New York, Abradale Press, 1993
* Gibson, Ian, &quot;The Shameful Life of Salvador Dalí&quot;, London, Faber and Faber, 1997
* Shanes, Eric, &quot;Salvador Dalí&quot;, Parkstone International, 2014

== External links ==
*Salvador Dalí on What&#x27;s My Line?
* Interview and bank advertisement.
* A collection of interviews and footage of Dalí in the French television
*Mike Wallace interviews Salvador Dalí Archived 15 December 2015. Harry Ransom Center, the University of Texas at Austin 
*&quot;Panorama&quot;: Salvador Dali – Malcolm Muggeridge BBC interview, first transmitted 4 May 1955</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="0" end="74" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Domingo Felipe Jacinto Dalí i Domènech, Marquess of Dalí of Púbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="114" end="127" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="151" end="161" title="Surrealism" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839" start="285" end="293" title="Figueres" label="Figueres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="297" end="306" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="381" end="394" title="Impressionism" label="Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133779" start="403" end="414" title="Renaissance art" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="477" end="483" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="488" end="499" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q25729" start="671" end="696" title="The Persistence of Memory" label="The Persistence of Memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="770" end="787" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="1682" end="1698" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q134147" start="1883" end="1890" title="pop art" label="pop art"/>
<link wikidata="Q297525" start="1942" end="1952" title="Jeff Koons" label="Jeff Koons"/>
<link wikidata="Q294326" start="1957" end="1969" title="Damien Hirst" label="Damien Hirst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143722" start="2042" end="2061" title="Dalí Theatre and Museum" label="Dalí Theatre-Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839" start="2065" end="2073" title="Figueres" label="Figueres"/>
<link wikidata="Q674427" start="2090" end="2110" title="Salvador Dalí Museum" label="Salvador Dalí Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49236" start="2114" end="2137" title="St. Petersburg, Florida" label="St. Petersburg, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q597320" start="2306" end="2313" title="Empordà" label="Empordà"/>
<link wikidata="Q937876" start="2314" end="2320" title="Comarques of Catalonia" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="3139" end="3144" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="3744" end="3756" title="FC Barcelona" label="FC Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337552" start="3769" end="3785" title="Emili Sagi-Barba" label="Emili Sagi-Barba"/>
<link wikidata="Q342435" start="3790" end="3804" title="Josep Samitier" label="Josep Samitier"/>
<link wikidata="Q11263" start="3852" end="3860" title="Cadaqués" label="Cadaqués"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399554" start="4054" end="4066" title="Ramon Pichot" label="Ramon Pichot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="4394" end="4402" title="Futurism" label="Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="4531" end="4537" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450424" start="5124" end="5149" title="Residencia de Estudiantes" label="Residencia de Estudiantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322403" start="5206" end="5251" title="Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando" label="Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801255" start="5454" end="5463" title="artistic dress movement" label="aesthetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q151854" start="5539" end="5550" title="Pepín Bello" label="Pepín Bello"/>
<link wikidata="Q51545" start="5552" end="5563" title="Luis Buñuel" label="Luis Buñuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41408" start="5565" end="5586" title="Federico García Lorca" label="Federico García Lorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742116" start="5918" end="5929" title="Nationalist faction (Spanish Civil War)" label="Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="5969" end="5986" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q160112" start="6063" end="6075" title="Museo del Prado" label="Prado Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015245" start="6649" end="6662" title="Cabaret Scene" label="Cabaret Scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="6834" end="6838" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="6843" end="6851" title="Futurism" label="Futurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q294181" start="7025" end="7036" title="Comte de Lautréamont" label="Lautréamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q60465010" start="7387" end="7402" title="Galeries Dalmau" label="Galeries Dalmau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="7630" end="7643" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q152384" start="7722" end="7731" title="Joan Miró" label="Joan Miró"/>
<link wikidata="Q66809948" start="7960" end="7971" title="Yves Tanguy" label="Yves Tanguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153517" start="8228" end="8247" title="The Basket of Bread" label="The Basket of Bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="10324" end="10335" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="10371" end="10378" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803" start="10380" end="10388" title="Bronzino" label="Bronzino"/>
<link wikidata="Q209615" start="10390" end="10411" title="Francisco de Zurbarán" label="Francisco de Zurbarán"/>
<link wikidata="Q41264" start="10413" end="10420" title="Johannes Vermeer" label="Vermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q297" start="10425" end="10434" title="Diego Velázquez" label="Velázquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q297" start="10858" end="10873" title="Diego Velázquez" label="Diego Velázquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q51545" start="11011" end="11022" title="Luis Buñuel" label="Luis Buñuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q464056" start="11350" end="11354" title="Gala Dalí" label="Gala"/>
<link wikidata="Q152176" start="11485" end="11496" title="Paul Éluard" label="Paul Éluard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920341" start="11522" end="11546" title="The First Days of Spring" label="The First Days of Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q167536" start="11560" end="11581" title="The Great Masturbator" label="The Great Masturbator"/>
<link wikidata="Q195776" start="11598" end="11617" title="The Lugubrious Game" label="The Lugubrious Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q161955" start="11865" end="11877" title="André Breton" label="André Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637700" start="12215" end="12240" title="paranoiac-critical method" label="paranoiac-critical method"/>
<link wikidata="Q727449" start="13212" end="13223" title="Port Lligat" label="Port Lligat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25729" start="13506" end="13531" title="The Persistence of Memory" label="The Persistence of Memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189569" start="14735" end="14746" title="Julien Levy" label="Julien Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="16147" end="16167" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q464037" start="16342" end="16356" title="Caresse Crosby" label="Caresse Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q844495" start="16640" end="16654" title="Lindbergh baby" label="Lindbergh baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q63731" start="16663" end="16672" title="Bruno Hauptmann" label="kidnapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q161955" start="16928" end="16940" title="André Breton" label="André Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666958" start="17542" end="17584" title="London International Surrealist Exhibition" label="London International Surrealist Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q63844" start="18608" end="18670" title="Soft Construction with Boiled Beans (Premonition of Civil War)" label="Soft Construction with Boiled Beans (Premonition of Civil War)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="18958" end="18962" title="Time magazine" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q196055" start="19212" end="19224" title="Edward James" label="Edward James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464824" start="19369" end="19399" title="Metamorphosis of Narcissus" label="The Metamorphosis of Narcissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990594" start="19509" end="19526" title="Lobster Telephone" label="Lobster Telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986845" start="19547" end="19565" title="Mae West Lips Sofa" label="Mae West Lips Sofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="19602" end="19619" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742116" start="19709" end="19720" title="Nationalist faction (Spanish Civil War)" label="Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="19964" end="19972" title="the Second Spanish Republic" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q195159" start="20045" end="20055" title="Rainy Taxi" label="Rainy Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384737" start="20270" end="20310" title="Exposition Internationale du Surréalisme" label="Exposition Internationale du Surréalisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q161955" start="20331" end="20343" title="André Breton" label="André Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q152176" start="20348" end="20359" title="Paul Éluard" label="Paul Éluard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912" start="20399" end="20413" title="Marcel Duchamp" label="Marcel Duchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="20470" end="20483" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q78491" start="20494" end="20506" title="Stefan Zweig" label="Stefan Zweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q45661" start="21176" end="21197" title="Coco Chanel" label="Gabrielle Coco Chanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="21447" end="21451" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q207420" start="21580" end="21611" title="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="22130" end="22136" title="Francisco Franco" label="Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q207308" start="22284" end="22291" title="Falange Española de las JONS" label="Falange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637700" start="22561" end="22586" title="paranoiac-critical method" label="paranoiac-critical method"/>
<link wikidata="Q186251" start="22619" end="22630" title="Surrealist automatism" label="automatism."/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="23032" end="23044" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q117371" start="23194" end="23219" title="Aristides de Sousa Mendes" label="Aristides de Sousa Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772349" start="23491" end="23509" title="Monterey Peninsula" label="Monterey Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q464037" start="23592" end="23606" title="Caresse Crosby" label="Caresse Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509326" start="23964" end="24015" title="Slave Market with the Disappearing Bust of Voltaire" label="Slave Market with the Disappearing Bust of Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663568" start="24032" end="24047" title="The Face of War" label="The Face of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41690" start="24186" end="24200" title="Golden Section" label="Golden Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q152384" start="24601" end="24610" title="Joan Miró" label="Joan Miró"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763042" start="24919" end="24951" title="The Secret Life of Salvador Dalí" label="The Secret Life of Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26075" end="26083" title="[collage" label="[collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q15619234" start="26249" end="26263" title="Bignou Gallery" label="Bignou Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q610803" start="26386" end="26401" title="Basket of Bread" label="Basket of Bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200974" start="27327" end="27334" title="Destino" label="Destino"/>
<link wikidata="Q133508" start="27731" end="27743" title="Leda Atomica" label="Leda Atomica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11263" start="28135" end="28143" title="Cadaqués" label="Cadaqués"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="29458" end="29469" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q115728" start="29577" end="29603" title="The Madonna of Port Lligat" label="The Madonna of Port Lligat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="29649" end="29662" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q115728" start="29911" end="29937" title="The Madonna of Port Lligat" label="The Madonna of Port Lligat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25749" start="29951" end="29988" title="Christ of Saint John of the Cross" label="The Christ of Saint John on the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461937" start="30005" end="30052" title="The Disintegration of the Persistence of Memory" label="The Disintegration of the Persistence of Memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209358" start="30225" end="30245" title="La Gare de Perpignan" label="La Gare de Perpignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136474" start="30269" end="30296" title="The Hallucinogenic Toreador" label="The Hallucinogenic Toreador"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="30441" end="30456" title="rhinoceros horn" label="rhinoceros horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12142" start="30632" end="30641" title="Tesseract" label="Tesseract"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583260" start="30701" end="30732" title="Crucifixion (Corpus Hypercubus)" label="Crucifixion (Corpus Hypercubus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q217422" start="30814" end="30826" title="anamorphosis" label="anamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092316" start="30828" end="30842" title="negative space" label="negative space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933810" start="30844" end="30854" title="visual pun" label="visual pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q468930" start="30866" end="30883" title="trompe-l&amp;#x27;œil" label="trompe-l&amp;#x27;œil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996852" start="31240" end="31249" title="bulletism" label="bulletist"/>
<link wikidata="Q200034" start="31260" end="31271" title="pointillism" label="pointillism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110021" start="31282" end="31291" title="half-tone" label="half-tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q527628" start="31368" end="31378" title="holography" label="holography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="31452" end="31463" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q134147" start="31505" end="31512" title="pop art" label="pop art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143722" start="31547" end="31561" title="Dalí Theatre and Museum" label="Theatre-Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839" start="31582" end="31590" title="Figueres" label="Figueres"/>
<link wikidata="Q454010" start="31875" end="31886" title="Amanda Lear" label="Amanda Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="32850" end="32866" title="Juan Carlos I of Spain" label="King Juan Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738714" start="33000" end="33005" title="Púbol" label="Púbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q611945" start="33199" end="33222" title="The Swallow&amp;#x27;s Tail" label="The Swallow&amp;#x27;s Tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345659" start="33296" end="33314" title="catastrophe theory" label="catastrophe theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q164428" start="33318" end="33327" title="René Thom" label="René Thom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143722" start="34968" end="34982" title="Dalí Theatre and Museum" label="Theatre-Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="36063" end="36071" title="Freudian" label="Freudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="36098" end="36103" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q83931" start="36134" end="36140" title="locust" label="locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q19707" start="36151" end="36157" title="donkey" label="donkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q83483" start="36164" end="36174" title="sea urchin" label="sea urchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131250" start="36506" end="36520" title="praying mantis" label="praying mantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q153517" start="36629" end="36648" title="The Basket of Bread" label="The Basket of Bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q208172" start="36754" end="36762" title="baguette" label="baguette"/>
<link wikidata="Q167536" start="37043" end="37064" title="The Great Masturbator" label="The Great Masturbator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464824" start="37078" end="37108" title="Metamorphosis of Narcissus" label="The Metamorphosis of Narcissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q727449" start="37222" end="37232" title="Portlligat" label="Portlligat"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="37567" end="37575" title="Albert Einstein" label="Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q131480" start="37746" end="37755" title="Camembert" label="Camembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="37785" end="37795" title="rhinoceros" label="rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q724944" start="37971" end="37989" title="logarithmic spiral" label="logarithmic spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="38049" end="38060" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q763485" start="38128" end="38188" title="Young Virgin Auto-Sodomized by the Horns of Her Own Chastity" label="Young Virgin Auto-Sodomized by the Horns of Her Own Chastity"/>
<link wikidata="Q308841" start="38354" end="38359" title="snail" label="snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q172354" start="38585" end="38667" title="Dream Caused by the Flight of a Bee Around a Pomegranate a Second Before Awakening" label="Dream Caused by the Flight of a Bee Around a Pomegranate a Second Before Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q160538" start="38705" end="38725" title="Gian Lorenzo Bernini" label="Gian Lorenzo Bernini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38762" end="38798" title="Santa Maria Sopra Minerva#Minerva&amp;#x27;s Pulcino" label="elephant carrying an ancient obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="38964" end="39004" title="Theory of relativity" label="Einstein&amp;#x27;s theory of the relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="39087" end="39127" title="atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="39143" end="39146" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="39481" end="39495" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Dr. Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461937" start="39510" end="39557" title="The Disintegration of the Persistence of Memory" label="The Disintegration of the Persistence of Memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="39755" end="39772" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990594" start="40700" end="40717" title="Lobster Telephone" label="Lobster Telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986845" start="40741" end="40759" title="Mae West Lips Sofa" label="Mae West Lips Sofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q196055" start="40811" end="40823" title="Edward James" label="Edward James"/>
<link wikidata="Q938535" start="42170" end="42181" title="Chupa Chups" label="Chupa Chups"/>
<link wikidata="Q203329" start="42250" end="42278" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1969" label="1969 Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q211250" start="42342" end="42353" title="Teatro Real" label="Teatro Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q41408" start="42433" end="42454" title="Federico García Lorca" label="Federico García Lorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690969" start="42487" end="42501" title="Mariana Pineda (play)" label="Mariana Pineda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878195" start="42519" end="42529" title="Bacchanale" label="Bacchanale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193029" start="42898" end="42920" title="The Three-Cornered Hat" label="The Three-Cornered Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q190575" start="43259" end="43275" title="Un Chien Andalou" label="Un Chien Andalou"/>
<link wikidata="Q946849" start="43316" end="43336" title="L&amp;#x27;Age d&amp;#x27;Or" label="L&amp;#x27;Age d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q317237" start="44481" end="44491" title="Harpo Marx" label="Harpo Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q497311" start="44687" end="44697" title="Spellbound (1945 film)" label="Spellbound"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="44792" end="44803" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399169" start="44817" end="44827" title="John Hench" label="John Hench"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200974" start="44852" end="44859" title="Destino" label="Destino"/>
<link wikidata="Q374229" start="44998" end="45011" title="Roy E. Disney" label="Roy E. Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q380078" start="45065" end="45082" title="Robert Descharnes" label="Robert Descharnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q704572" start="45290" end="45306" title="Philippe Halsman" label="Philippe Halsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451957" start="45349" end="45358" title="Jack Bond (director)" label="Jack Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684722" start="45402" end="45424" title="Jean-Christophe Averty" label="Jean-Christophe Averty"/>
<link wikidata="Q263730" start="45744" end="45764" title="Alejandro Jodorowsky" label="Alejandro Jodorowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012924" start="46129" end="46138" title="Être Dieu" label="Être Dieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q316884" start="46189" end="46213" title="Manuel Vázquez Montalbán" label="Manuel Vázquez Montalbán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398742" start="46237" end="46252" title="Igor Wakhévitch" label="Igor Wakhévitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q464023" start="46402" end="46419" title="Elsa Schiaparelli" label="Elsa Schiaparelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q105271778" start="46486" end="46518" title="Lobster dress" label="white dress with a lobster print"/>
<link wikidata="Q46139" start="46828" end="46835" title="Man Ray" label="Man Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q354804" start="46837" end="46844" title="Brassaï" label="Brassaï"/>
<link wikidata="Q697096" start="46846" end="46858" title="Cecil Beaton" label="Cecil Beaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q704572" start="46864" end="46880" title="Philippe Halsman" label="Philippe Halsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q727449" start="47216" end="47227" title="Port Lligat" label="Port Lligat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11263" start="47239" end="47247" title="Cadaqués" label="Cadaqués"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839" start="47282" end="47290" title="Figueres" label="Figueres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636491" start="48370" end="48386" title="Haakon Chevalier" label="Haakon Chevalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939069" start="49477" end="49500" title="Carles Fages de Climent" label="Carles Fages de Climent"/>
<link wikidata="Q192894" start="49927" end="49955" title="Miguel Primo de Rivera" label="Primo de Rivera dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q522505" start="50161" end="50199" title="Workers and Peasants&amp;#x27; Bloc" label="Workers&amp;#x27; and Peasants&amp;#x27; Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q161955" start="50434" end="50446" title="André Breton" label="André Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="51112" end="51127" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q189564" start="52063" end="52082" title="Pierre Teilhard de Chardin" label="Teilhard de Chardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552613" start="52091" end="52102" title="Omega Point" label="Omega Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445581" start="52138" end="52173" title="Tuna Fishing (painting)" label="Tuna Fishing (Homage to Meissonier)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920341" start="52994" end="53018" title="The First Days of Spring" label="The First Days of Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q167536" start="53039" end="53060" title="The Great Masturbator" label="The Great Masturbator"/>
<link wikidata="Q195776" start="53085" end="53104" title="The Lugubrious Game" label="The Lugubrious Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q337531" start="53729" end="53756" title="Académie des Beaux-Arts" label="French Academy of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q694774" start="53908" end="53922" title="Joseph Cornell" label="Joseph Cornell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563239" start="53941" end="53952" title="Rose Hobart (film)" label="Rose Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q33261" start="55244" end="55250" title="ocelot" label="ocelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q102049578" start="55251" end="55256" title="Babou (ocelot)" label="Babou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057742" start="55461" end="55500" title="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" label="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751405" start="55532" end="55558" title="The Mike Wallace Interview" label="The Mike Wallace Interview"/>
<link wikidata="Q660263" start="55590" end="55610" title="What&amp;#x27;s My Line?" label="What&amp;#x27;s My Line?"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839" start="55910" end="55918" title="Figueres" label="Figueres"/>
<link wikidata="Q674427" start="55946" end="55966" title="Salvador Dalí Museum" label="Salvador Dalí Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49236" start="55970" end="55984" title="St. Petersburg, Florida" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q36767" start="56250" end="56266" title="Robert Pattinson" label="Robert Pattinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249443" start="56276" end="56288" title="Little Ashes" label="Little Ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q104514" start="56306" end="56318" title="Adrien Brody" label="Adrien Brody"/>
<link wikidata="Q206124" start="56328" end="56345" title="Midnight in Paris" label="Midnight in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q173158" start="56367" end="56379" title="Ben Kingsley" label="Ben Kingsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q52559148" start="56389" end="56397" title="Daliland" label="Dalíland"/>
<link wikidata="Q29647346" start="56441" end="56452" title="Money Heist" label="Money Heist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382079" start="56649" end="56669" title="Salvador Dalí Desert" label="Salvador Dalí Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210887" start="56689" end="56700" title="Dali (crater)" label="Dalí crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q83641522" start="56761" end="56768" title="MV Dali" label="MV Dali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075464" start="56804" end="56837" title="Gala-Salvador Dalí Foundation" label="The Gala-Salvador Dalí Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801318" start="56956" end="56978" title="Artists Rights Society" label="Artists Rights Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q931502" start="57029" end="57059" title="Order of Isabella the Catholic" label="Order of Isabella the Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q337580" start="57092" end="57150" title="Royal Academy of Science, Letters and Fine Arts of Belgium" label="Royal Academy of Science, Letters and Fine Arts of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q337531" start="57183" end="57206" title="Académie des Beaux-Arts" label="Académie des Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q377066" start="57214" end="57232" title="Institut de France" label="Institut de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q751275" start="57267" end="57287" title="Order of Charles III" label="Order of Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="57338" end="57354" title="Juan Carlos I of Spain" label="King Juan Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q51545" start="57592" end="57603" title="Luis Buñuel" label="Luis Buñuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q167536" start="57613" end="57634" title="The Great Masturbator" label="The Great Masturbator"/>
<link wikidata="Q946849" start="57656" end="57676" title="L&amp;#x27;Age d&amp;#x27;Or" label="L&amp;#x27;Age d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q25729" start="57768" end="57793" title="The Persistence of Memory" label="The Persistence of Memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990594" start="57815" end="57832" title="Lobster Telephone" label="Lobster Telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q63844" start="57854" end="57916" title="Soft Construction with Boiled Beans (Premonition of Civil War)" label="Soft Construction with Boiled Beans (Premonition of Civil War)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464824" start="57938" end="57964" title="Metamorphosis of Narcissus" label="Metamorphosis of Narcissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133839" start="57986" end="58005" title="The Burning Giraffe" label="The Burning Giraffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986845" start="58027" end="58045" title="Mae West Lips Sofa" label="Mae West Lips Sofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q172354" start="58061" end="58096" title="Dream Caused by the Flight of a Bee Around a Pomegranate a Second Before Awakening" label="Dream Caused by the Flight of a Bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q115728" start="58112" end="58138" title="The Madonna of Port Lligat" label="The Madonna of Port Lligat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583260" start="58160" end="58191" title="Crucifixion (Corpus Hypercubus)" label="Crucifixion (Corpus Hypercubus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q763485" start="58250" end="58310" title="Young Virgin Auto-Sodomized by the Horns of Her Own Chastity" label="Young Virgin Auto-Sodomized by the Horns of Her Own Chastity"/>
<link wikidata="Q335403" start="58332" end="58380" title="The Discovery of America by Christopher Columbus" label="The Discovery of America by Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209358" start="58396" end="58433" title="La Gare de Perpignan" label="&amp;quot;Perpignan Railway Station&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136474" start="58452" end="58479" title="The Hallucinogenic Toreador" label="The Hallucinogenic Toreador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143722" start="58542" end="58561" title="Dalí Theatre and Museum" label="Dalí Theatre-Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839" start="58564" end="58572" title="Figueres" label="Figueres"/>
<link wikidata="Q460889" start="58643" end="58684" title="Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofia" label="Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601937" start="58756" end="58782" title="Salvador Dalí House Museum" label="Salvador Dalí House Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q727449" start="58785" end="58796" title="Port Lligat" label="Port Lligat"/>
<link wikidata="Q674427" start="58817" end="58837" title="Salvador Dalí Museum" label="Salvador Dalí Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49236" start="58840" end="58862" title="St Petersburg, Florida" label="St Petersburg, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948750" start="58891" end="58917" title="Reynolds and Eleanor Morse" label="Reynolds and Eleanor Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597776" start="59028" end="59051" title="List of Spanish artists" label="List of Spanish artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q25095574" start="59054" end="59077" title="Salvador Dalí and Dance" label="Salvador Dalí and Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="60400" end="60429" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q720681" start="60470" end="60488" title="Malcolm Muggeridge" label="Malcolm Muggeridge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40113" wikidata="Q948604" url="?curid=40113" title="Ides of March">
<text>The Ides of March (; , Medieval Latin: ) is the day on the Roman calendar marked as the , roughly the midpoint of a month, of Martius, corresponding to 15 March on the Gregorian calendar. It was marked by several major religious observances. In 44 BC, it became notorious as the date of the assassination of Julius Caesar, which made the Ides of March a turning point in Roman history.

==Ides==
The Romans did not number each day of a month from the first to the last day. Instead, they counted back from three fixed points of the month: the Nones (the 5th or 7th, eight days before the Ides), the Ides (the 13th for most months, but the 15th in March, May, July, and October), and the Kalends (1st of the following month).

Originally the Ides were supposed to be determined by the full moon, reflecting the lunar origin of the Roman calendar. &quot;Martius&quot; (March) was the first month of the Roman year until as late as the mid-2nd century BC, an order reflected in the numerical names of the months of September (the seventh month) through December (the tenth month) not corresponding to their current position on the Gregorian calendar. In the earliest Roman calendar, the Ides of March would have been the first full moon of the new year. As a fixed point in the month, the Ides accumulated functions set to occur every month, and was the day when debt payments and rents were due.

===Religious observances===

The month of Martius was named for the god Mars, whose &quot;birthday&quot; was celebrated on the 1st, but the Ides of each month were sacred to Jupiter, the Romans&#x27; supreme deity. The Flamen Dialis, Jupiter&#x27;s high priest, led the &quot;Ides sheep&quot; () in procession along the Via Sacra to the , where it was sacrificed.

March retained many of its new-year ceremonies even when it was preceded on the calendar by January and February. In addition to the monthly sacrifice, the Ides of March was also the occasion of the Feast of Anna Perenna, a goddess of the year (Latin ) whose festival originally concluded the ceremonies of the new year. The day was enthusiastically celebrated among the common people with picnics, drinking, and revelry. One source from late antiquity also places the Mamuralia on the Ides of March. This observance, which has aspects of scapegoat or ancient Greek ritual, involved beating an old man dressed in animal skins and perhaps driving him from the city. The ritual may have been a new year festival representing the expulsion of the old year.

In the later Imperial period, the Ides began a &quot;holy week&quot; of festivals celebrating Cybele and Attis, being the day (&quot;The Reed enters&quot;), when Attis was born and found among the reeds of a Phrygian river. He was discovered by shepherds or the goddess Cybele, who was also known as the (&quot;Great Mother&quot;) (narratives differ). A week later, on 22 March, the solemn commemoration of (&quot;The Tree enters&quot;) commemorated the death of Attis under a pine tree. A college of priests, the (&quot;tree bearers&quot;) annually cut down a tree, hung from it an image of Attis, and carried it to the temple of the with lamentations. The day was formalized as part of the official Roman calendar under Claudius ( 54 AD). A three-day period of mourning followed, culminating with celebrating the rebirth of Attis on 25 March, the date of the vernal equinox on the Julian calendar.

==Assassination of Caesar==

In modern times, the Ides of March is best known as the date on which Julius Caesar was assassinated in 44 BC. Caesar was stabbed to death at a meeting of the Senate. As many as 60 conspirators, led by Brutus and Cassius, were involved. According to Plutarch, a seer had warned that harm would come to Caesar on the Ides of March. On his way to the Theatre of Pompey, where he would be assassinated, Caesar passed the seer and joked, &quot;Well, the Ides of March are come&quot;, implying that the prophecy had not been fulfilled, to which the seer replied &quot;Aye, they are come, but they are not gone.&quot; This meeting is famously dramatised in William Shakespeare&#x27;s play &quot;Julius Caesar&quot;, when Caesar is warned by the soothsayer to &quot;beware the Ides of March.&quot; The Roman biographer Suetonius identifies the &quot;seer&quot; as a haruspex named Spurinna.

Caesar&#x27;s assassination opened the final chapter in the crisis of the Roman Republic. After his victory in Caesar&#x27;s civil war, his death triggered a series of further Roman civil wars that would finally result in the rise to sole power of his adopted heir Octavian. In 27 BC, Octavian became emperor Augustus, and thus he finally terminated the Roman Republic. Writing under Augustus, Ovid portrays the murder as a sacrilege, since Caesar was also the of Rome and a priest of Vesta. On the fourth anniversary of Caesar&#x27;s death in 40 BC, after achieving a victory at the siege of Perugia, Octavian executed 300 senators and equites who had fought against him under Lucius Antonius, the brother of Mark Antony. The executions were one of a series of actions taken by Octavian to avenge Caesar&#x27;s death. Suetonius and the historian Cassius Dio characterised the slaughter as a religious sacrifice, noting that it occurred on the Ides of March at the new altar to the deified Julius.

== See also ==
* &quot;The Ides of March&quot; – a 1948 novel by Thornton Wilder
* The Ides of March (est. 1964) – an American musical group
* &quot;The Ides of March&quot; – a 1981 song by Iron Maiden
* &quot;The Ides of March&quot; – a 2005 song by Silverstein
* &quot;The Ides of March&quot; – a 2008 novel by Valerio Massimo Manfredi
* &quot;The Ides of March&quot; – a 2011 film by George Clooney, Beau Willimon and Grant Heslov
* &quot;The Ides of March&quot; – a 2021 music album by Myles Kennedy

== References ==
==External links==
* Plutarch, The Parallel Lives, The Life of Julius Caesar
* Nicolaus of Damascus, Life of Augustus (translated by Clayton M. Hall)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q948604" start="4" end="17" title="Ides of March" label="Ides of March"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="23" end="37" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="59" end="73" title="Roman calendar" label="Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905780" start="126" end="133" title="Martius (month)" label="Martius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="168" end="186" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="219" end="240" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="religious observances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025466" start="291" end="321" title="assassination of Julius Caesar" label="assassination of Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="543" end="548" title="Nones (calendar)" label="Nones"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="599" end="603" title="Ides (calendar)" label="Ides"/>
<link wikidata="Q282162" start="687" end="694" title="Kalends" label="Kalends"/>
<link wikidata="Q104641" start="784" end="793" title="full moon" label="full moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185688" start="810" end="822" title="lunar calendar" label="lunar origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="1463" end="1471" title="Mars (deity)" label="god Mars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1485" end="1493" title="Glossary of ancient Roman religion#dies natalis" label="birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="1569" end="1576" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426927" start="1614" end="1627" title="Flamen Dialis" label="Flamen Dialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q655172" start="1715" end="1724" title="Via Sacra" label="Via Sacra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142916" start="1747" end="1757" title="Animal sacrifice" label="sacrificed"/>
<link wikidata="Q539796" start="1968" end="1980" title="Anna Perenna" label="Anna Perenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="2198" end="2212" title="late antiquity" label="late antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265156" start="2229" end="2238" title="Mamuralia" label="Mamuralia"/>
<link wikidata="Q245122" start="2299" end="2308" title="scapegoat" label="scapegoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q581653" start="2326" end="2332" title="pharmakos" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325522" start="2504" end="2512" title="Father Time" label="old year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2528" end="2543" title="Roman Empire" label="Imperial period"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2562" end="2596" title="Cybele#&amp;#x27;Holy week&amp;#x27; in March" label="&amp;quot;holy week&amp;quot; of festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q188236" start="2609" end="2615" title="Cybele" label="Cybele"/>
<link wikidata="Q262016" start="2620" end="2625" title="Attis" label="Attis"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579" start="2723" end="2730" title="Phrygia" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="3237" end="3245" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12889843" start="3376" end="3390" title="March equinox" label="vernal equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="3398" end="3413" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="3515" end="3528" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="3604" end="3610" title="Roman senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q172248" start="3647" end="3653" title="Marcus Junius Brutus" label="Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207370" start="3658" end="3665" title="Gaius Cassius Longinus" label="Cassius"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="3695" end="3703" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q944814" start="3794" end="3811" title="Theatre of Pompey" label="Theatre of Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="4096" end="4115" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q215750" start="4134" end="4147" title="Julius Caesar (play)" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011595" start="4184" end="4194" title="Fortune-telling" label="soothsayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="4257" end="4266" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q623455" start="4304" end="4312" title="haruspex" label="haruspex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395322" start="4390" end="4418" title="crisis of the Roman Republic" label="crisis of the Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238338" start="4441" end="4464" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s civil war" label="Caesar&amp;#x27;s civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747183" start="4498" end="4522" title="Roman civil wars" label="further Roman civil wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="4639" end="4647" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821013" start="4700" end="4722" title="Augustan literature (ancient Rome)" label="Writing under Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="4724" end="4728" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q178710" start="4815" end="4820" title="Vesta (mythology)" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q643987" start="4914" end="4930" title="siege of Perugia" label="siege of Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="4954" end="4962" title="Roman senate" label="senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="4967" end="4974" title="equestrian order" label="equites"/>
<link wikidata="Q318803" start="5008" end="5023" title="Lucius Antonius (brother of Mark Antony)" label="Lucius Antonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="5040" end="5051" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="5177" end="5188" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="5222" end="5241" title="Sacrifice in ancient Roman religion" label="religious sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235185" start="5312" end="5326" title="Divus Julius" label="deified Julius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148938" start="5346" end="5375" title="The Ides of March (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Ides of March&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q155087" start="5394" end="5409" title="Thornton Wilder" label="Thornton Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q478140" start="5412" end="5429" title="The Ides of March (band)" label="The Ides of March"/>
<link wikidata="Q275550" start="5472" end="5501" title="Killers (Iron Maiden album)" label="&amp;quot;The Ides of March&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="5519" end="5530" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736364" start="5533" end="5562" title="The Ides of March (Silverstein song)" label="&amp;quot;The Ides of March&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q638286" start="5580" end="5591" title="Silverstein (band)" label="Silverstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q467817" start="5642" end="5666" title="Valerio Massimo Manfredi" label="Valerio Massimo Manfredi"/>
<link wikidata="Q543581" start="5669" end="5698" title="The Ides of March (2011 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Ides of March&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844" start="5716" end="5730" title="George Clooney" label="George Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877396" start="5732" end="5745" title="Beau Willimon" label="Beau Willimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q710180" start="5750" end="5762" title="Grant Heslov" label="Grant Heslov"/>
<link wikidata="Q106900799" start="5771" end="5788" title="The Ides of March (album)" label="The Ides of March"/>
<link wikidata="Q289003" start="5819" end="5832" title="Myles Kennedy" label="Myles Kennedy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40114" wikidata="Q25419" url="?curid=40114" title="Escherichia coli">
<text>Escherichia coli ( ) is a gram-negative, facultative anaerobic, rod-shaped, coliform bacterium of the genus &quot;Escherichia&quot; that is commonly found in the lower intestine of warm-blooded organisms. Most &quot;E. coli&quot; strains are part of the normal microbiota of the gut, where they constitute about 0.1%, along with other facultative anaerobes. These bacteria are mostly harmless or even beneficial to humans. For example, some strains of &quot;E. coli&quot; benefit their hosts by producing vitamin K2 or by preventing the colonization of the intestine by harmful pathogenic bacteria. These mutually beneficial relationships between &quot;E. coli&quot; and humans are a type of mutualistic biological relationship—where both the humans and the &quot;E. coli&quot; are benefitting each other. &quot;E. coli&quot; is expelled into the environment within fecal matter. The bacterium grows massively in fresh fecal matter under aerobic conditions for three days, but its numbers decline slowly afterwards.

Some serotypes, such as EPEC and ETEC, are pathogenic, causing serious food poisoning in their hosts. Fecal–oral transmission is the major route through which pathogenic strains of the bacterium cause disease. This transmission method is occasionally responsible for food contamination incidents that prompt product recalls. Cells are able to survive outside the body for a limited amount of time, which makes them potential indicator organisms to test environmental samples for fecal contamination. A growing body of research, though, has examined environmentally persistent &quot;E. coli&quot; which can survive for many days and grow outside a host.

The bacterium can be grown and cultured easily and inexpensively in a laboratory setting, and has been intensively investigated for over 60 years. &quot;E. coli&quot; is a chemoheterotroph whose chemically defined medium must include a source of carbon and energy. &quot;E. coli&quot; is the most widely studied prokaryotic model organism, and an important species in the fields of biotechnology and microbiology, where it has served as the host organism for the majority of work with recombinant DNA. Under favourable conditions, it takes as little as 20 minutes to reproduce.

==Biology and biochemistry==
===Type and morphology===
&quot;E. coli&quot; is a gram-negative, facultative anaerobe, nonsporulating coliform bacterium. Cells are typically rod-shaped, and are about 2.0 μm long and 0.25–1.0 μm in diameter, with a cell volume of 0.6–0.7 μm3.

&quot;E. coli&quot; stains gram-negative because its cell wall is composed of a thin peptidoglycan layer and an outer membrane. During the staining process, &quot;E. coli&quot; picks up the color of the counterstain safranin and stains pink. The outer membrane surrounding the cell wall provides a barrier to certain antibiotics, such that &quot;E. coli&quot; is not damaged by penicillin.

The flagella which allow the bacteria to swim have a peritrichous arrangement. It also attaches and effaces to the microvilli of the intestines via an adhesion molecule known as intimin.

=== Metabolism ===
&quot;E. coli&quot; can live on a wide variety of substrates and uses mixed acid fermentation in anaerobic conditions, producing lactate, succinate, ethanol, acetate, and carbon dioxide. Since many pathways in mixed-acid fermentation produce hydrogen gas, these pathways require the levels of hydrogen to be low, as is the case when &quot;E. coli&quot; lives together with hydrogen-consuming organisms, such as methanogens or sulphate-reducing bacteria.

In addition, &quot;E. coli&quot;″s metabolism can be rewired to solely use CO2 as the source of carbon for biomass production. In other words, this obligate heterotroph&#x27;s metabolism can be altered to display autotrophic capabilities by heterologously expressing carbon fixation genes as well as formate dehydrogenase and conducting laboratory evolution experiments. This may be done by using formate to reduce electron carriers and supply the ATP required in anabolic pathways inside of these synthetic autotrophs.

&quot;E. coli&quot; has three native glycolytic pathways: EMPP, EDP, and OPPP. The EMPP employs ten enzymatic steps to yield two pyruvates, two ATP, and two NADH per glucose molecule while OPPP serves as an oxidation route for NADPH synthesis. Although the EDP is the more thermodynamically favourable of the three pathways, &quot;E. coli&quot; do not use the EDP for glucose metabolism, relying mainly on the EMPP and the OPPP. The EDP mainly remains inactive except for during growth with gluconate.

==== Catabolite repression ====
When growing in the presence of a mixture of sugars, bacteria will often consume the sugars sequentially through a process known as catabolite repression. By repressing the expression of the genes involved in metabolizing the less preferred sugars, cells will usually first consume the sugar yielding the highest growth rate, followed by the sugar yielding the next highest growth rate, and so on. In doing so the cells ensure that their limited metabolic resources are being used to maximize the rate of growth. The well-used example of this with &quot;E. coli&quot; involves the growth of the bacterium on glucose and lactose, where &quot;E. coli&quot; will consume glucose before lactose. Catabolite repression has also been observed in &quot;E. coli&quot; in the presence of other non-glucose sugars, such as arabinose and xylose, sorbitol, rhamnose, and ribose. In &quot;E. coli&quot;, glucose catabolite repression is regulated by the phosphotransferase system, a multi-protein phosphorylation cascade that couples glucose uptake and metabolism.

===Culture growth===
Optimum growth of &quot;E. coli&quot; occurs at , but some laboratory strains can multiply at temperatures up to . &quot;E. coli&quot; grows in a variety of defined laboratory media, such as lysogeny broth, or any medium that contains glucose, ammonium phosphate monobasic, sodium chloride, magnesium sulfate, potassium phosphate dibasic, and water. Growth can be driven by aerobic or anaerobic respiration, using a large variety of redox pairs, including the oxidation of pyruvic acid, formic acid, hydrogen, and amino acids, and the reduction of substrates such as oxygen, nitrate, fumarate, dimethyl sulfoxide, and trimethylamine N-oxide. &quot;E. coli&quot; is classified as a facultative anaerobe. It uses oxygen when it is present and available. It can, however, continue to grow in the absence of oxygen using fermentation or anaerobic respiration. Respiration type is managed in part by the arc system. The ability to continue growing in the absence of oxygen is an advantage to bacteria because their survival is increased in environments where water predominates.

===Cell cycle===
The bacterial cell cycle is divided into three stages. The B period occurs between the completion of cell division and the beginning of DNA replication. The C period encompasses the time it takes to replicate the chromosomal DNA. The D period refers to the stage between the conclusion of DNA replication and the end of cell division. The doubling rate of &quot;E. coli&quot; is higher when more nutrients are available. However, the length of the C and D periods do not change, even when the doubling time becomes less than the sum of the C and D periods. At the fastest growth rates, replication begins before the previous round of replication has completed, resulting in multiple replication forks along the DNA and overlapping cell cycles.

The number of replication forks in fast growing &quot;E. coli&quot; typically follows 2n (n = 1, 2 or 3). This only happens if replication is initiated simultaneously from all origins of replications, and is referred to as synchronous replication. However, not all cells in a culture replicate synchronously. In this case cells do not have multiples of two replication forks. Replication initiation is then referred to being asynchronous. However, asynchrony can be caused by mutations to for instance DnaA or DnaA initiator-associating protein DiaA.

Although &quot;E. coli&quot; reproduces by binary fission the two supposedly identical cells produced by cell division are functionally asymmetric with the old pole cell acting as an aging parent that repeatedly produces rejuvenated offspring. When exposed to an elevated stress level, damage accumulation in an old &quot;E. coli&quot; lineage may surpass its immortality threshold so that it arrests division and becomes mortal. Cellular aging is a general process, affecting prokaryotes and eukaryotes alike.

===Genetic adaptation===

&quot;E. coli&quot; and related bacteria possess the ability to transfer DNA via bacterial conjugation or transduction, which allows genetic material to spread horizontally through an existing population. The process of transduction, which uses the bacterial virus called a bacteriophage, is where the spread of the gene encoding for the Shiga toxin from the &quot;Shigella&quot; bacteria to &quot;E. coli&quot; helped produce &quot;E. coli&quot; O157:H7, the Shiga toxin-producing strain of &quot;E. coli.&quot;

==Diversity==

&quot;E. coli&quot; encompasses an enormous population of bacteria that exhibit a very high degree of both genetic and phenotypic diversity. Genome sequencing of many isolates of &quot;E. coli&quot; and related bacteria shows that a taxonomic reclassification would be desirable. However, this has not been done, largely due to its medical importance, and &quot;E. coli&quot; remains one of the most diverse bacterial species: only 20% of the genes in a typical &quot;E. coli&quot; genome is shared among all strains.

In fact, from the more constructive point of view, the members of genus &quot;Shigella&quot; (&quot;S. dysenteriae&quot;, &quot;S. flexneri&quot;, &quot;S. boydii&quot;, and &quot;S. sonnei&quot;) should be classified as &quot;E. coli&quot; strains, a phenomenon termed taxa in disguise. Similarly, other strains of &quot;E. coli&quot; (e.g. the K-12 strain commonly used in recombinant DNA work) are sufficiently different that they would merit reclassification.

A strain is a subgroup within the species that has unique characteristics that distinguish it from other strains. These differences are often detectable only at the molecular level; however, they may result in changes to the physiology or lifecycle of the bacterium. For example, a strain may gain pathogenic capacity, the ability to use a unique carbon source, the ability to take upon a particular ecological niche, or the ability to resist antimicrobial agents. Different strains of &quot;E. coli&quot; are often host-specific, making it possible to determine the source of fecal contamination in environmental samples. For example, knowing which &quot;E. coli&quot; strains are present in a water sample allows researchers to make assumptions about whether the contamination originated from a human, another mammal, or a bird.
===Serotypes===

A common subdivision system of &quot;E. coli&quot;, but not based on evolutionary relatedness, is by serotype, which is based on major surface antigens (O antigen: part of lipopolysaccharide layer; H: flagellin; K antigen: capsule), e.g. O157:H7). It is, however, common to cite only the serogroup, i.e. the O-antigen. At present, about 190 serogroups are known. The common laboratory strain has a mutation that prevents the formation of an O-antigen and is thus not typeable.

===Genome plasticity and evolution===
Like all lifeforms, new strains of &quot;E. coli&quot; evolve through the natural biological processes of mutation, gene duplication, and horizontal gene transfer; in particular, 18% of the genome of the laboratory strain MG1655 was horizontally acquired since the divergence from &quot;Salmonella&quot;. &quot;E. coli&quot; K-12 and &quot;E. coli&quot; B strains are the most frequently used varieties for laboratory purposes. Some strains develop traits that can be harmful to a host animal. These virulent strains typically cause a bout of diarrhea that is often self-limiting in healthy adults but is frequently lethal to children in the developing world. More virulent strains, such as O157:H7, cause serious illness or death in the elderly, the very young, or the immunocompromised.

The genera &quot;Escherichia&quot; and &quot;Salmonella&quot; diverged around 102 million years ago (credibility interval: 57–176 mya), an event unrelated to the much earlier (see &quot;Synapsid&quot;) divergence of their hosts: the former being found in mammals and the latter in birds and reptiles. This was followed by a split of an &quot;Escherichia&quot; ancestor into five species (&quot;E. albertii&quot;, &quot;E. coli&quot;, &quot;E. fergusonii&quot;, &quot;E. hermannii&quot;, and &quot;E. vulneris&quot;). The last &quot;E. coli&quot; ancestor split between 20 and 30 million years ago.

The long-term evolution experiments using &quot;E. coli&quot;, begun by Richard Lenski in 1988, have allowed direct observation of genome evolution over more than 65,000 generations in the laboratory. For instance, &quot;E. coli&quot; typically do not have the ability to grow aerobically with citrate as a carbon source, which is used as a diagnostic criterion with which to differentiate &quot;E. coli&quot; from other, closely, related bacteria such as &quot;Salmonella&quot;. In this experiment, one population of &quot;E. coli&quot; unexpectedly evolved the ability to aerobically metabolize citrate, a major evolutionary shift with some hallmarks of microbial speciation.

In the microbial world, a relationship of predation can be established similar to that observed in the animal world. Considered, it has been seen that &quot;E. coli&quot; is the prey of multiple generalist predators, such as &quot;Myxococcus xanthus&quot;. In this predator-prey relationship, a parallel evolution of both species is observed through genomic and phenotypic modifications, in the case of &quot;E. coli&quot; the modifications are modified in two aspects involved in their virulence such as mucoid production (excessive production of exoplasmic acid alginate ) and the suppression of the OmpT gene, producing in future generations a better adaptation of one of the species that is counteracted by the evolution of the other, following a co-evolutionary model demonstrated by the Red Queen hypothesis.

===Neotype strain===
&quot;E. coli&quot; is the type species of the genus (&quot;Escherichia&quot;) and in turn &quot;Escherichia&quot; is the type genus of the family Enterobacteriaceae, where the family name does not stem from the genus &quot;Enterobacter&quot; + &quot;i&quot; (sic.) + &quot;aceae&quot;, but from &quot;enterobacterium&quot; + &quot;aceae&quot; (enterobacterium being not a genus, but an alternative trivial name to enteric bacterium).

The original strain described by Escherich is believed to be lost, consequently a new type strain (neotype) was chosen as a representative: the neotype strain is U5/41T, also known under the deposit names DSM 30083, ATCC 11775, and NCTC 9001, which is pathogenic to chickens and has an O1:K1:H7 serotype. However, in most studies, either O157:H7, K-12 MG1655, or K-12 W3110 were used as a representative &quot;E. coli&quot;. The genome of the type strain has only lately been sequenced.

===Phylogeny of &quot;E. coli&quot; strains===

Many strains belonging to this species have been isolated and characterised. In addition to serotype (&quot;vide supra&quot;), they can be classified according to their phylogeny, i.e. the inferred evolutionary history, as shown below where the species is divided into six groups as of 2014. Particularly the use of whole genome sequences yields highly supported phylogenies. The phylogroup structure remains robust to newer methods and sequences, which sometimes adds newer groups, giving 8 or 14 as of 2023.

The link between phylogenetic distance (&quot;relatedness&quot;) and pathology is small, &quot;e.g.&quot; the O157:H7 serotype strains, which form a clade (&quot;an exclusive group&quot;)—group E below—are all enterohaemorragic strains (EHEC), but not all EHEC strains are closely related. In fact, four different species of &quot;Shigella&quot; are nested among &quot;E. coli&quot; strains (&quot;vide supra&quot;), while &quot;E. albertii&quot; and &quot;E. fergusonii&quot; are outside this group. Indeed, all &quot;Shigella&quot; species were placed within a single subspecies of &quot;E. coli&quot; in a phylogenomic study that included the type strain. All commonly used research strains of &quot;E. coli&quot; belong to group A and are derived mainly from Clifton&#x27;s K-12 strain (λ+ F+; O16) and to a lesser degree from d&#x27;Herelle&#x27;s &quot;Bacillus coli&quot; strain (B strain; O7).

There have been multiple proposals to revise the taxonomy to match phylogeny. However, all these proposals need to face the fact that &quot;Shigella&quot; remains a widely used name in medicine and find ways to reduce any confusion that can stem from renaming.

==Genomics==

The first complete DNA sequence of an &quot;E. coli&quot; genome (laboratory strain K-12 derivative MG1655) was published in 1997. It is a circular DNA molecule 4.6 million base pairs in length, containing 4288 annotated protein-coding genes (organized into 2584 operons), seven ribosomal RNA (rRNA) operons, and 86 transfer RNA (tRNA) genes. Despite having been the subject of intensive genetic analysis for about 40 years, many of these genes were previously unknown. The coding density was found to be very high, with a mean distance between genes of only 118 base pairs. The genome was observed to contain a significant number of transposable genetic elements, repeat elements, cryptic prophages, and bacteriophage remnants. Most genes have only a single copy.

More than three hundred complete genomic sequences of &quot;Escherichia&quot; and &quot;Shigella&quot; species are known. The genome sequence of the type strain of &quot;E. coli&quot; was added to this collection before 2014. Comparison of these sequences shows a remarkable amount of diversity; only about 20% of each genome represents sequences present in every one of the isolates, while around 80% of each genome can vary among isolates. Each individual genome contains between 4,000 and 5,500 genes, but the total number of different genes among all of the sequenced &quot;E. coli&quot; strains (the pangenome) exceeds 16,000. This very large variety of component genes has been interpreted to mean that two-thirds of the &quot;E. coli&quot; pangenome originated in other species and arrived through the process of horizontal gene transfer.

== Gene nomenclature ==

Genes in &quot;E. coli&quot; are usually named in accordance with the uniform nomenclature proposed by Demerec et al. Gene names are 3-letter acronyms that derive from their function (when known) or mutant phenotype and are italicized. When multiple genes have the same acronym, the different genes are designated by a capital later that follows the acronym and is also italicized. For instance, &quot;recA&quot; is named after its role in homologous recombination plus the letter A. Functionally related genes are named &quot;recB&quot;, &quot;recC&quot;, &quot;recD&quot; etc. The proteins are named by uppercase acronyms, e.g. RecA, RecB, etc. When the genome of &quot;E. coli&quot; strain K-12 substr. MG1655 was sequenced, all known or predicted protein-coding genes were numbered (more or less) in their order on the genome and abbreviated by b numbers, such as b2819 (= &quot;recD&quot;). The &quot;b&quot; names were created after Fred Blattner, who led the genome sequence effort. Another numbering system was introduced with the sequence of another &quot;E. coli&quot; K-12 substrain, W3110, which was sequenced in Japan and hence uses numbers starting by JW... (Japanese W3110), e.g. JW2787 (= &quot;recD&quot;). Hence, &quot;recD&quot; = b2819 = JW2787. Note, however, that most databases have their own numbering system, e.g. the EcoGene database uses EG10826 for &quot;recD&quot;. Finally, ECK numbers are specifically used for alleles in the MG1655 strain of &quot;E. coli&quot; K-12. Complete lists of genes and their synonyms can be obtained from databases such as EcoGene or Uniprot.

==Proteomics==

===Proteome===
The genome sequence of &quot;E. coli&quot; predicts 4288 protein-coding genes, of which 38 percent initially had no attributed function. Comparison with five other sequenced microbes reveals ubiquitous as well as narrowly distributed gene families; many families of similar genes within &quot;E. coli&quot; are also evident. The largest family of paralogous proteins contains 80 ABC transporters. The genome as a whole is strikingly organized with respect to the local direction of replication; guanines, oligonucleotides possibly related to replication and recombination, and most genes are so oriented. The genome also contains insertion sequence (IS) elements, phage remnants, and many other patches of unusual composition indicating genome plasticity through horizontal transfer.

Several studies have experimentally investigated the proteome of &quot;E. coli&quot;. By 2006, 1,627 (38%) of the predicted proteins (open reading frames, ORFs) had been identified experimentally. Mateus et al. 2020 detected 2,586 proteins with at least 2 peptides (60% of all proteins).

=== Post-translational modifications (PTMs) ===
Although much fewer bacterial proteins seem to have post-translational modifications (PTMs) compared to eukaryotic proteins, a substantial number of proteins are modified in &quot;E. coli&quot;. For instance, Potel et al. (2018) found 227 phosphoproteins of which 173 were phosphorylated on histidine. The majority of phosphorylated amino acids were serine (1,220 sites) with only 246 sites on histidine and 501 phosphorylated threonines and 162 tyrosines.

===Interactome===
The interactome of &quot;E. coli&quot; has been studied by affinity purification and mass spectrometry (AP/MS) and by analyzing the binary interactions among its proteins.

Protein complexes. A 2006 study purified 4,339 proteins from cultures of strain K-12 and found interacting partners for 2,667 proteins, many of which had unknown functions at the time. A 2009 study found 5,993 interactions between proteins of the same &quot;E. coli&quot; strain, though these data showed little overlap with those of the 2006 publication.

Binary interactions. Rajagopala &quot;et al.&quot; (2014) have carried out systematic yeast two-hybrid screens with most &quot;E. coli&quot; proteins, and found a total of 2,234 protein-protein interactions. This study also integrated genetic interactions and protein structures and mapped 458 interactions within 227 protein complexes.

==Normal microbiota==
&quot;E. coli&quot; belongs to a group of bacteria informally known as coliforms that are found in the gastrointestinal tract of warm-blooded animals. &quot;E. coli&quot; normally colonizes an infant&#x27;s gastrointestinal tract within 40 hours of birth, arriving with food or water or from the individuals handling the child. In the bowel, &quot;E. coli&quot; adheres to the mucus of the large intestine. It is the primary facultative anaerobe of the human gastrointestinal tract. (Facultative anaerobes are organisms that can grow in either the presence or absence of oxygen.) As long as these bacteria do not acquire genetic elements encoding for virulence factors, they remain benign commensals.

===Therapeutic use===
Due to the low cost and speed with which it can be grown and modified in laboratory settings, &quot;E. coli&quot; is a popular expression platform for the production of recombinant proteins used in therapeutics. One advantage to using &quot;E. coli&quot; over another expression platform is that &quot;E. coli&quot; naturally does not export many proteins into the periplasm, making it easier to recover a protein of interest without cross-contamination. The &quot;E. coli&quot; K-12 strains and their derivatives (DH1, DH5α, MG1655, RV308 and W3110) are the strains most widely used by the biotechnology industry. Nonpathogenic &quot;E. coli&quot; strain Nissle 1917 (EcN), (Mutaflor) and &quot;E. coli&quot; O83:K24:H31 (Colinfant)) are used as probiotic agents in medicine, mainly for the treatment of various gastrointestinal diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease. It is thought that the EcN strain might impede the growth of opportunistic pathogens, including &quot;Salmonella&quot; and other coliform enteropathogens, through the production of microcin proteins the production of siderophores.

==Role in disease==

Most &quot;E. coli&quot; strains do not cause disease, naturally living in the gut, but virulent strains can cause gastroenteritis, urinary tract infections, neonatal meningitis, hemorrhagic colitis, and Crohn&#x27;s disease. Common signs and symptoms include severe abdominal cramps, diarrhea, hemorrhagic colitis, vomiting, and sometimes fever. In rarer cases, virulent strains are also responsible for bowel necrosis (tissue death) and perforation without progressing to hemolytic-uremic syndrome, peritonitis, mastitis, sepsis, and gram-negative pneumonia. Very young children are more susceptible to develop severe illness, such as hemolytic uremic syndrome; however, healthy individuals of all ages are at risk to the severe consequences that may arise as a result of being infected with &quot;E. coli&quot;.

Some strains of &quot;E. coli&quot;, for example O157:H7, can produce Shiga toxin. The Shiga toxin causes inflammatory responses in target cells of the gut, leaving behind lesions which result in the bloody diarrhea that is a symptom of a Shiga toxin-producing &quot;E. coli&quot; (STEC) infection. This toxin further causes premature destruction of the red blood cells, which then clog the body&#x27;s filtering system, the kidneys, in some rare cases (usually in children and the elderly) causing hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS), which may lead to kidney failure and even death. Signs of hemolytic uremic syndrome include decreased frequency of urination, lethargy, and paleness of cheeks and inside the lower eyelids. In 25% of HUS patients, complications of nervous system occur, which in turn causes strokes. In addition, this strain causes the buildup of fluid (since the kidneys do not work), leading to edema around the lungs, legs, and arms. This increase in fluid buildup especially around the lungs impedes the functioning of the heart, causing an increase in blood pressure.

Uropathogenic &quot;E. coli&quot; (UPEC) is one of the main causes of urinary tract infections. It is part of the normal microbiota in the gut and can be introduced in many ways. In particular for females, the direction of wiping after defecation (wiping back to front) can lead to fecal contamination of the urogenital orifices. Anal intercourse can also introduce this bacterium into the male urethra, and in switching from anal to vaginal intercourse, the male can also introduce UPEC to the female urogenital system.

Enterotoxigenic &quot;E. coli&quot; (ETEC) is the most common cause of traveler&#x27;s diarrhea, with as many as 840 million cases worldwide in developing countries each year. The bacteria, typically transmitted through contaminated food or drinking water, adheres to the intestinal lining, where it secretes either of two types of enterotoxins, leading to watery diarrhea. The rate and severity of infections are higher among children under the age of five, including as many as 380,000 deaths annually.

In May 2011, one &quot;E. coli&quot; strain, O104:H4, was the subject of a bacterial outbreak that began in Germany. Certain strains of &quot;E. coli&quot; are a major cause of foodborne illness. The outbreak started when several people in Germany were infected with enterohemorrhagic &quot;E. coli&quot; (EHEC) bacteria, leading to hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS), a medical emergency that requires urgent treatment. The outbreak did not only concern Germany, but also 15 other countries, including regions in North America. On 30 June 2011, the German &quot;Bundesinstitut für Risikobewertung (BfR)&quot; (Federal Institute for Risk Assessment, a federal institute within the German Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Consumer Protection) announced that seeds of fenugreek from Egypt were likely the cause of the EHEC outbreak.

Some studies have demonstrated an absence of E. &quot;coli&quot; in the gut flora of subjects with the metabolic disorder Phenylketonuria. It is hypothesized that the absence of these normal bacterium impairs the production of the key vitamins B2 (riboflavin) and K2 (menaquinone) – vitamins which are implicated in many physiological roles in humans such as cellular and bone metabolism – and so contributes to the disorder.

Carbapenem-resistant &quot;E. coli&quot; (carbapenemase-producing &quot;E. coli&quot;) that are resistant to the carbapenem class of antibiotics, considered the drugs of last resort for such infections. They are resistant because they produce an enzyme called a carbapenemase that disables the drug molecule.

=== Incubation period ===
The time between ingesting the STEC bacteria and feeling sick is called the &quot;incubation period&quot;. The incubation period is usually 3–4 days after the exposure, but may be as short as 1 day or as long as 10 days. The symptoms often begin slowly with mild belly pain or non-bloody diarrhea that worsens over several days. HUS, if it occurs, develops an average 7 days after the first symptoms, when the diarrhea is improving.

=== Diagnosis ===
Diagnosis of infectious diarrhea and identification of antimicrobial resistance is performed using a stool culture with subsequent antibiotic sensitivity testing. It requires a minimum of 2 days and maximum of several weeks to culture gastrointestinal pathogens. The sensitivity (true positive) and specificity (true negative) rates for stool culture vary by pathogen, although a number of human pathogens can not be cultured. For culture-positive samples, antimicrobial resistance testing takes an additional 12–24 hours to perform.

Current point of care molecular diagnostic tests can identify &quot;E. coli&quot; and antimicrobial resistance in the identified strains much faster than culture and sensitivity testing. Microarray-based platforms can identify specific pathogenic strains of &quot;E. coli&quot; and &quot;E. coli&quot;-specific AMR genes in two hours or less with high sensitivity and specificity, but the size of the test panel (i.e., total pathogens and antimicrobial resistance genes) is limited. Newer metagenomics-based infectious disease diagnostic platforms are currently being developed to overcome the various limitations of culture and all currently available molecular diagnostic technologies.

===Treatment===
The mainstay of treatment is the assessment of dehydration and replacement of fluid and electrolytes. Administration of antibiotics has been shown to shorten the course of illness and duration of excretion of enterotoxigenic &quot;E. coli&quot; (ETEC) in adults in endemic areas and in traveller&#x27;s diarrhea, though the rate of resistance to commonly used antibiotics is increasing and they are generally not recommended. The antibiotic used depends upon susceptibility patterns in the particular geographical region. Currently, the antibiotics of choice are fluoroquinolones or azithromycin, with an emerging role for rifaximin. Rifaximin, a semisynthetic rifamycin derivative, is an effective and well-tolerated antibacterial for the management of adults with non-invasive traveller&#x27;s diarrhea. Rifaximin was significantly more effective than placebo and no less effective than ciprofloxacin in reducing the duration of diarrhea. While rifaximin is effective in patients with &quot;E. coli&quot;-predominant traveller&#x27;s diarrhea, it appears ineffective in patients infected with inflammatory or invasive enteropathogens.

===Prevention===
ETEC is the type of &quot;E. coli&quot; that most vaccine development efforts are focused on. Antibodies against the LT and major CFs of ETEC provide protection against LT-producing, ETEC-expressing homologous CFs. Oral inactivated vaccines consisting of toxin antigen and whole cells, i.e. the licensed recombinant cholera B subunit (rCTB)-WC cholera vaccine Dukoral, have been developed. There are currently no licensed vaccines for ETEC, though several are in various stages of development. In different trials, the rCTB-WC cholera vaccine provided high (85–100%) short-term protection. An oral ETEC vaccine candidate consisting of rCTB and formalin inactivated &quot;E. coli&quot; bacteria expressing major CFs has been shown in clinical trials to be safe, immunogenic, and effective against severe diarrhoea in American travelers but not against ETEC diarrhoea in young children in Egypt. A modified ETEC vaccine consisting of recombinant &quot;E. coli&quot; strains over-expressing the major CFs and a more LT-like hybrid toxoid called LCTBA, are undergoing clinical testing.

Other proven prevention methods for &quot;E. coli&quot; transmission include handwashing and improved sanitation and drinking water, as transmission occurs through fecal contamination of food and water supplies. Additionally, thoroughly cooking meat and avoiding consumption of raw, unpasteurized beverages, such as juices and milk are other proven methods for preventing &quot;E. coli&quot;. Lastly, cross-contamination of utensils and work spaces should be avoided when preparing food.

==Model organism in life science research==

Because of its long history of laboratory culture and ease of manipulation, &quot;E. coli&quot; plays an important role in modern biological engineering and industrial microbiology. The work of Stanley Norman Cohen and Herbert Boyer in &quot;E. coli&quot;, using plasmids and restriction enzymes to create recombinant DNA, became a foundation of biotechnology.

&quot;E. coli&quot; is a very versatile host for the production of heterologous proteins, and various protein expression systems have been developed which allow the production of recombinant proteins in &quot;E. coli&quot;. Researchers can introduce genes into the microbes using plasmids which permit high level expression of protein, and such protein may be mass-produced in industrial fermentation processes. One of the first useful applications of recombinant DNA technology was the manipulation of &quot;E. coli&quot; to produce human insulin.

Many proteins previously thought difficult or impossible to be expressed in &quot;E. coli&quot; in folded form have been successfully expressed in &quot;E. coli&quot;. For example, proteins with multiple disulphide bonds may be produced in the periplasmic space or in the cytoplasm of mutants rendered sufficiently oxidizing to allow disulphide-bonds to form, while proteins requiring post-translational modification such as glycosylation for stability or function have been expressed using the N-linked glycosylation system of &quot;Campylobacter jejuni&quot; engineered into &quot;E. coli&quot;.

Modified &quot;E. coli&quot; cells have been used in vaccine development, bioremediation, production of biofuels, lighting, and production of immobilised enzymes.

Strain K-12 is a mutant form of &quot;E. coli&quot; that over-expresses the enzyme Alkaline phosphatase (ALP). The mutation arises due to a defect in the gene that constantly codes for the enzyme. A gene that is producing a product without any inhibition is said to have constitutive activity. This particular mutant form is used to isolate and purify the aforementioned enzyme.

Strain OP50 of &quot;Escherichia coli&quot; is used for maintenance of &quot;Caenorhabditis elegans&quot; cultures.

Strain JM109 is a mutant form of &quot;E. coli&quot; that is recA and endA deficient. The strain can be utilized for blue/white screening when the cells carry the fertility factor episome. Lack of recA decreases the possibility of unwanted restriction of the DNA of interest and lack of endA inhibit plasmid DNA decomposition. Thus, JM109 is useful for cloning and expression systems.

===Model organism===
&quot;E. coli&quot; is frequently used as a model organism in microbiology studies. Cultivated strains (e.g. &quot;E. coli&quot; K12) are well-adapted to the laboratory environment, and, unlike wild-type strains, have lost their ability to thrive in the intestine. Many laboratory strains lose their ability to form biofilms. These features protect wild-type strains from antibodies and other chemical attacks, but require a large expenditure of energy and material resources. &quot;E. coli&quot; is often used as a representative microorganism in the research of novel water treatment and sterilisation methods, including photocatalysis. By standard plate count methods, following sequential dilutions, and growth on agar gel plates, the concentration of viable organisms or CFUs (Colony Forming Units), in a known volume of treated water can be evaluated, allowing the comparative assessment of materials performance.

In 1946, Joshua Lederberg and Edward Tatum first described the phenomenon known as bacterial conjugation using &quot;E. coli&quot; as a model bacterium, and it remains the primary model to study conjugation. &quot;E. coli&quot; was an integral part of the first experiments to understand phage genetics, and early researchers, such as Seymour Benzer, used &quot;E. coli&quot; and phage T4 to understand the topography of gene structure. Prior to Benzer&#x27;s research, it was not known whether the gene was a linear structure, or if it had a branching pattern.

&quot;E. coli&quot; was one of the first organisms to have its genome sequenced; the complete genome of &quot;E. coli&quot; K12 was published by &quot;Science&quot; in 1997.

==== MDS42 ====
From 2002 to 2010, a team at the Hungarian Academy of Science created a strain of &quot;Escherichia coli&quot; called MDS42, which is now sold by Scarab Genomics of Madison, WI under the name of &quot;Clean Genome &quot;E. coli&quot;&quot;, where 15% of the genome of the parental strain (&quot;E. coli&quot; K-12 MG1655) were removed to aid in molecular biology efficiency, removing IS elements, pseudogenes and phages, resulting in better maintenance of plasmid-encoded toxic genes, which are often inactivated by transposons. Biochemistry and replication machinery were not altered.

By evaluating the possible combination of nanotechnologies with landscape ecology, complex habitat landscapes can be generated with details at the nanoscale. On such synthetic ecosystems, evolutionary experiments with &quot;E. coli&quot; have been performed to study the spatial biophysics of adaptation in an island biogeography on-chip.

In other studies, non-pathogenic &quot;E. coli&quot; has been used as a model microorganism towards understanding the effects of simulated microgravity (on Earth) on the same.

== Uses in biological computing ==
Since 1961, scientists proposed the idea of genetic circuits used for computational tasks. Collaboration between biologists and computing scientists has allowed designing digital logic gates on the metabolism of &quot;E. coli&quot;. As Lac operon is a two-stage process, genetic regulation in the bacteria is used to realize computing functions. The process is controlled at the transcription stage of DNA into messenger RNA.

Studies are being performed attempting to program &quot;E. coli&quot; to solve complicated mathematics problems, such as the Hamiltonian path problem.

A computer to control protein production of &quot;E. coli&quot; within yeast cells has been developed. A method has also been developed to use bacteria to behave as an LCD screen.

In July 2017, separate experiments with &quot;E. coli&quot; published on Nature showed the potential of using living cells for computing tasks and storing information. A team formed with collaborators of the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University and Harvard&#x27;s Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering developed a biological computer inside &quot;E. coli&quot; that responded to a dozen inputs. The team called the computer &quot;ribocomputer&quot;, as it was composed of ribonucleic acid. Meanwhile, Harvard researchers probed that is possible to store information in bacteria after successfully archiving images and movies in the DNA of living &quot;E. coli&quot; cells. In 2021, a team led by biophysicist Sangram Bagh realized a study with &quot;E. coli&quot; to solve 2 × 2 maze problems to probe the principle for distributed computing among cells.

==History==
In 1885, the German-Austrian pediatrician Theodor Escherich discovered this organism in the feces of healthy individuals. He called it &quot;Bacterium coli commune&quot; because it is found in the colon. Early classifications of prokaryotes placed these in a handful of genera based on their shape and motility (at that time Ernst Haeckel&#x27;s classification of bacteria in the kingdom Monera was in place).

&quot;Bacterium coli&quot; was the type species of the now invalid genus &quot;Bacterium&quot; when it was revealed that the former type species (&quot;Bacterium triloculare&quot;) was missing. Following a revision of &quot;Bacterium&quot;, it was reclassified as &quot;Bacillus coli&quot; by Migula in 1895 and later reclassified in the newly created genus &quot;Escherichia&quot;, named after its original discoverer, by Aldo Castellani and Albert John Chalmers.

In 1996, an outbreak of &quot;E. coli&quot; food poisoning occurred in Wishaw, Scotland, killing 21 people. This death toll was exceeded in 2011, when the 2011 Germany &quot;E. coli&quot; O104:H4 outbreak, linked to organic fenugreek sprouts, killed 53 people.

In 2024, an outbreak of &quot;E. coli&quot; food poisoning occurred across the U.S. was linked to U.S.-grown organic carrots causing one fatality and dozens of illnesses.

== Uses ==
&quot;E. coli&quot; has several practical uses besides its use as a vector for genetic experiments and processes. For example, &quot;E. coli&quot; can be used to generate synthetic propane and recombinant human growth hormone.

== See also ==

* BolA-like protein family
* Carbon monoxide-releasing molecules
* Contamination control
* Dam dcm strain
* Eijkman test
* Fecal coliform
* International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria
* List of strains of &quot;Escherichia coli&quot;
* Mannan oligosaccharide-based nutritional supplements
* Overflow metabolism
* T4 rII system
== References ==
== External links ==
* &quot;E. coli&quot; on Protein Data Bank</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q632006" start="26" end="39" title="Gram-negative bacteria" label="gram-negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091848" start="41" end="62" title="Facultative anaerobic organism" label="facultative anaerobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753295" start="64" end="74" title="Bacillus (shape)" label="rod-shaped"/>
<link wikidata="Q902010" start="76" end="94" title="coliform bacteria" label="coliform bacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q311055" start="114" end="125" title="Escherichia" label="Escherichia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="168" end="177" title="intestine" label="intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193456" start="181" end="193" title="warm-blooded" label="warm-blooded"/>
<link wikidata="Q855769" start="230" end="237" title="Strain (biology)" label="strains"/>
<link wikidata="Q739734" start="261" end="282" title="Gut microbiota" label="microbiota of the gut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091848" start="335" end="355" title="facultative anaerobe" label="facultative anaerobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936967" start="505" end="515" title="Vitamin K2" label="vitamin K2"/>
<link wikidata="Q804517" start="578" end="597" title="pathogenic bacteria" label="pathogenic bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q186368" start="692" end="703" title="Mutualism (biology)" label="mutualistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193124" start="938" end="956" title="Aerobic organism" label="aerobic conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q848328" start="1022" end="1030" title="serotype" label="serotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144817" start="1041" end="1045" title="Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli" label="EPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q265214" start="1050" end="1054" title="Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli" label="ETEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q272002" start="1088" end="1102" title="Foodborne illness" label="food poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272069" start="1119" end="1142" title="fecal–oral route" label="Fecal–oral transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511075" start="1284" end="1302" title="food contamination" label="food contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q10997527" start="1442" end="1460" title="indicator organism" label="indicator organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="1496" end="1515" title="Feces" label="fecal contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125312" start="1692" end="1710" title="Microbiological culture" label="grown and cultured"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1843" end="1859" title="Chemotroph#Chemoheterotroph" label="chemoheterotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="1917" end="1923" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="1928" end="1934" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="1983" end="1994" title="prokaryote" label="prokaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213907" start="1995" end="2009" title="model organism" label="model organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="2053" end="2066" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193" start="2071" end="2083" title="microbiology" label="microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q221673" start="2112" end="2125" title="host organism" label="host organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q285697" start="2156" end="2171" title="recombinant DNA" label="recombinant DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091848" start="2345" end="2365" title="facultative anaerobic organism" label="facultative anaerobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q828761" start="2367" end="2381" title="Endospore" label="nonsporulating"/>
<link wikidata="Q902010" start="2382" end="2400" title="coliform bacteria" label="coliform bacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="2452" end="2454" title="micrometers" label="μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="2473" end="2475" title="μm" label="μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q128700" start="2578" end="2587" title="cell wall" label="cell wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q206920" start="2610" end="2629" title="peptidoglycan layer" label="peptidoglycan layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q258248" start="2637" end="2651" title="Bacterial outer membrane" label="outer membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q413672" start="2741" end="2749" title="safranin" label="safranin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="2842" end="2853" title="antibiotics" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="2903" end="2913" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="2920" end="2928" title="flagellum" label="flagella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2969" end="2993" title="Flagellum#Flagellar arrangement schemes" label="peritrichous arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q939486" start="3031" end="3041" title="Microvillus" label="microvilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q356661" start="3067" end="3084" title="Bacterial adhesin" label="adhesion molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q24723149" start="3094" end="3101" title="intimin" label="intimin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22275677" start="3193" end="3216" title="mixed acid fermentation" label="mixed acid fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161249" start="3252" end="3259" title="lactic acid" label="lactate"/>
<link wikidata="Q213050" start="3261" end="3270" title="succinate" label="succinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="3272" end="3279" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q212527" start="3281" end="3288" title="acetate" label="acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="3294" end="3308" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q22275677" start="3333" end="3356" title="Mixed acid fermentation" label="mixed-acid fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="3365" end="3373" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169785" start="3534" end="3544" title="methanogen" label="methanogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q648314" start="3549" end="3575" title="sulphate-reducing bacteria" label="sulphate-reducing bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="3653" end="3656" title="Carbon dioxide" label="CO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="3674" end="3680" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q901921" start="3845" end="3860" title="carbon fixation" label="carbon fixation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147563" start="3878" end="3899" title="formate dehydrogenase" label="formate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001841" start="3975" end="3982" title="formate" label="formate"/>
<link wikidata="Q211016" start="3993" end="4009" title="electron carrier" label="electron carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="4026" end="4029" title="Adenosine triphosphate" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q162643" start="4157" end="4161" title="Embden–Meyerhof–Parnas pathway" label="EMPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q22281759" start="4163" end="4166" title="Entner–Doudoroff pathway" label="EDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q827489" start="4172" end="4176" title="Pentose phosphate pathway" label="OPPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q213580" start="4228" end="4237" title="pyruvates" label="pyruvates"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="4243" end="4246" title="Adenosine triphosphate" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q12499775" start="4256" end="4260" title="NADH" label="NADH"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="4265" end="4272" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q28747" start="4326" end="4331" title="NADPH" label="NADPH"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734081" start="4467" end="4485" title="glucose metabolism" label="glucose metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q407569" start="4590" end="4599" title="gluconate" label="gluconate"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130714" start="4766" end="4776" title="Catabolism" label="catabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="5242" end="5249" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q127900" start="5254" end="5261" title="lactose" label="lactose"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="5302" end="5309" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q127900" start="5317" end="5324" title="lactose" label="lactose"/>
<link wikidata="Q71240623" start="5447" end="5456" title="arabinose" label="arabinose"/>
<link wikidata="Q66589603" start="5461" end="5467" title="xylose" label="xylose"/>
<link wikidata="Q245280" start="5469" end="5477" title="sorbitol" label="sorbitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q414109" start="5479" end="5487" title="rhamnose" label="rhamnose"/>
<link wikidata="Q59817493" start="5493" end="5499" title="ribose" label="ribose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538418" start="5575" end="5600" title="phosphotransferase system" label="phosphotransferase system"/>
<link wikidata="Q242736" start="5618" end="5633" title="phosphorylation" label="phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572349" start="5655" end="5669" title="glucose uptake" label="glucose uptake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="5674" end="5684" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797887" start="5899" end="5913" title="lysogeny broth" label="lysogeny broth"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="5943" end="5950" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q419087" start="5952" end="5980" title="Monoammonium phosphate" label="ammonium phosphate monobasic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="5982" end="5997" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q288266" start="5999" end="6016" title="magnesium sulfate" label="magnesium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q403721" start="6018" end="6045" title="Dipotassium phosphate" label="potassium phosphate dibasic"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="6051" end="6056" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q912751" start="6082" end="6089" title="aerobic respiration" label="aerobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181713" start="6093" end="6114" title="anaerobic respiration" label="anaerobic respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="6141" end="6152" title="redox" label="redox pairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q213580" start="6181" end="6193" title="pyruvic acid" label="pyruvic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q161233" start="6195" end="6206" title="formic acid" label="formic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="6208" end="6216" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="6222" end="6232" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="6275" end="6281" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="6283" end="6290" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q139857" start="6292" end="6300" title="fumarate" label="fumarate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407927" start="6302" end="6320" title="dimethyl sulfoxide" label="dimethyl sulfoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q419802" start="6326" end="6348" title="trimethylamine N-oxide" label="trimethylamine N-oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091848" start="6389" end="6409" title="facultative anaerobe" label="facultative anaerobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="6419" end="6425" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="6512" end="6518" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41760" start="6525" end="6537" title="fermentation" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181713" start="6541" end="6562" title="anaerobic respiration" label="anaerobic respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979536" start="6607" end="6617" title="arc system" label="arc system"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="6669" end="6675" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="6762" end="6767" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="6936" end="6951" title="DNA replication" label="DNA replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q246128" start="7013" end="7029" title="Cytogenetics" label="chromosomal DNA."/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="7089" end="7104" title="DNA replication" label="DNA replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="7511" end="7514" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="7672" end="7683" title="DNA replication" label="replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q976651" start="7721" end="7744" title="Origin of replication" label="origins of replications"/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="7780" end="7791" title="DNA replication" label="replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="7902" end="7918" title="replication fork" label="replication fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q673206" start="8047" end="8051" title="DnaA" label="DnaA"/>
<link wikidata="Q673206" start="8055" end="8059" title="DnaA" label="DnaA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8090" end="8094" title="DiaA" label="DiaA"/>
<link wikidata="Q929080" start="8140" end="8154" title="fission (biology)" label="binary fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q9075999" start="8527" end="8541" title="cellular senescence" label="Cellular aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="8574" end="8584" title="prokaryote" label="prokaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="8590" end="8599" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="8708" end="8711" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q273193" start="8716" end="8737" title="bacterial conjugation" label="bacterial conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q845870" start="8741" end="8753" title="transduction (genetics)" label="transduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185" start="8788" end="8807" title="Horizontal gene transfer" label="spread horizontally"/>
<link wikidata="Q165028" start="8909" end="8922" title="bacteriophage" label="bacteriophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q424753" start="8973" end="8984" title="Shiga toxin" label="Shiga toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131029" start="9000" end="9008" title="Shigella" label="Shigella"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9062" end="9089" title="Escherichia coli O157:H7" label="&amp;quot;E. coli&amp;quot; O157:H7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068526" start="9305" end="9322" title="Whole genome sequencing" label="Genome sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689490" start="9953" end="9969" title="taxa in disguise" label="taxa in disguise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397190" start="10029" end="10033" title="E. coli K-12" label="K-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q285697" start="10058" end="10073" title="recombinant DNA" label="recombinant DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q855769" start="10150" end="10156" title="strain (biology)" label="strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q466109" start="10162" end="10170" title="subgroup" label="subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q855769" start="10253" end="10260" title="Strain (biology)" label="strains"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="10446" end="10465" title="pathogenicity" label="pathogenic capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q56064425" start="10495" end="10508" title="carbon source (biology)" label="carbon source"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="10548" end="10564" title="ecological niche" label="ecological niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q68541106" start="10591" end="10611" title="antimicrobial agents" label="antimicrobial agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="10960" end="10966" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="10973" end="10977" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="11139" end="11146" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q421804" start="11168" end="11186" title="lipopolysaccharide" label="lipopolysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q24788421" start="11197" end="11206" title="flagellin" label="flagellin"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="11210" end="11217" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11234" end="11241" title="O157:H7" label="O157:H7"/>
<link wikidata="Q848328" start="11284" end="11293" title="serogroup" label="serogroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q421804" start="11304" end="11313" title="O antigen" label="O-antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q421804" start="11437" end="11446" title="O antigen" label="O-antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="11567" end="11573" title="evolution" label="evolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="11618" end="11626" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q746284" start="11628" end="11644" title="gene duplication" label="gene duplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185" start="11650" end="11674" title="horizontal gene transfer" label="horizontal gene transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397190" start="11716" end="11740" title="Escherichia coli in molecular biology" label="laboratory strain MG1655"/>
<link wikidata="Q150839" start="11799" end="11809" title="Salmonella" label="Salmonella"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397190" start="11817" end="11841" title="E. coli K-12" label="&amp;quot;E. coli&amp;quot; K-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211967" start="11961" end="11967" title="Trait (biology)" label="traits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460232" start="12012" end="12020" title="Virulence" label="virulent"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="12055" end="12063" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448137" start="12078" end="12091" title="Self-limiting (biology)" label="self-limiting"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12203" end="12210" title="Escherichia coli O157:H7" label="O157:H7"/>
<link wikidata="Q641307" start="12282" end="12299" title="immunocompromised" label="immunocompromised"/>
<link wikidata="Q311055" start="12319" end="12330" title="Escherichia" label="Escherichia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150839" start="12347" end="12357" title="Salmonella" label="Salmonella"/>
<link wikidata="Q189069" start="12488" end="12496" title="Synapsid" label="Synapsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397188" start="12696" end="12707" title="Escherichia albertii" label="E. albertii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397197" start="12742" end="12755" title="Escherichia fergusonii" label="E. fergusonii"/>
<link wikidata="Q24977373" start="12769" end="12781" title="Escherichia hermannii" label="E. hermannii"/>
<link wikidata="Q130322643" start="12799" end="12810" title="Escherichia vulneris" label="E. vulneris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375995" start="12905" end="12962" title="E. coli long-term evolution experiment" label="long-term evolution experiments using &amp;quot;E. coli&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q713637" start="12973" end="12987" title="Richard Lenski" label="Richard Lenski"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="13195" end="13202" title="citrate" label="citrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q56064425" start="13208" end="13221" title="carbon source (biology)" label="carbon source"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="13498" end="13505" title="citrate" label="citrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q39350" start="13567" end="13577" title="speciation" label="speciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q142803" start="13811" end="13829" title="Myxococcus xanthus" label="Myxococcus xanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090672" start="14182" end="14186" title="OmpT" label="OmpT"/>
<link wikidata="Q843011" start="14373" end="14393" title="Red Queen hypothesis" label="Red Queen hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q380136" start="14564" end="14582" title="Enterobacteriaceae" label="Enterobacteriaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q134281" start="14641" end="14653" title="Enterobacter" label="Enterobacter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840005" start="14691" end="14696" title="Bacterial taxonomy" label="aceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203864" start="15058" end="15067" title="DSMZ" label="DSM 30083"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843042" start="15069" end="15079" title="American Type Culture Collection" label="ATCC 11775"/>
<link wikidata="Q848328" start="15148" end="15156" title="serotype" label="serotype"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15191" end="15198" title="O157:H7" label="O157:H7"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="15558" end="15567" title="phylogeny" label="phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068526" start="15705" end="15727" title="Whole genome sequencing" label="whole genome sequences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15769" end="15779" title="phylogroup" label="phylogroup"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16010" end="16017" title="O157:H7" label="O157:H7"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="16049" end="16054" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397188" start="16329" end="16340" title="Escherichia albertii" label="E. albertii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397197" start="16357" end="16370" title="Escherichia fergusonii" label="E. fergusonii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397190" start="16577" end="16593" title="Escherichia coli (molecular biology)" label="research strains"/>
<link wikidata="Q962057" start="16731" end="16745" title="Félix d&amp;#x27;Herelle" label="d&amp;#x27;Herelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="16759" end="16772" title="Bacillus coli" label="Bacillus coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q863908" start="17098" end="17110" title="DNA sequence" label="DNA sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="17137" end="17143" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="17227" end="17230" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="17252" end="17261" title="base pair" label="base pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q139677" start="17342" end="17349" title="operons" label="operons"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="17358" end="17371" title="ribosomal RNA" label="ribosomal RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="17395" end="17407" title="transfer RNA" label="transfer RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q121438" start="17713" end="17742" title="transposon" label="transposable genetic elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712327" start="17769" end="17778" title="prophages" label="prophages"/>
<link wikidata="Q165028" start="17784" end="17797" title="bacteriophage" label="bacteriophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037930" start="18592" end="18601" title="pangenome" label="pangenome"/>
<link wikidata="Q22280388" start="19157" end="19181" title="homologous recombination" label="homologous recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q24768106" start="19347" end="19351" title="RecA" label="RecA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066326" start="19353" end="19357" title="RecBCD" label="RecB"/>
<link wikidata="Q905695" start="20310" end="20317" title="UniProt" label="Uniprot"/>
<link wikidata="Q860947" start="21189" end="21197" title="proteome" label="proteome"/>
<link wikidata="Q908550" start="21270" end="21289" title="open reading frames" label="open reading frames"/>
<link wikidata="Q898362" start="21525" end="21556" title="post-translational modification" label="post-translational modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="21577" end="21587" title="Eukaryote" label="eukaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q423934" start="21712" end="21726" title="phosphoprotein" label="phosphoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q485277" start="21764" end="21773" title="histidine" label="histidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="21806" end="21816" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q183290" start="21823" end="21829" title="serine" label="serine"/>
<link wikidata="Q485277" start="21867" end="21876" title="histidine" label="histidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186521" start="21900" end="21909" title="threonine" label="threonine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188017" start="21919" end="21927" title="tyrosine" label="tyrosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q841382" start="21953" end="21964" title="interactome" label="interactome"/>
<link wikidata="Q382799" start="22008" end="22029" title="affinity purification" label="affinity purification"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="22034" end="22051" title="mass spectrometry" label="mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q420927" start="22797" end="22814" title="multiprotein complex" label="protein complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q902010" start="22910" end="22919" title="coliforms" label="coliforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q193456" start="22968" end="22988" title="warm-blooded animals" label="warm-blooded animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="23046" end="23068" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649349" start="23216" end="23221" title="mucus" label="mucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083" start="23229" end="23244" title="large intestine" label="large intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091848" start="23264" end="23284" title="Facultative anaerobic organism" label="facultative anaerobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091848" start="23323" end="23344" title="Facultative anaerobic organism" label="Facultative anaerobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q165028" start="23460" end="23476" title="bacteriophage" label="genetic elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623405" start="23490" end="23506" title="virulence factor" label="virulence factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q191934" start="23528" end="23538" title="Commensalism" label="commensals"/>
<link wikidata="Q285697" start="23732" end="23752" title="recombinant proteins" label="recombinant proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198990" start="23928" end="23937" title="periplasm" label="periplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816730" start="24310" end="24319" title="probiotic" label="probiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300099" start="24376" end="24400" title="gastrointestinal disease" label="gastrointestinal disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q917447" start="24413" end="24439" title="inflammatory bowel disease" label="inflammatory bowel disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q150839" start="24543" end="24553" title="Salmonella" label="Salmonella"/>
<link wikidata="Q902010" start="24570" end="24578" title="Coliform bacteria" label="coliform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839363" start="24622" end="24630" title="microcin" label="microcin"/>
<link wikidata="Q424747" start="24658" end="24669" title="siderophore" label="siderophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q156103" start="24809" end="24824" title="gastroenteritis" label="gastroenteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144817" start="24826" end="24850" title="Uropathogenic Escherichia coli" label="urinary tract infections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24852" end="24871" title="Meningitis#Bacterial" label="neonatal meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472" start="24898" end="24918" title="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q162266" start="25168" end="25193" title="hemolytic-uremic syndrome" label="hemolytic-uremic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q223102" start="25195" end="25206" title="peritonitis" label="peritonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q835061" start="25208" end="25216" title="mastitis" label="mastitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="25218" end="25224" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="25244" end="25253" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q424753" start="25580" end="25591" title="Shiga toxin" label="Shiga toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q265600" start="25749" end="25790" title="Shigatoxigenic and verotoxigenic Escherichia coli" label="Shiga toxin-producing &amp;quot;E. coli&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q162266" start="26009" end="26034" title="hemolytic-uremic syndrome" label="hemolytic-uremic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="26315" end="26321" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="26421" end="26426" title="edema" label="edema"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26598" end="26638" title="Pathogenic Escherichia coli#Urinary tract infection" label="Uropathogenic &amp;quot;E. coli&amp;quot; (UPEC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q221668" start="26668" end="26691" title="urinary tract infection" label="urinary tract infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q265214" start="27120" end="27155" title="Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli" label="Enterotoxigenic &amp;quot;E. coli&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q138885" start="27191" end="27215" title="traveler&amp;#x27;s diarrhea" label="traveler&amp;#x27;s diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q509615" start="27392" end="27409" title="Intestinal epithelium" label="intestinal lining"/>
<link wikidata="Q421978" start="27452" end="27464" title="enterotoxins" label="enterotoxins"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27671" end="27678" title="E. coli O104:H4" label="O104:H4"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27701" end="27719" title="2011 E. coli O104:H4 outbreak" label="bacterial outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="27734" end="27741" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q272002" start="27803" end="27820" title="foodborne illness" label="foodborne illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q265600" start="27893" end="27937" title="enterohemorrhagic" label="enterohemorrhagic &amp;quot;E. coli&amp;quot; (EHEC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q699656" start="28311" end="28372" title="Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Consumer Protection" label="Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Consumer Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q133205" start="28398" end="28407" title="fenugreek" label="fenugreek"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="28413" end="28418" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q194041" start="28586" end="28601" title="Phenylketonuria" label="Phenylketonuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q410897" start="29004" end="29014" title="carbapenem" label="carbapenem"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="29024" end="29035" title="antibiotics" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q122435" start="29052" end="29072" title="Drug of last resort" label="drugs of last resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="29137" end="29143" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q311379" start="29153" end="29166" title="carbapenemase" label="carbapenemase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563658" start="29780" end="29793" title="stool culture" label="stool culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q527465" start="29810" end="29840" title="antibiotic sensitivity testing" label="antibiotic sensitivity testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149729" start="30069" end="30083" title="human pathogen" label="human pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125312" start="30096" end="30104" title="microbiological culture" label="cultured"/>
<link wikidata="Q17075487" start="30222" end="30235" title="point of care" label="point of care"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257937" start="30236" end="30256" title="molecular diagnostic" label="molecular diagnostic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30703" end="30751" title="Metagenomics#Infectious disease diagnosis" label="metagenomics-based infectious disease diagnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q194290" start="30966" end="30977" title="dehydration" label="dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="31039" end="31050" title="antibiotics" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13669486" start="31482" end="31497" title="fluoroquinolone" label="fluoroquinolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q165399" start="31502" end="31514" title="azithromycin" label="azithromycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q416073" start="31542" end="31551" title="rifaximin" label="rifaximin"/>
<link wikidata="Q256602" start="31808" end="31821" title="ciprofloxacin" label="ciprofloxacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156103" start="32039" end="32053" title="enteropathogen" label="enteropathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="32168" end="32178" title="Antibodies" label="Antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q224180" start="32273" end="32283" title="homology (biology)" label="homologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="32877" end="32886" title="diarrhoea" label="diarrhoea"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="32961" end="32966" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q580689" start="33821" end="33843" title="biological engineering" label="biological engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610387" start="33848" end="33871" title="industrial microbiology" label="industrial microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q741299" start="33885" end="33905" title="Stanley Norman Cohen" label="Stanley Norman Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q354878" start="33910" end="33923" title="Herbert Boyer" label="Herbert Boyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q172778" start="33954" end="33961" title="plasmid" label="plasmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q219715" start="33967" end="33985" title="restriction enzyme" label="restriction enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q285697" start="33997" end="34012" title="recombinant DNA" label="recombinant DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747302" start="34120" end="34132" title="heterologous" label="heterologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="34133" end="34140" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q331672" start="34155" end="34173" title="Protein expression (biotechnology)" label="protein expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q285697" start="34232" end="34252" title="recombinant proteins" label="recombinant proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q845523" start="34430" end="34453" title="industrial fermentation" label="industrial fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="34593" end="34600" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198990" start="34847" end="34864" title="periplasmic space" label="periplasmic space"/>
<link wikidata="Q898362" start="34988" end="35019" title="post-translational modification" label="post-translational modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q898365" start="35028" end="35041" title="glycosylation" label="glycosylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q265488" start="35137" end="35157" title="Campylobacter jejuni" label="Campylobacter jejuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="35255" end="35262" title="vaccine" label="vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q816441" start="35276" end="35290" title="bioremediation" label="bioremediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128991" start="35306" end="35314" title="biofuels" label="biofuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="35356" end="35362" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q24769688" start="35449" end="35469" title="Alkaline phosphatase" label="Alkaline phosphatase"/>
<link wikidata="Q208467" start="35637" end="35658" title="Receptor (biochemistry)" label="constitutive activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q91703" start="35823" end="35845" title="Caenorhabditis elegans" label="Caenorhabditis elegans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193" start="36332" end="36344" title="microbiology" label="microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q128723" start="36464" end="36473" title="wild-type" label="wild-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q467410" start="36586" end="36593" title="biofilm" label="biofilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="36642" end="36652" title="antibody" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q218831" start="36893" end="36907" title="photocatalysis" label="photocatalysis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36921" end="36940" title="Bacteriological water analysis#Plate count" label="plate count methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q218823" start="37200" end="37216" title="Joshua Lederberg" label="Joshua Lederberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q237499" start="37221" end="37233" title="Edward Tatum" label="Edward Tatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q273193" start="37274" end="37295" title="bacterial conjugation" label="bacterial conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165028" start="37479" end="37484" title="bacteriophage" label="phage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975294" start="37526" end="37540" title="Seymour Benzer" label="Seymour Benzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q417216" start="38329" end="38340" title="IS elements" label="IS elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q277338" start="38342" end="38352" title="pseudogene" label="pseudogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q165028" start="38358" end="38364" title="phages" label="phages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="38574" end="38590" title="Nanotechnology" label="nanotechnologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q738011" start="38596" end="38613" title="landscape ecology" label="landscape ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662749" start="38698" end="38718" title="synthetic ecosystems" label="synthetic ecosystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664460" start="38842" end="38861" title="island biogeography" label="island biogeography"/>
<link wikidata="Q311359" start="39320" end="39330" title="Lac operon" label="Lac operon"/>
<link wikidata="Q987652" start="39636" end="39660" title="Hamiltonian path problem" label="Hamiltonian path problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="39734" end="39744" title="yeast cell" label="yeast cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="39831" end="39841" title="Liquid-crystal display" label="LCD screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914753" start="40052" end="40071" title="The Biodesign Institute" label="Biodesign Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="40075" end="40099" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040597" start="40119" end="40171" title="Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering" label="Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="40342" end="40358" title="RNA" label="ribonucleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q606777" start="40643" end="40662" title="Maze" label="2 × 2 maze problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q180634" start="40690" end="40711" title="distributed computing" label="distributed computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q77686" start="40780" end="40797" title="Theodor Escherich" label="Theodor Escherich"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="40967" end="40977" title="prokaryote" label="prokaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q48246" start="41063" end="41076" title="Ernst Haeckel" label="Ernst Haeckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q97263158" start="41126" end="41132" title="Monera" label="Monera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840026" start="41222" end="41243" title="Bacterium (genus)" label="&amp;quot;Bacterium&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q311055" start="41513" end="41524" title="Escherichia" label="Escherichia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660666" start="41532" end="41543" title="List of bacterial genera named after personal names" label="named after"/>
<link wikidata="Q524137" start="41572" end="41587" title="Aldo Castellani" label="Aldo Castellani"/>
<link wikidata="Q21337745" start="41592" end="41612" title="Albert John Chalmers" label="Albert John Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="41770" end="41819" title="2011 Germany E. coli O104:H4 outbreak" label="2011 Germany &amp;quot;E. coli&amp;quot; O104:H4 outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q133205" start="41839" end="41856" title="Fenugreek" label="fenugreek sprouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q783770" start="41975" end="41993" title="Agriculture in the United States" label="U.S.-grown organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81" start="41994" end="42001" title="carrot" label="carrots"/>
<link wikidata="Q24786176" start="42306" end="42330" title="BolA-like protein family" label="BolA-like protein family"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343452" start="42333" end="42368" title="Carbon monoxide-releasing molecules" label="Carbon monoxide-releasing molecules"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164919" start="42371" end="42392" title="Contamination control" label="Contamination control"/>
<link wikidata="Q874745" start="42395" end="42409" title="Dam dcm strain" label="Dam dcm strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407332" start="42412" end="42424" title="Eijkman test" label="Eijkman test"/>
<link wikidata="Q918223" start="42427" end="42441" title="Fecal coliform" label="Fecal coliform"/>
<link wikidata="Q743780" start="42444" end="42490" title="International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria" label="International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397189" start="42493" end="42540" title="List of strains of Escherichia coli" label="List of strains of &amp;quot;Escherichia coli&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109391" start="42543" end="42595" title="Mannan oligosaccharide-based nutritional supplements" label="Mannan oligosaccharide-based nutritional supplements"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113100" start="42598" end="42617" title="Overflow metabolism" label="Overflow metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669089" start="42620" end="42633" title="T4 rII system" label="T4 rII system"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40119" wikidata="Q167768" url="?curid=40119" title="William Makepeace Thackeray">
<text>William Makepeace Thackeray ( ; 18 July 1811 – 24 December 1863) was an English novelist and illustrator. He is known for his satirical works, particularly his 1847–1848 novel &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, a panoramic portrait of British society, and the 1844 novel &quot;The Luck of Barry Lyndon&quot;, which was adapted for a 1975 film by Stanley Kubrick.

Thackeray was born in Calcutta, British India, and was sent to England after his father&#x27;s death in 1815. He studied at various schools and briefly attended Trinity College, Cambridge, before leaving to travel Europe. Thackeray squandered much of his inheritance on gambling and unsuccessful newspapers. He turned to journalism to support his family, primarily working for &quot;Fraser&#x27;s Magazine&quot;, &quot;The Times&quot;, and &quot;Punch&quot;. His wife Isabella suffered from mental illness. Thackeray gained fame with his novel &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; and produced several other notable works. He unsuccessfully ran for Parliament in 1857 and edited the &quot;Cornhill Magazine&quot; in 1860. Thackeray&#x27;s health declined due to excessive eating, drinking, and lack of exercise. He died from a stroke at the age of fifty-two.

Thackeray began as a satirist and parodist, gaining popularity through works that showcased his fondness for roguish characters. Thackeray&#x27;s early works were marked by savage attacks on high society, military prowess, marriage, and hypocrisy, often written under various pseudonyms. His writing career began with satirical sketches like &quot;The Yellowplush Papers&quot;. Thackeray&#x27;s later novels, such as &quot;Pendennis&quot; and &quot;The Newcomes&quot;, reflected a mellowing in his tone, focusing on the coming of age of characters and critical portrayals of society. During the Victorian era, Thackeray was ranked second to Charles Dickens but is now primarily known for &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;.

==Biography==
===Early life===
Thackeray, an only child, was born in Calcutta, British India, where his father, Richmond Thackeray (1 September 1781 – 13 September 1815), was secretary to the Board of Revenue in the East India Company. His mother, Anne Becher (1792–1864), was the second daughter of Harriet Becher and John Harman Becher, who was also a secretary (writer) for the East India Company. His father was a grandson of Thomas Thackeray (1693–1760), headmaster of Harrow School.

Richmond died in 1815, which caused Anne to send her son to England that same year, while she remained in India. The ship on which he travelled made a short stopover at Saint Helena, where the imprisoned Napoleon was pointed out to him. Once in England, he was educated at schools in Southampton and Chiswick, and then at Charterhouse School, where he overlapped with John Leech. Thackeray disliked Charterhouse, and parodied it in his fiction as &quot;Slaughterhouse&quot;. Nevertheless, Thackeray was honoured in the Charterhouse Chapel with a monument after his death. 
===College education===
Illness in his last year at Charterhouse, during which he reportedly grew to his full height of , postponed his matriculation at Trinity College, Cambridge, until February 1829.

Never very keen on academic studies, Thackeray left Cambridge in 1830, but some of his earliest published writing appeared in two university periodicals, &quot;The Snob&quot; and &quot;The Gownsman&quot;.

Thackeray then travelled for some time on Continental Europe, visiting Paris and Weimar, where he met Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. He returned to England and began to study law at the Middle Temple, but soon gave that up. On reaching age 21, he came into his inheritance from his father, but he squandered much of it on gambling and on funding two unsuccessful newspapers, &quot;The National Standard&quot; and &quot;The Constitutional&quot;, for which he had hoped to write. He also lost a good part of his fortune in the collapse of two Indian banks. Forced to consider a profession to support himself, he turned first to art, which he studied in Paris, but did not pursue it, except in later years as the illustrator of some of his own novels and other writings.
===Marriage and children===
Thackeray&#x27;s years of semi-idleness ended on 20 August 1836, when he married Isabella Gethin Shawe (1816–1894), second daughter of Isabella Creagh Shawe and Matthew Shawe, a colonel who had died after distinguished service, primarily in India. The Thackerays had three children, all daughters: Anne Isabella (1837–1919), Jane (who died at eight months old), and Harriet Marian (1840–1875), who married Sir Leslie Stephen, editor, biographer and philosopher.
===Professional journalist===
Thackeray now began &quot;writing for his life&quot;, as he put it, turning to journalism in an effort to support his young family. He primarily worked for &quot;Fraser&#x27;s Magazine&quot;, a sharp-witted and sharp-tongued conservative publication for which he produced art criticism, short fictional sketches, and two longer fictional works, &quot;Catherine&quot; and &quot;The Luck of Barry Lyndon&quot;. Between 1837 and 1840, he also reviewed books for &quot;The Times&quot;. 

He was also a regular contributor to &quot;The Morning Chronicle&quot; and &quot;The Foreign Quarterly Review&quot;. Later, through his connection to the illustrator John Leech, he began writing for the newly created magazine &quot;Punch&quot;, in which he published &quot;The Snob Papers&quot;, later collected as &quot;The Book of Snobs&quot;. This work popularised the modern meaning of the word &quot;snob&quot;. 

Thackeray was a regular contributor to &quot;Punch&quot; between 1843 and 1854.

===Mental decline of his wife and romantic relationships===
In Thackeray&#x27;s personal life, his wife Isabella succumbed to depression after the birth of their third child in 1840. Finding that he could get no work done at home, he spent more and more time away, until September 1840, when he realised how grave his wife&#x27;s condition was. Struck by guilt, he set out with his wife to Ireland. During the crossing, she threw herself from a water-closet into the sea, but she was pulled from the waters. They fled back home after a four-week battle with her mother. From November 1840 to February 1842, Isabella was in and out of professional care, as her condition waxed and waned.

She eventually deteriorated into a permanent state of detachment from reality. Thackeray desperately sought cures for her, but nothing worked, and she ended up in two different asylums in or near Paris until 1845, after which Thackeray took her back to England, where he installed her with a Mrs. Bakewell at Camberwell. Isabella outlived her husband by 30 years, in the end being cared for by a family named Thompson in Leigh-on-Sea at Southend, until her death in 1894. After his wife&#x27;s illness, Thackeray never established another permanent relationship. He did pursue other women, however, in particular Mrs. Jane Brookfield and Sally Baxter. In 1851, Mr. Brookfield barred Thackeray from further visits or correspondence with Jane. Baxter, an American twenty years Thackeray&#x27;s junior whom he met during a lecture tour in New York City in 1852, married another man in 1855.
===Anti-Irish works for Punch===
In the early 1840s, Thackeray had some success with two travel books, &quot;The Paris Sketch Book&quot; and &quot;The Irish Sketch Book&quot;, the latter marked by its hostility towards Irish Catholics. However, as the book appealed to anti-Irish sentiment in Britain at the time, Thackeray was given the job of being &quot;Punch&quot;&#x27;s Irish expert, often under the pseudonym Hibernis Hibernior (&quot;more Irish than the Irish&quot;). Thackeray became responsible for creating &quot;Punch&quot;&#x27;s notoriously hostile and negative depictions of the Irish during the Great Irish Famine of 1845 to 1851.
===Status as a celebrity and lecture tours===
Thackeray achieved more recognition with his &quot;Snob Papers&quot; (serialised 1846/7, published in book form in 1848), but the work that really established his fame was the novel &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, which first appeared in serialised instalments beginning in January 1847. Even before &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; completed its serial run, Thackeray had become a celebrity, sought after by the very lords and ladies whom he satirised. They hailed him as the equal of Charles Dickens.
He remained &quot;at the top of the tree&quot;, as he put it, for the rest of his life, during which he produced several large novels, notably &quot;Pendennis&quot;, &quot;The Newcomes&quot;, and &quot;The History of Henry Esmond&quot;, despite various illnesses, including a near-fatal one that struck him in 1849 in the middle of writing &quot;Pendennis&quot;. He twice visited the United States on lecture tours during this period. Longtime Washington journalist B.P. Poore described Thackeray on one of those tours:The citizens of Washington enjoyed a rare treat when Thackeray came to deliver his lectures on the English essayists, wits, and humorists of the eighteenth century. Accustomed to the spread-eagle style of oratory too prevalent at the Capitol, they were delighted with the pleasing voice and easy manner of the burly, gray-haired, rosy-cheeked Briton, who made no gestures, but stood most of the time with his hands in his pockets, as if he were talking with friends at a cozy fireside. Thackeray also gave lectures in London on the English humorists of the eighteenth century, and on the first four Hanoverian monarchs. The latter series was published in book form in 1861 as &quot;The Four Georges: Sketches of Manners, Morals, Court, and Town Life &quot;.
===Failed candidate for the Liberal Party===
In July 1857, Thackeray stood unsuccessfully as a Liberal for the city of Oxford in Parliament. Although not the most fiery agitator, Thackeray was always a decided liberal in his politics, and he promised to vote for the ballot in extension of the suffrage and was ready to accept triennial parliaments. He was narrowly beaten by Cardwell, who received 1,070 votes, as against 1,005 for Thackeray.
===Magazine editor===
In 1860, Thackeray became editor of the newly established &quot;Cornhill Magazine&quot;, but he was never comfortable in the role, preferring to contribute to the magazine as the writer of a column called &quot;Roundabout Papers&quot;.
===Health problems===

Thackeray&#x27;s health worsened during the 1850s, and he was plagued by a recurring stricture of the urethra that laid him up for days at a time. He also felt that he had lost much of his creative impetus. He worsened matters by excessive eating and drinking and avoiding exercise, though he enjoyed riding (he kept a horse). He has been described as &quot;the greatest literary glutton who ever lived&quot;. His main activity apart from writing was &quot;gutting and gorging&quot;. He could not break his addiction to spicy peppers, further ruining his digestion.

===Death and funeral===
On 23 December 1863, after returning from dining out and before dressing for bed, he suffered a stroke. He was found dead in his bed the following morning. His death at the age of fifty-two was unexpected and shocked his family, his friends and the reading public. An estimated 7,000 people attended his funeral at Kensington Gardens. He was buried on 29 December at Kensal Green Cemetery, and a memorial bust sculpted by Marochetti can be found in Westminster Abbey.

==Works==

* &quot;The Yellowplush Papers&quot; (1837)
* &quot;Catherine&quot; (1839–1840)
* &quot;A Shabby Genteel Story&quot; (1840)
* &quot;The Paris Sketchbook&quot; (1840)
* &quot;Second Funeral of Napoleon&quot; (1841)
* &quot;The Irish Sketchbook&quot; (1842)
* &quot;The Luck of Barry Lyndon&quot; (1844)
* &quot;Notes of a Journey from Cornhill to Grand Cairo&quot; (1846)
* &quot;Mrs. Perkins&#x27;s Ball&quot; (1846), under the name M. A. Titmarsh
* &quot;Stray Papers: Being Stories, Reviews, Verses, and Sketches&quot; (1821–1847)
* &quot;The Book of Snobs&quot; (1846–1848)
* &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (1847–1848)
* &quot;Pendennis&quot; (1848–1850)
* &quot;Rebecca and Rowena&quot; (1850) (a parody sequel to &quot;Ivanhoe&quot;)
* &quot;Men&#x27;s Wives&quot; (1852)
* &quot;The History of Henry Esmond&quot; (1852)
* &quot;The English Humorists of the Eighteenth Century&quot; (1853)
* &quot;The Newcomes&quot; (1854–1855)
* &quot;The Rose and the Ring&quot; (1854–1855)
* &quot;The Virginians&quot; (1857–1859)
* &quot;Lovel the Widower&quot; (1860)
* &quot;Four Georges&quot; (1860–1861)
* &quot;The Adventures of Philip&quot; (1861–1862)
* &quot;Roundabout Papers&quot; (1863)
* &quot;Denis Duval&quot; (1864)
* &quot;Ballads&quot; (1869)
* &quot;Burlesques&quot; (1869)
* &quot;The Orphan of Pimlico&quot; (1876)
Thackeray began as a satirist and parodist, writing works that displayed a sneaking fondness for roguish upstarts, such as Becky Sharp in &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; and the title characters of &quot;The Luck of Barry Lyndon&quot; and &quot;Catherine&quot;. In his earliest works, written under such pseudonyms as Charles James Yellowplush, Michael Angelo Titmarsh and George Savage Fitz-Boodle, he tended towards savagery in his attacks on high society, military prowess, the institution of marriage and hypocrisy.

One of his earliest works, &quot;Timbuctoo&quot; (1829), contains a burlesque upon the subject set for the Cambridge Chancellor&#x27;s Medal for English Verse. (The contest was won by Tennyson with a poem of the same title, &quot;Timbuctoo&quot;). Thackeray&#x27;s writing career really began with a series of satirical sketches now usually known as &quot;The Yellowplush Papers&quot;, which appeared in &quot;Fraser&#x27;s Magazine&quot; beginning in 1837. These were adapted for BBC Radio 4 in 2009, with Adam Buxton playing Charles Yellowplush.

Between May 1839 and February 1840 &quot;Fraser&#x27;s&quot; published the work sometimes considered Thackeray&#x27;s first novel, &quot;Catherine&quot;. Originally intended as a satire of the Newgate school of crime fiction, it ended up being more of a picaresque tale. He also began work, never finished, on the novel later published as &quot;A Shabby Genteel Story&quot;.
Along with &quot;The Luck of Barry Lyndon&quot;, Thackeray is probably best known now for &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;. Literary theorist Kornelije Kvas wrote that &quot;the meteoric rise of the heroine of &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; Rebecca Sharp is a satirical presentation of the striving for profit, power, and social recognition of the new middle class. Old and new members of the middle class strive to emulate the lifestyle of the higher class (noblemen and landowners), and thereby to increase their material possessions and to own luxury objects. In &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, one can observe a greater degree of violation of moral values among members of the new middle class, for the decline of morality is proportionate to the degree of closeness of the individual to the market and its laws.&quot; In contrast, his large novels from the period after &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, which were once described by Henry James as examples of &quot;loose baggy monsters&quot;, have largely faded from view, perhaps because they reflect a mellowing in Thackeray, who had become so successful with his satires on society that he seemed to lose his zest for attacking it. These later works include &quot;Pendennis&quot;, a Bildungsroman depicting the coming of age of Arthur Pendennis, an alter ego of Thackeray, who also features as the narrator of two later novels, &quot;The Newcomes&quot; and &quot;The Adventures of Philip&quot;. &quot;The Newcomes&quot; is noteworthy for its critical portrayal of the &quot;marriage market&quot;, while &quot;Philip&quot; is known for its semi-autobiographical depiction of Thackeray&#x27;s early life, in which he partially regains some of his early satirical power.

Also notable among the later novels is &quot;The History of Henry Esmond&quot;, in which Thackeray tried to write a novel in the style of the eighteenth century, a period that held great appeal for him. About this novel, there have been found evident analogies—in the fundamental structure of the plot; in the psychological outlines of the main characters; in frequent episodes; and in the use of metaphors—to Ippolito Nievo&#x27;s &quot;Confessions of an Italian&quot;. Nievo wrote his novel during his stay in Milan where, in the &quot;Ambrosiana&quot; library, &quot;The History of Henry Esmond&quot; was available, just published.

Not only &quot;Esmond&quot; but also &quot;Barry Lyndon&quot; and &quot;Catherine&quot; are set in that period, as is the sequel to &quot;Esmond&quot;, &quot;The Virginians&quot;, which is set partially in North America and includes George Washington as a character who nearly kills one of the protagonists in a duel.

==Family==

===Parents===

Thackeray&#x27;s father, Richmond Thackeray, was born at South Mimms and went to India in 1798 at age sixteen as a writer (civil servant) with the East India Company. Richmond&#x27;s father&#x27;s name was also William Makepeace Thackeray. Richmond fathered a daughter, Sarah Redfield, in 1804 with Charlotte Sophia Rudd, his possibly Eurasian mistress, and both mother and daughter were named in his will. Such liaisons were common among gentlemen of the East India Company, and it formed no bar to his later courting and marrying William&#x27;s mother.
Thackeray&#x27;s mother, Anne Becher (born 1792), was &quot;one of the reigning beauties of the day&quot; and a daughter of John Harmon Becher, Collector of the South 24 Parganas district (d. Calcutta, 1800), of an old Bengal civilian family &quot;noted for the tenderness of its women&quot;. Anne Becher, her sister Harriet and their widowed mother, also Harriet, had been sent back to India by her authoritarian guardian grandmother, Ann Becher, in 1809 on the &quot;Earl Howe&quot;. Anne&#x27;s grandmother had told her that the man she loved, Henry Carmichael-Smyth, an ensign in the Bengal Engineers whom she met at an Assembly Ball in 1807 in Bath, had died, while he was told that Anne was no longer interested in him. Neither of these assertions was true. Though Carmichael-Smyth was from a distinguished Scottish military family, Anne&#x27;s grandmother went to extreme lengths to prevent their marriage. Surviving family letters state that she wanted a better match for her granddaughter.

Anne Becher and Richmond Thackeray were married in Calcutta on 13 October 1810. Their only child, William, was born on 18 July 1811. There is a fine miniature portrait of Anne Becher Thackeray and William Makepeace Thackeray, aged about two, done in Madras by George Chinnery .

Anne&#x27;s family&#x27;s deception was unexpectedly revealed in 1812, when Richmond Thackeray unwittingly invited the supposedly dead Carmichael-Smyth to dinner. Five years later, after Richmond had died of a fever on 13 September 1815, Anne married Henry Carmichael-Smyth, on 13 March 1817. The couple moved to England in 1820, after having sent William off to school there more than three years earlier. The separation from his mother had a traumatic effect on the young Thackeray, which he discussed in his essay &quot;On Letts&#x27;s Diary&quot; in &quot;The Roundabout Papers&quot;.

===Descendants===
Thackeray is an ancestor of the British financier Ryan Williams, and is the great-great-great-grandfather of the British comedian Al Murray and author Joanna Nadin.

==Reputation and legacy==
During the Victorian era Thackeray was ranked second only to Charles Dickens, but he is now much less widely read and is known almost exclusively for &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;. The novel has become a fixture in university courses, and has been repeatedly adapted for the cinema and television.

In Thackeray&#x27;s own day some commentators, such as Anthony Trollope, ranked his &quot;History of Henry Esmond&quot; as his greatest work, perhaps because it expressed Victorian values of duty and earnestness, as did some of his other later novels. It is perhaps for this reason that they have not survived as well as &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, which satirises those values.

Thackeray saw himself as writing in the realistic tradition, and distinguished his work from the exaggerations and sentimentality of Dickens. Some later commentators have accepted this self-evaluation and seen him as a realist, but others note his inclination to use eighteenth-century narrative techniques, such as digressions and direct addresses to the reader, and argue that through them he frequently disrupts the illusion of reality. The school of Henry James, with its emphasis on maintaining that illusion, marked a break with Thackeray&#x27;s techniques.

Indian popular Marathi politician Bal Thackeray&#x27;s father Keshav Sitaram Thackeray was an admirer of William; Keshav later changed his surname from Panvelkar to &quot;Thackeray&quot;.

Charlotte Brontë dedicated the second edition of &quot;Jane Eyre&quot; to Thackeray.

In 1887 the Royal Society of Arts unveiled a blue plaque to commemorate Thackeray at the house at 2 Palace Green, London, that had been built for him in the 1860s. It is now the location of the Israeli Embassy. 

Thackeray&#x27;s former home in Tunbridge Wells, Kent, is now a restaurant named after the author.

Thackeray was also a member of the Albion Lodge of the Ancient Order of Druids at Oxford.

== In popular culture ==
* Thackeray is portrayed by Michael Palin in the 2018 ITV television series &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;.
* Miles Jupp plays Thackeray in the 2017 film &quot;The Man Who Invented Christmas&quot;.
* Jonathan Keeble plays Thackery in the 2016 BBC audio drama &quot;Charlotte Brontë in Babylon&quot;. 
* A quote from Thackeray appears in episode 7 of &quot;JoJo&#x27;s Bizarre Adventure&quot;. Will Anthonio Zeppeli&#x27;s first name is possibly a reference to the English novelist William Makepeace Thackeray, who was quoted upon Zeppeli&#x27;s death: &quot;To love and win is the best thing. To love and lose, the next best.&quot;
* Thackeray&#x27;s quote &quot;Mother is the name for God&quot; appears in the 1994 movie &quot;The Crow&quot;.
* Thackeray&#x27;s &quot;The Colonel&quot; was mentioned by Anne Frank in &quot;The Diary of a Young Girl&quot;.

==List of works==

===Series===
Arthur Pendennis
#&quot;The History of Henry Esmond&quot; (1852) – 
#&quot;The Virginians&quot; (1857–1859) – 
#&quot;Pendennis&quot; (1848–1850) – 
#&quot;The Newcomes&quot; (1854–1855) – 
#&quot;A Shabby Genteel Story&quot; (Unfinished) (1840) – 
#&quot;The Adventures of Philip&quot; (1861–1862) – 

The Christmas Books of Mr M. A. Titmarsh
Thackeray wrote and illustrated five Christmas books as &quot;by Mr M. A. Titmarsh&quot;. They were collected under the pseudonymous title and his real name no later than 1868 by Smith, Elder &amp; Co.

&quot;The Rose and the Ring&quot; was dated 1855 in its first edition, published for Christmas 1854. 
# &quot;Mrs. Perkins&#x27;s Ball&quot; (1846), as by M. A. Titmarsh
# &quot;Our Street&quot;
# &quot;Doctor Birch and His Young Friends&quot;
# &quot;The Kickleburys on the Rhine&quot; (Christmas 1850) – &quot;a new picture book, drawn and written by Mr M. A. Titmarsh&quot;
# &quot;The Rose and the Ring&quot; (Christmas 1854) – 

===Novels===
* &quot;Catherine&quot; (1839–1840) – (originally credited to &quot;Ikey Solomons, Esq. Junior&quot;)
*&quot;The Luck of Barry Lyndon&quot; (1844) – 
* &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (1847–1848) – 
* &quot;Men&#x27;s Wives&quot; (1852) – 
* &quot;Lovel the Widower&quot;
* &quot;Denis Duval&quot; (unfinished) (1864) – 

===Novellas===
* &quot;Elizabeth Brownbridge&quot;
* &quot;Sultan Stork&quot;
* &quot;Little Spitz&quot;
* &quot;The Yellowplush Papers&quot; (1837) – 
* &quot;The Professor&quot;, loosely based on the life of Edward Dando
* &quot;Miss Löwe&quot;
* &quot;The Tremendous Adventures of Major Gahagan&quot;
* &quot;The Fatal Boots&quot;
* &quot;Cox’s Diary&quot;
* &quot;The Bedford-Row Conspiracy&quot;
* &quot;The History of Samuel Titmarsh and the Great Hoggarty Diamond&quot;
* &quot;The Fitz-Boodle Papers&quot;
* &quot;The Diary of C. Jeames de la Pluche, Esq. with his letters&quot;
* &quot;A Legend of the Rhine&quot;
* &quot;A Little Dinner at Timmins&#x27;s&quot;
* &quot;Rebecca and Rowena&quot; (1850), a parodic sequel to &quot;Ivanhoe&quot; – 
* &quot;Bluebeard&#x27;s Ghost&quot;

===Sketches and satires===
* &quot;The Irish Sketchbook&quot; (2 Volumes) (1843) – 
* &quot;The Book of Snobs&quot; (1846–1848), which popularised that term – 
* Flore et Zephyr
* Roundabout Papers
* Some Roundabout Papers
* Charles Dickens in France
* Character Sketches
* Sketches and Travels in London
* Mr. Brown&#x27;s Letters
* The Proser
* Miscellanies

===Play===
* &quot;The Wolves and the Lamb&quot;

===Travel writing===
* &quot;Notes of a Journey from Cornhill to Grand Cairo&quot; (1846), under the name Mr M. A. Titmarsh.
* &quot;The Paris Sketchbook&quot; (1840), featuring Roger Bontemps
* &quot;The Little Travels and Roadside Sketches&quot; (1840)

===Other non-fiction===
* &quot;The English Humorists of the 18th Century&quot; (1853)
* &quot;Four Georges&quot; (1860–1861) – 
* &quot;Roundabout Papers&quot; (1863)
* &quot;The Orphan of Pimlico&quot; (1876)
* &quot;Sketches and Travels in London&quot;
* &quot;Stray Papers: Being Stories, Reviews, Verses, and Sketches&quot; (1821–1847)
* &quot;Literary Essays&quot;
* &quot;The English Humorists of the 18th century: a series of lectures&quot; (1867)
* &quot;Ballads&quot;
* &quot;Miscellanies&quot;
* &quot;Stories&quot;
* &quot;Burlesques&quot;
* &quot;Character Sketches&quot;
* &quot;Critical Reviews&quot;
* &quot;Second Funeral of Napoleon&quot;

===Poems===
* &quot;The Pigtail&quot;
* &quot;The Mahogany Tree&quot; (1847)

==See also==
* &quot;Barry Lyndon&quot;, the 1975 film adaptation by Stanley Kubrick
* &quot;The Rose and the Ring&quot;, the 1986 film adaptation by Jerzy Gruza

==Footnotes==
==References==
==Bibliography==

* Aplin, John (ed), &quot;The Correspondence and Journals of the Thackeray Family&quot;, 5 vols., Pickering &amp; Chatto, 2011.
* Aplin, John, &quot;The Inheritance of Genius – A Thackeray Family Biography, 1798–1875&quot;, Lutterworth Press, 2010.
* Aplin, John, &quot;Memory and Legacy – A Thackeray Family Biography, 1876–1919&quot;, Lutterworth Press, 2011.
* Catalan, Zelma. &quot;The Politics of Irony in Thackeray’s Mature Fiction: Vanity Fair, Henry Esmond, The Newcomes.&quot; Sofia (Bulgaria), 2010, 250 pp.
* Elwin, Malcolm. &quot;Thackeray: A Personality&quot;. London: Jonathan Cape, 1932.
* Goldfarb, Sheldon. &quot;Catherine: A Story (The Thackeray Edition)&quot;. University of Michigan Press, 1999.
* Ferris, Ina. &quot;William Makepeace Thackeray&quot;. Boston: Twayne, 1983.
* Forster, Margaret. &quot;William Makepeace Thackeray: Memoirs of Victorian Gentleman&quot;. London: Secker &amp; Warburg, 1978.
* Jack, Adolphus Alfred. &quot;Thackeray: A Study&quot;. London: Macmillan, 1895.
* Melville, Lewis. &quot;The Life of William Makepeace Thackeray&quot;. London: Hutchinson &amp; Co., 1899.
* Monsarrat, Ann. &quot;An Uneasy Victorian: Thackeray the Man, 1811–1863&quot;. London: Cassell, 1980.
* Peters, Catherine. &quot;Thackeray: A Writer&#x27;s Life&quot;. Sutton Publishing, 1999.
* Peters, Catherine. &quot;Thackeray’s Universe: Shifting Worlds of Imagination and Reality&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.
* Prawer, Siegbert S.: &quot;Breeches and Metaphysics: Thackeray&#x27;s German Discourse&quot;. Oxford: Legenda, 1997.
* Prawer, Siegbert S.: &quot;Israel at Vanity Fair: Jews and Judaism in the Writings of W. M. Thackeray&quot;. Leiden: Brill, 1992.
* Prawer, Siegbert S.: &quot;W. M. Thackeray&#x27;s European sketch books: a study of literary and graphic portraiture&quot;. P. Lang, 2000.
* Ray, Gordon N. &quot;Thackeray: The Uses of Adversity, 1811–1846&quot;. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1955.
* Ray, Gordon N. &quot;Thackeray: The Age of Wisdom, 1847–1863&quot;. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1957.
* Ritchie, H.T. &quot;Thackeray and His Daughter&quot;. Harper and Brothers, 1924.
* Rodríguez Espinosa, Marcos (1998) &quot;Traducción y recepción como procesos de mediación cultural: &#x27;Vanity Fair&#x27; en España. &quot; Málaga: Servicio de Publicaciones de la Universidad de Málaga.&quot;
* Shillingsburg, Peter. &quot;William Makepeace Thackeray: A Literary Life&quot;. Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2001.
* Taylor, D. J. &quot;Thackeray&quot;. London: Chatto &amp; Windus, 1999.
* Williams, Ioan M. &quot;Thackeray&quot;. London: Evans, 1968.
==External links==

* 
* 
* Works by Thackeray at eBooks @ Adelaide
* Works by William Thackeray at Poeticous
* PSU&#x27;s Electronic Classics Series William Makepeace Thackeray site 
* On Charity and Humor, discourse on behalf of a charitable organisation
* &quot;Pegasus in Harness: Victorian Publishing and W. M. Thackeray&quot; by Peter L. Shillingsburg
* &quot;Bluebeard&#x27;s Ghost&quot; by W. M. Thackeray (1843) 
* &quot;The Adventures of Thackeray on his way through the World: An online exhibition at the Houghton Library
* Archival material at 
* . General Collection, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University
* Poems by William Makepeace Thackeray at English Poetry</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q167768" start="0" end="27" title="William Makepeace Thackeray" label="William Makepeace Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="126" end="135" title="Satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q612836" start="182" end="193" title="Vanity Fair (novel)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124771" start="267" end="291" title="The Luck of Barry Lyndon" label="The Luck of Barry Lyndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q471716" start="309" end="332" title="Barry Lyndon" label="adapted for a 1975 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="336" end="351" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="376" end="384" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="386" end="399" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="515" end="541" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451361" start="737" end="759" title="Fraser&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Fraser&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="773" end="782" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="800" end="805" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931722" start="1030" end="1047" title="Cornhill Magazine" label="Cornhill Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910239" start="1392" end="1404" title="high society" label="high society"/>
<link wikidata="Q201650" start="1438" end="1447" title="hypocrisy" label="hypocrisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q681737" start="1721" end="1734" title="coming of age" label="coming of age"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="1796" end="1809" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="1842" end="1857" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="1984" end="1992" title="Kolkata" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="1994" end="2007" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="2131" end="2149" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067132" start="2345" end="2361" title="Thomas Thackeray" label="Thomas Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247373" start="2389" end="2402" title="Harrow School" label="Harrow School"/>
<link wikidata="Q34497" start="2574" end="2586" title="Saint Helena" label="Saint Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2609" end="2617" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="2689" end="2700" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q845015" start="2705" end="2713" title="Chiswick" label="Chiswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067870" start="2727" end="2746" title="Charterhouse School" label="Charterhouse School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374807" start="2773" end="2783" title="John Leech (caricaturist)" label="John Leech"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="3131" end="3157" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="3429" end="3447" title="Continental Europe" label="Continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955" start="3468" end="3474" title="Weimar" label="Weimar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="3489" end="3515" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q925942" start="3570" end="3583" title="Middle Temple" label="Middle Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q565833" start="4478" end="4491" title="Anne Isabella Thackeray Ritchie" label="Anne Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q18876817" start="4546" end="4560" title="Harriet Stephen" label="Harriet Marian"/>
<link wikidata="Q740657" start="4590" end="4604" title="Leslie Stephen" label="Leslie Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451361" start="4834" end="4856" title="Fraser&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Fraser&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="4897" end="4909" title="conservative" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052512" start="5023" end="5032" title="Catherine (Thackeray novel)" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124771" start="5049" end="5073" title="The Luck of Barry Lyndon" label="The Luck of Barry Lyndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="5137" end="5146" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381797" start="5199" end="5220" title="The Morning Chronicle" label="The Morning Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374807" start="5322" end="5332" title="John Leech (caricaturist)" label="John Leech"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="5388" end="5393" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224025" start="5477" end="5494" title="The Book of Snobs" label="The Book of Snobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q541590" start="6765" end="6777" title="Leigh-on-Sea" label="Leigh-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152596" start="6962" end="6977" title="Jane Octavia Brookfield" label="Jane Brookfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="7451" end="7466" title="Irish Catholics" label="Irish Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q574680" start="7501" end="7521" title="anti-Irish sentiment" label="anti-Irish sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="7843" end="7861" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Irish Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q211236" start="8291" end="8300" title="celebrity" label="celebrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="8395" end="8410" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162382" start="8561" end="8570" title="Pendennis" label="Pendennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522018" start="8584" end="8596" title="The Newcomes" label="The Newcomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203517" start="8614" end="8641" title="The History of Henry Esmond" label="The History of Henry Esmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="8856" end="8866" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889111" start="8878" end="8888" title="Benjamin Perley Poore" label="B.P. Poore"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="9165" end="9172" title="United States Capitol" label="Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="9530" end="9540" title="House of Hanover" label="Hanoverian"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="9784" end="9791" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q334381" start="10065" end="10073" title="Edward Cardwell, 1st Viscount Cardwell" label="Cardwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931722" start="10219" end="10236" title="Cornhill Magazine" label="Cornhill Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585753" start="10499" end="10523" title="Urethral stricture" label="stricture of the urethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q822607" start="11320" end="11338" title="Kensington Gardens" label="Kensington Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574424" start="11372" end="11393" title="Kensal Green Cemetery" label="Kensal Green Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375473" start="11427" end="11437" title="Carlo Marochetti" label="Marochetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="11454" end="11471" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052512" start="11537" end="11546" title="Catherine (Thackeray novel)" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659434" start="11573" end="11595" title="A Shabby Genteel Story" label="A Shabby Genteel Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124771" start="11749" end="11773" title="The Luck of Barry Lyndon" label="The Luck of Barry Lyndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161571" start="11864" end="11888" title="Mrs. Perkins&amp;#x27;s Ball" label="Mrs. Perkins&amp;#x27;s Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224025" start="12026" end="12043" title="The Book of Snobs" label="The Book of Snobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q612836" start="12070" end="12081" title="Vanity Fair (novel)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162382" start="12108" end="12117" title="Pendennis" label="Pendennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q840974" start="12202" end="12209" title="Ivanhoe" label="Ivanhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816135" start="12225" end="12241" title="Men&amp;#x27;s Wives" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Wives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203517" start="12263" end="12290" title="The History of Henry Esmond" label="The History of Henry Esmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522018" start="12381" end="12393" title="The Newcomes" label="The Newcomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761552" start="12420" end="12441" title="The Rose and the Ring" label="The Rose and the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772832" start="12468" end="12482" title="The Virginians" label="The Virginians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16158937" start="12587" end="12611" title="The Adventures of Philip" label="The Adventures of Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q612836" start="12950" end="12961" title="Vanity Fair (novel)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124771" start="13002" end="13026" title="The Memoirs of Barry Lyndon, Esq." label="The Luck of Barry Lyndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052512" start="13043" end="13052" title="Catherine (Thackeray novel)" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="13503" end="13511" title="Alfred Tennyson, 1st Baron Tennyson" label="Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="13800" end="13811" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678812" start="13826" end="13837" title="Adam Buxton" label="Adam Buxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052512" start="14005" end="14014" title="Catherine (Thackeray novel)" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983504" start="14061" end="14068" title="Newgate novel" label="Newgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937792" start="14079" end="14092" title="crime fiction" label="crime fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q44563" start="14122" end="14132" title="picaresque novel" label="picaresque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659434" start="14213" end="14235" title="A Shabby Genteel Story" label="A Shabby Genteel Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="15149" end="15160" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162382" start="15434" end="15443" title="Pendennis" label="Pendennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q223945" start="15453" end="15466" title="Bildungsroman" label="Bildungsroman"/>
<link wikidata="Q681737" start="15481" end="15494" title="coming of age" label="coming of age"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522018" start="15604" end="15616" title="The Newcomes" label="The Newcomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16158937" start="15633" end="15657" title="The Adventures of Philip" label="The Adventures of Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203517" start="15984" end="16011" title="The History of Henry Esmond" label="The History of Henry Esmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q733342" start="16349" end="16363" title="Ippolito Nievo" label="Ippolito Nievo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772832" start="16733" end="16747" title="The Virginians" label="The Virginians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="16781" end="16794" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="16808" end="16825" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551418" start="16978" end="16989" title="South Mimms" label="South Mimms"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="17068" end="17086" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308319" start="17637" end="17663" title="South 24 Parganas district" label="South 24 Parganas district"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887616" start="18064" end="18080" title="Bengal Engineers" label="Bengal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="18125" end="18129" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089402" start="18736" end="18751" title="George Chinnery" label="George Chinnery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704500" start="19493" end="19502" title="Al Murray" label="Al Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205913" start="19514" end="19526" title="Joanna Nadin" label="Joanna Nadin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="19616" end="19631" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q318399" start="19903" end="19919" title="Anthony Trollope" label="Anthony Trollope"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="20265" end="20274" title="Realism (arts)" label="realistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726864" start="20340" end="20354" title="sentimentality" label="sentimentality"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="20679" end="20690" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265028" start="20805" end="20812" title="Marathi people" label="Marathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q61193" start="20824" end="20837" title="Bal Thackeray" label="Bal Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634267" start="20852" end="20876" title="Keshav Sitaram Thackeray" label="Keshav Sitaram Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q127332" start="20979" end="20995" title="Charlotte Brontë" label="Charlotte Brontë"/>
<link wikidata="Q182961" start="21034" end="21043" title="Jane Eyre" label="Jane Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="21077" end="21098" title="Royal Society of Arts" label="Royal Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="21110" end="21121" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369740" start="21259" end="21274" title="Embassy of Israel, London" label="Israeli Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396794" start="21433" end="21456" title="Ancient Order of Druids" label="Ancient Order of Druids"/>
<link wikidata="Q223985" start="21522" end="21535" title="Michael Palin" label="Michael Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56599307" start="21576" end="21587" title="Vanity Fair (2018 TV series)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851436" start="21597" end="21607" title="Miles Jupp" label="Miles Jupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q27964411" start="21647" end="21677" title="The Man Who Invented Christmas (film)" label="The Man Who Invented Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28930028" start="21837" end="21878" title="JoJo&amp;#x27;s Bizarre Adventure (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;JoJo&amp;#x27;s Bizarre Adventure&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q250912" start="22209" end="22229" title="The Crow (1994 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Crow&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583" start="22291" end="22301" title="Anne Frank" label="Anne Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911" start="22311" end="22336" title="The Diary of a Young Girl" label="The Diary of a Young Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203517" start="22401" end="22428" title="The History of Henry Esmond" label="The History of Henry Esmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772832" start="22452" end="22466" title="The Virginians" label="The Virginians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162382" start="22495" end="22504" title="Pendennis" label="Pendennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522018" start="22533" end="22545" title="The Newcomes" label="The Newcomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659434" start="22574" end="22596" title="A Shabby Genteel Story" label="A Shabby Genteel Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q16158937" start="22633" end="22657" title="The Adventures of Philip" label="The Adventures of Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161571" start="23034" end="23058" title="Mrs. Perkins&amp;#x27;s Ball" label="Mrs. Perkins&amp;#x27;s Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761552" start="23309" end="23330" title="The Rose and the Ring" label="The Rose and the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052512" start="23379" end="23388" title="Catherine (Thackeray novel)" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124771" start="23480" end="23504" title="The Luck of Barry Lyndon" label="The Luck of Barry Lyndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q612836" start="23529" end="23540" title="Vanity Fair (novel)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816135" start="23570" end="23586" title="Men&amp;#x27;s Wives" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Wives"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23611" end="23628" title="Lovel the Widower" label="Lovel the Widower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23643" end="23654" title="Denis Duval" label="Denis Duval"/>
<link wikidata="Q116940462" start="23895" end="23907" title="Edward Dando" label="Edward Dando"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24364" end="24382" title="Rebecca and Rowena" label="Rebecca and Rowena"/>
<link wikidata="Q840974" start="24423" end="24430" title="Ivanhoe" label="Ivanhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224025" start="24570" end="24587" title="The Book of Snobs" label="The Book of Snobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q728497" start="24625" end="24634" title="snob" label="that term"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="24703" end="24718" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439606" start="25067" end="25081" title="Roger Bontemps" label="Roger Bontemps"/>
<link wikidata="Q471716" start="25902" end="25914" title="Barry Lyndon" label="Barry Lyndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="25950" end="25965" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25974" end="25995" title="The Rose and the Ring (film)" label="The Rose and the Ring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26031" end="26042" title="Jerzy Gruza" label="Jerzy Gruza"/>
<link wikidata="Q527146" start="26887" end="26904" title="Margaret Forster" label="Forster, Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536868" start="27099" end="27114" title="Lewis Melville" label="Melville, Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509766" start="27542" end="27561" title="Siegbert Salomon Prawer" label="Prawer, Siegbert S."/>
<link wikidata="Q5203669" start="28543" end="28556" title="D. J. Taylor (writer)" label="Taylor, D. J."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40121" wikidata="Q612836" url="?curid=40121" title="Vanity Fair (novel)">
<text>Vanity Fair is a novel by the English author William Makepeace Thackeray, which follows the lives of Becky Sharp and Amelia Sedley amid their friends and families during and after the Napoleonic Wars. It was first published as a 19-volume monthly serial (the last containing Parts 19 &quot;and&quot; 20) from 1847 to 1848, carrying the subtitle Pen and Pencil Sketches of English Society, which reflects both its satirisation of early 19th-century British society and the many illustrations drawn by Thackeray to accompany the text. It was published as a single volume in 1848 with the subtitle A Novel without a Hero, reflecting Thackeray&#x27;s interest in deconstructing his era&#x27;s conventions regarding literary heroism. It is sometimes considered the &quot;principal founder&quot; of the Victorian domestic novel.

The story is framed as a puppet play, and the narrator, despite being an authorial voice, is somewhat unreliable. The serial was a popular and critical success; the novel is now considered a classic and has inspired several audio, film, and television adaptations. It also inspired the title of the British lifestyle magazine first published in 1868, which became known for its caricatures of famous people of Victorian and Edwardian society. In 2003, &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; was listed at No. 122 on the BBC&#x27;s The Big Read poll of the UK&#x27;s best-loved books.

==Title==

The book&#x27;s title comes from John Bunyan&#x27;s &quot;Pilgrim&#x27;s Progress&quot;, a Dissenter allegory first published in 1678. In that work, &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; refers to a stop along the pilgrim&#x27;s route: a never-ending fair held in a town called Vanity, which represents man&#x27;s sinful attachment to worldly things. Thackeray does not mention Bunyan in the novel or in his surviving letters about it, where he describes himself dealing with &quot;living without God in the world&quot;, but he did expect the reference to be understood by his audience, as shown in an 1851 &quot;Times&quot; article likely written by Thackeray himself. 
Robert Bell—whose friendship later became so great that he was buried near Thackeray at Kensal Green Cemetery—complained that the novel could have used &quot;more light and air&quot; to make it &quot;more agreeable and healthy&quot;. Thackeray rebutted this with Evangelist&#x27;s words as the pilgrims entered Bunyan&#x27;s Vanity Fair: &quot;The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it?&quot;

From its appearance in Bunyan, &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; or a &quot;vanity-fair&quot; was also in general use for &quot;the world&quot; in a range of connotations from the blandly descriptive to the wearily dismissive to the condemning. By the 18th century, it was generally taken as a playground and, in the first half of the 19th century, more specifically the playground of the idle and undeserving rich. All of these senses appear in Thackeray&#x27;s work. The name &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; has also been used for at least 5 periodicals.

==Plot summary==
The story is framed by its preface and coda as a puppet show taking place at a fair; the cover illustration of the serial installments was not of the characters but of a troupe of comic actors at Speakers&#x27; Corner in Hyde Park. The narrator, variously a show manager or writer, appears at times within the work itself and is somewhat unreliable, repeating a tale of gossip at second or third hand.

In London in 1814, Rebecca Sharp (&quot;Becky&quot;), daughter of an art teacher and a French dancer, is a strong-willed, cunning, moneyless young woman determined to make her way in society. After leaving school, Becky stays with her friend Amelia Sedley (&quot;Emmy&quot;), who is a good-natured, simple-minded young girl, of a wealthy London family. There, Becky meets the dashing and self-obsessed Captain George Osborne (Amelia&#x27;s betrothed) and Amelia&#x27;s brother Joseph (&quot;Jos&quot;) Sedley, a clumsy and vainglorious but rich civil servant home from the East India Company. Hoping to marry Sedley, the richest young man she has met, Becky entices him, but she fails. George Osborne&#x27;s friend Captain William Dobbin loves Amelia, but only wishes her happiness, which is centred on George.

Becky Sharp says farewell to the Sedley family and enters the service of the crude and profligate baronet Sir Pitt Crawley, who has engaged her as a governess to his daughters. Her behaviour at Sir Pitt&#x27;s house gains his favour, and after the premature death of his second wife, he proposes marriage to her. However, he finds that Becky has secretly married his second son, Captain Rawdon Crawley, a plot orchestrated by Bute Crawley to ensure that Sir Pitt&#x27;s elder half sister, the spinster Miss Crawley, who is very rich (having inherited her mother&#x27;s fortune) disinherits Rawdon; and the whole Crawley family compete for her favour so she will bequeath them her wealth. Initially her favourite is Rawdon Crawley, but his marriage with Becky enrages her. First she favours the family of Sir Pitt&#x27;s brother, but when she dies, she leaves her money to Sir Pitt&#x27;s eldest son, also called Pitt.

News arrives that Napoleon has escaped from Elba, and as a result the stockmarket becomes jittery, causing Amelia&#x27;s stockbroker father, John Sedley, to become bankrupt. George&#x27;s rich father forbids George to marry Amelia, who is now poor. Dobbin persuades George to marry Amelia, and George is consequently disinherited. George Osborne, William Dobbin and Rawdon Crawley are deployed to Brussels, accompanied by Amelia and Becky, and Amelia&#x27;s brother, Jos.

George is embarrassed by the vulgarity of Mrs. Major O&#x27;Dowd, the wife of the head of the regiment. The newly wedded Osborne is already growing tired of Amelia, and he becomes increasingly attracted to Becky, which makes Amelia jealous and unhappy. He is also losing money to Rawdon at cards and billiards. At a ball in Brussels, George gives Becky a note inviting her to run away with him (although this fact is not revealed until the end of the book). But then the army have marching orders to the Battle of Waterloo, and George spends a tender night with Amelia and leaves.

The noise of battle horrifies Amelia, and she is comforted by the brisk but kind Mrs. O&#x27;Dowd. Becky is indifferent and makes plans for whatever the outcome (for example, if Napoleon wins, she would aim to become the mistress of one of his Marshals). She also makes a profit selling her carriage and horses at inflated prices to Jos, who is seeking to flee Brussels.

George Osborne is killed at the Battle of Waterloo, while Dobbin and Rawdon survive the battle. Amelia bears him a posthumous son, who carries on the name George. She returns to live in genteel poverty with her parents, spending her life in memory of her husband and care of her son. Dobbin pays for a small annuity for Amelia and expresses his love for her by small kindnesses toward her and her son. She is too much in love with her husband&#x27;s memory to return Dobbin&#x27;s love. Saddened, he goes with his regiment to India for many years.

Becky also gives birth to a son, named Rawdon after his father. Becky is a cold, distant mother, although Rawdon loves his son. Becky continues her ascent first in post-war Paris and then in London where she is patronised by the rich and powerful Marquis of Steyne. She is eventually presented at court to the Prince Regent and charms him further at a game of &quot;acting charades&quot; where she plays the roles of Clytemnestra and Philomela. The elderly Sir Pitt Crawley dies and is succeeded by his son Pitt, who had married Lady Jane Sheepshanks, Lord Southdown&#x27;s third daughter. Becky is on good terms with Pitt and Jane originally, but Jane is disgusted by Becky&#x27;s attitude to her son and jealous of Becky&#x27;s relationship with Pitt.

At the summit of their social success, Rawdon is arrested for debt, possibly at Becky&#x27;s connivance. The financial success of the Crawleys had been a topic of gossip; in fact they were living on credit even when it ruined those who trusted them, such as their landlord, an old servant of the Crawley family. The Marquis of Steyne had given Becky money, jewels, and other gifts but Becky does not use them for expenses or to free her husband. Instead, Rawdon&#x27;s letter to his brother is received by Lady Jane, who pays the £170 that prompted his imprisonment.

He returns home to find Becky singing to Steyne and strikes him down on the assumption—despite her protestations of innocence—that they are having an affair. Steyne is indignant, having assumed the £1000 he had just given Becky was part of an arrangement with her husband. Rawdon finds Becky&#x27;s hidden bank records and leaves her, expecting Steyne to challenge him to a duel. Instead Steyne arranges for Rawdon to be made Governor of Coventry Island, a pestilential and disease-ridden location. Becky, having lost both husband and credibility, leaves England and wanders the continent, leaving her son in the care of Pitt and Lady Jane.
As Amelia&#x27;s adored son George grows up, his grandfather Mr Osborne relents towards him (though not towards Amelia) and takes him from his impoverished mother, who knows the rich old man will give him a better start in life than she could manage. After twelve years abroad, both Joseph Sedley and Dobbin return. Dobbin professes his unchanged love to Amelia. Amelia is affectionate, but she cannot forget the memory of her dead husband. Dobbin mediates a reconciliation between Amelia and her father-in-law, who dies soon after. He had amended his will, bequeathing young George half his large fortune and Amelia a generous annuity.

After the death of Mr Osborne, Amelia, Jos, George and Dobbin go to Pumpernickel (Weimar in Germany), where they encounter the destitute Becky. Becky has fallen in life. She lives among card sharps and con artists, drinking heavily and gambling. Becky enchants Jos Sedley all over again, and Amelia is persuaded to let Becky join them. Dobbin forbids this, and reminds Amelia of her jealousy of Becky with her husband. Amelia feels that this dishonours the memory of her dead and revered husband, and this leads to a complete breach between her and Dobbin. Dobbin leaves the group and rejoins his regiment, while Becky remains with the group.

However, Becky has decided that Amelia should marry Dobbin, even though Becky knows Dobbin is her enemy. Becky shows Amelia George&#x27;s note, kept all this time from the eve of the Battle of Waterloo, and Amelia finally realises that George was not the perfect man she always thought, and that she has rejected a better man, Dobbin. Amelia and Dobbin are reconciled and return to England. Becky and Jos stay in Europe. Jos dies, possibly suspiciously, after signing a portion of his money to Becky as life insurance, thereby setting her up with an income. She returns to England, and manages a respectable life, although all her previous friends refuse to acknowledge her.

== Characters ==


=== Emmy Sedley (Amelia) ===
Amelia, called Emmy, is good-natured but passive and naïve. Pretty rather than beautiful, she has a snub nose and round, rosy cheeks. She is well-liked by men, and women when few men are around, as was the case when she was at school. She begins the work as its heroine (&quot;selected for the very reason that she was the best-natured of all&quot;) and marries the dashing George Osborne against his father&#x27;s wishes, but the narrator is soon forced to admit &quot;she wasn&#x27;t a heroine&quot; after all as she remains soppily devoted to him despite his neglect of her and his flirtation with Becky.

After George dies in the Battle of Waterloo, she brings up little George alone while living with her parents. She is completely dominated by her increasingly peevish mother and her spendthrift father, who, to finance one of his failing investment schemes, sells the annuity Jos had provided. Amelia becomes obsessed with her son and the memory of her husband. She ignores William Dobbin, who courts her for years and treats him shabbily until he leaves. Only when Becky shows her George&#x27;s letter to her, indicating his unfaithfulness, can Amelia move on. She then marries Dobbin.

In a letter to his close friend Jane Octavia Brookfield while the book was being written, Thackeray confided that &quot;You know you are only a piece of Amelia, my mother is another half, my poor little wife &quot;y est pour beaucoup&quot;&quot;. Within the work, her character is compared and connected to Iphigenia, although two of the references extend the allusion to all daughters in all drawing rooms as potential Iphigenias waiting to be sacrificed by their families.

=== Becky Sharp (Rebecca) ===

Rebecca Sharp, called Becky, is Amelia&#x27;s opposite: an intelligent, conniving young woman with a gift for satire. She is described as a short, sandy-haired girl who has green eyes and a great deal of wit. Becky is born to a French opera dancer mother and an art teacher and artist father Francis. Fluent in both French and English, Becky has a beautiful singing voice, plays the piano, and shows great talent as an actress. Without a mother to guide her into marriage, Becky resolves that &quot;I must be my own Mamma&quot;.

She thereafter appears to be completely amoral and without conscience and has been called the work&#x27;s &quot;anti-heroine&quot;. She does not seem to have the ability to get attached to other people, and lies easily and intelligently to get her way. She is extremely manipulative and, after the first few chapters and her failure to attract Jos Sedley, is not shown as being particularly sincere.

Never having known financial or social security even as a child, Becky desires it above all things. Nearly everything she does is with the intention of securing a stable position for herself, or herself and her husband after she and Rawdon are married. She advances Rawdon&#x27;s interests tirelessly, flirting with men such as General Tufto and the Marquis of Steyne to get him promoted. She also uses her feminine wiles to distract men at card parties while Rawdon cheats them blind.

Marrying Rawdon Crawley in secret was a mistake, as was running off instead of begging Miss Crawley&#x27;s forgiveness. She also fails to manipulate Miss Crawley through Rawdon so as to obtain an inheritance. Although Becky manipulates men very easily, she is less successful with women. She is utterly hostile to Lady Bareacres, dismissive of Mrs. O&#x27;Dowd, and Lady Jane, although initially friendly, eventually distrusts and dislikes her.

The exceptions to this trend are (at least initially) Miss Crawley, her companion Miss Briggs, and her school friend Amelia; the latter is the recipient of more-or-less the only kindnesses Becky expresses in the work, persuading her to marry Dobbin in light of what Becky comes to appreciate to be his good qualities and protecting Amelia from two ruffians vying for her attentions. This comparative loyalty to Amelia stems from Becky having no other friends at school, and Amelia having &quot;by a thousand kind words and offices, overcome... (Becky&#x27;s) hostility&quot;; &#x27;The gentle tender-hearted Amelia Sedley was the only person to whom she could attach herself in the least; and who could help attaching herself to Amelia?&#x27;

Beginning with her determination to be her &quot;own Mamma&quot;, Becky begins to assume the role of Clytemnestra. Becky and her necklace from Steyne also allude to the fallen Eriphyle in Racine&#x27;s retelling of &quot;Iphigenia at Aulis&quot;, where she doubles and rescues Iphigenia. In lesser contexts, Becky also appears as Arachne to Miss Pinkerton&#x27;s Minerva and as a variety of classical figures in the works&#x27; illustrations.

=== George Osborne ===

George Osborne, his father (a merchant, of considerably superior social status to Dobbin&#x27;s grocer father, albeit self made, and ironically a mere corporal in the City Light Horse regiment of which Dobbin senior, by this time an alderman and a knight, is colonel), and his two sisters are close to the Sedley family until Mr. Sedley (the father of Jos and Amelia, and George Osborne&#x27;s godfather, from whom the latter takes his middle name of &#x27;Sedley&#x27;) goes bankrupt following some ill-advised speculation. Since George and Amelia were raised in close company and were childhood sweethearts, George defies his father to marry Amelia. Before father and son can be reconciled, George is killed at the battle of Waterloo, leaving the pregnant Amelia to carry on as well as she can.

Raised to be a selfish, vain, profligate spender, handsome and self-obsessed, George squanders the last of the money he receives from his father and sets nothing aside to help support Amelia. After marrying Amelia, he finds after a couple of weeks that he is bored. He flirts with Becky quite seriously and is reconciled to Amelia only a short time before he is killed in battle.

=== William Dobbin ===
The best friend of George Osborne, Captain William Dobbin is tall, ungainly, and not particularly handsome. He is a few years older than George but has been friends with him since his schooldays, even though Dobbin&#x27;s father is a fig-merchant (Dobbin &amp; Rudge, grocers and oilmen, Thames Street, London - he is later an alderman and colonel of the City Light Horse regiment, and knighted) and the Osbornes belong to the genteel class and have become independently wealthy. He defends George and is blind to his faults in many ways, although he tries to force George to do the right thing. He pushes George to keep his promise to marry Amelia even though Dobbin is in love with Amelia himself. After George is killed, Dobbin puts together an annuity to help support Amelia, ostensibly with the help of George&#x27;s fellow officers.

Later, Major and Lieutenant Colonel Dobbin discreetly does what he can to help support Amelia and her son George. He allows Amelia to continue with her obsession over George and does not correct her erroneous beliefs about him. He hangs about for years, either pining away over her while serving in India or waiting on her in person, allowing her to take advantage of his good nature. After Amelia finally chooses Becky&#x27;s friendship over his during their stay in Germany, Dobbin leaves in disgust. He returns when Amelia writes to him and admits her feelings for him, marries her (despite having lost much of his passion for her), and has a daughter whom he loves deeply.

=== Rawdon Crawley ===
Rawdon, the younger of the two Crawley sons, is an empty-headed cavalry officer who is his wealthy aunt&#x27;s favourite until he marries Becky Sharp, who is of a far lower class. He permanently alienates his aunt, who leaves her estate to Rawdon&#x27;s elder brother Sir Pitt instead. Sir Pitt has by this time inherited their father&#x27;s estate, leaving Rawdon destitute.

The well-meaning Rawdon does have a few talents in life, most of them having to do with gambling and duelling. He is very good at cards and billiards, and although he does not always win he is able to earn cash by betting against less talented gamblers. He is heavily indebted throughout most of the book, not so much for his own expenses as for Becky&#x27;s. Not particularly talented as a military officer, he is content to let Becky manage his career.

Although Rawdon knows Becky is attractive to men, he believes her reputation is spotless even though she is widely suspected of romantic intrigue with General Tufto and other powerful men. Nobody dares to suggest otherwise to Rawdon because of his temper and his reputation for duelling. Yet other people, particularly the Marquis of Steyne, find it impossible to believe that Crawley is unaware of Becky&#x27;s tricks. Steyne in particular believes Rawdon is fully aware Becky is prostituting herself, and believes Rawdon is going along with the charade in the hope of financial gain.

After Rawdon finds out the truth and leaves Becky for an assignment overseas, he leaves his son to be brought up by his brother Sir Pitt and his wife Lady Jane. While overseas, Rawdon dies of yellow fever.

=== Pitt Crawley ===
Rawdon Crawley&#x27;s elder brother inherits the Crawley estate from his father, the boorish and vulgar Sir Pitt, and also inherits the estate of his wealthy aunt, Miss Crawley, after she disinherits Rawdon. Pitt is very religious and has political aspirations, although not many people appreciate his intelligence or wisdom because there&#x27;s not much there to appreciate.

Somewhat pedantic and conservative, Pitt does nothing to help Rawdon or Becky even when they fall on hard times. This is chiefly due to the influence of his wife, Lady Jane, who dislikes Becky because of her callous treatment of her son, and also because Becky repaid Lady Jane&#x27;s earlier kindness by patronising her and flirting with Sir Pitt.

=== Miss Matilda Crawley ===
The elderly Miss Crawley is everyone&#x27;s favourite wealthy aunt. Sir Pitt and Rawdon both dote on her, although Rawdon is her favourite nephew and sole heir until he marries Becky. While Miss Crawley likes Becky and keeps her around to entertain her with sarcasm and wit, and while she loves scandal and particularly stories of unwise marriage, she does not want scandal or unwise marriage in her family. A substantial part of the early section of the book deals with the efforts the Crawleys make to kowtow to Miss Crawley in the hope of receiving a big inheritance.

Thackeray spent time in Paris with his maternal grandmother Harriet Becher, and Miss Crawley&#x27;s character is said to be based on her.

=== Joseph Sedley ===
Amelia&#x27;s older brother, Joseph &quot;Jos&quot; Sedley, is a &quot;nabob&quot;, who made a respectable fortune as a collector in India. Obese and self-important but very shy and insecure, he is attracted to Becky Sharp but circumstances prevent him from proposing. He never marries, but when he meets Becky again he is easily manipulated into falling in love with her. Jos is not a courageous or intelligent man, displaying his cowardice at the Battle of Waterloo by trying to flee and purchasing both of Becky&#x27;s overpriced horses. Becky ensnares him again near the end of the book and, it is hinted, murders him for his life insurance.

==Publication history==

Thackeray may have begun working out some of the details of &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; as early as 1841 but probably began writing it in late 1844. Like many novels of the time, &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; was published as a serial before being sold in book form. It was printed in 20 monthly parts between January 1847 and July 1848 for &quot;Punch&quot; by Bradbury &amp; Evans in London. The first three had already been completed before publication, while the others were written after it had begun to sell.

As was standard practice, the last part was a &quot;double number&quot; containing parts 19 and 20. Surviving texts, his notes, and letters show that adjustments were made – e.g., the Battle of Waterloo was delayed twice – but that the broad outline of the story and its principal themes were well established from the beginning of publication. 

:No. 1 (January 1847) Ch. 1–4
:No. 2 (February 1847) Ch. 5–7
:No. 3 (March 1847) Ch. 8–11
:No. 4 (April 1847) Ch. 12–14
:No. 5 (May 1847) Ch. 15–18
:No. 6 (June 1847) Ch. 19–22
:No. 7 (July 1847) Ch. 23–25
:No. 8 (August 1847) Ch. 26–29
:No. 9 (September 1847) Ch. 30–32
:No. 10 (October 1847) Ch. 33–35
:No. 11 (November 1847) Ch. 36–38
:No. 12 (December 1847) Ch. 39–42
:No. 13 (January 1848) Ch. 43–46
:No. 14 (February 1848) Ch. 47–50
:No. 15 (March 1848) Ch. 51–53
:No. 16 (April 1848) Ch. 54–56
:No. 17 (May 1848) Ch. 57–60
:No. 18 (June 1848) Ch. 61–63
:No. 19/20 (July 1848) Ch. 64–67

The parts resembled pamphlets and contained the text of several chapters between outer pages of steel engravings and advertising. Wood engravings, which could be set along with normal moveable type, appeared within the text. The same engraved illustration appeared on the canary-yellow cover of each monthly part; this colour became Thackeray&#x27;s signature, as a light blue-green was Dickens&#x27;s, allowing passers-by to notice a new Thackeray number in a bookstall from a distance.

&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; was the first work that Thackeray published under his own name and was extremely well received at the time. After the conclusion of its serial publication, it was printed as a bound volume by Bradbury &amp; Evans in 1848 and was quickly picked up by other London printers as well. As a collected work, the novels bore the subtitle &quot;A Novel without a Hero&quot;. By the end of 1859, royalties on &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; had only given Thackeray about £2000, a third of his take from &quot;The Virginians&quot;, but was responsible for his still more lucrative lecture tours in Britain and the United States.

From his first draft and following publication, Thackeray occasionally revised his allusions to make them more accessible for his readers. In Chapter 5, an original &quot;Prince Whadyecallem&quot; became &quot;Prince Ahmed&quot; by the 1853 edition. In Chapter 13, a passage about the filicidal Biblical figure Jephthah was removed, although references to Iphigenia remained important. In Chapter 56, Thackeray originally confused Samuel – the boy whose mother Hannah had given him up when called to by God – with Eli, the old priest to whose care he was entrusted; this mistake was not corrected until the 1889 edition, after Thackeray&#x27;s death.

The serials had been subtitled &quot;Pen and Pencil Sketches of English Society&quot; and both they and the early bound versions featured Thackeray&#x27;s own illustrations. These sometimes provided symbolically-freighted images, such as one of the female characters being portrayed as a man-eating mermaid. In at least one case, a major plot point is provided through an image and its caption. Although the text makes it clear that other characters suspect Becky Sharp to have murdered her second husband, there is nothing definitive in the text itself. However, an image reveals her overhearing Jos pleading with Dobbin while clutching a small white object in her hand. The caption that this is &quot;Becky&#x27;s second appearance in the character of Clytemnestra&quot; clarifies that she did indeed murder him for the insurance money, likely through laudanum or another poison.

&quot;The final three illustrations of &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; are tableaux that insinuate visually what the narrator is unwilling to articulate: that Becky... has actually been substantially rewarded – by society – for her crimes.&quot; One of the Thackeray&#x27;s plates for the 11th issue of &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; was suppressed from publication by threat of prosecution for libel, so great was the resemblance of its depiction of Lord Steyne to the Marquis of Hertford. Despite their relevance, most modern editions either do not reproduce all the illustrations or do so with poor detail.

* , reprinted 1925.
* , without illustration.
* , reprinted 1898.
* , reprinted 1886.
* .
* , in four editions.
* .
* .
* .
* .
* , reprinted 1995. 
* , reprinted 2008.
* , reprinted 2003, 2004, &amp; 2008.
* .
* . &amp;

==Reception and criticism==



===Contemporaneous reception===
The style is highly indebted to Henry Fielding. Thackeray meant the book to be not only entertaining but also instructive, an intention demonstrated through the book&#x27;s narration and through Thackeray&#x27;s private correspondence. A letter to his editor at &quot;Punch&quot; expressed his belief that &quot;our profession... is as serious as the parson&#x27;s own&quot;. He considered it his own coming-of-age as a writer and greatest work.

Critics hailed the work as a literary treasure before the last part of the serial was published. In her correspondence, Charlotte Brontë was effusive regarding his illustrations as well: &quot;You will not easily find a second Thackeray. How he can render, with a few black lines and dots, shades of expression, so fine, so real; traits of character so minute, so subtle, so difficult to seize and fix, I cannot tell—I can only wonder and admire... If Truth were again a goddess, Thackeray should be her high priest.&quot;

The early reviewers took the debt to Bunyan as self-evident and compared Becky with Pilgrim and Thackeray with Faithful. Although they were superlative in their praise, some expressed disappointment at the unremittingly dark portrayal of human nature, fearing Thackeray had taken his dismal metaphor too far. In response to these critics, Thackeray explained that he saw people for the most part as &quot;abominably foolish and selfish&quot;.

The unhappy ending was intended to inspire readers to look inward at their own shortcomings. Other critics took notice of or exception to the social subversion in the work; in his correspondence, Thackeray stated his criticism was not reserved to the upper class: &quot;My object is to make every body engaged, engaged in the pursuit of Vanity Fair and I must carry my story through in this dreary minor key, with only occasional hints here and there of better things—of better things which it does not become me to preach&quot;.

===Analysis===

The novel is considered a classic of English literature, though some critics claim that it has structural problems; Thackeray sometimes lost track of the huge scope of his work, mixing up characters&#x27; names and minor plot details. The number of allusions and references it contains can make it difficult for modern readers to follow.

The subtitle, &quot;A Novel without a Hero&quot;, refers to the characters all being flawed to a greater or lesser degree; even the most sympathetic have weaknesses, for example Captain Dobbin, who is prone to vanity and melancholy. The human weaknesses Thackeray illustrates are mostly to do with greed, idleness, and snobbery, and the scheming, deceit and hypocrisy which mask them. None of the characters is wholly evil, although Becky&#x27;s manipulative, amoral tendencies make her come pretty close. However, even Becky, who is amoral and cunning, is thrown on her own resources by poverty and its stigma. (She is the orphaned daughter of a poor artist and an opera dancer.) Thackeray&#x27;s tendency to highlight faults in all of his characters displays his desire for a greater level of realism in his fiction compared to the rather unlikely or idealised people in many contemporary novels.

The novel is a satire of society as a whole, characterised by hypocrisy and opportunism, but it is not necessarily a reforming novel; there is no clear suggestion that social or political changes or greater piety and moral reformism could improve the nature of society. It thus paints a fairly bleak view of the human condition. This bleak portrait is continued with Thackeray&#x27;s own role as an omniscient narrator, one of the writers best known for using the technique. He continually offers asides about his characters and compares them to actors and puppets, but his cheek goes even as far as his readers, accusing all who may be interested in such &quot;Vanity Fairs&quot; as being either &quot;of a lazy, or a benevolent, or a sarcastic mood&quot;. As Lord David Cecil remarked, &quot;Thackeray liked people, and for the most part he thought them well-intentioned. But he also saw very clearly that they were all in some degree weak and vain, self-absorbed and self-deceived.&quot; Amelia begins as a warm-hearted and friendly girl, though sentimental and naive, but by the story&#x27;s end she is portrayed as vacuous and shallow. Dobbin appears first as loyal and magnanimous, if unaware of his own worth; by the end of the story he is presented as a tragic fool, a prisoner of his own sense of duty who knows he is wasting his gifts on Amelia but is unable to live without her. The novel&#x27;s increasingly grim outlook can take readers aback, as characters whom the reader at first holds in sympathy are shown to be unworthy of such regard.

The work is often compared to the other great historical novel of the Napoleonic Wars, Tolstoy&#x27;s &quot;War and Peace&quot;. While Tolstoy&#x27;s work has a greater emphasis on the historical detail and the effect the war has upon his protagonists, Thackeray instead uses the conflict as a backdrop to the lives of his characters. The momentous events on the continent do not always have an equally important influence on the behaviours of Thackeray&#x27;s characters. Rather their faults tend to compound over time. This is in contrast to the redemptive power the conflict has on the characters in &quot;War and Peace&quot;. For Thackeray, the Napoleonic Wars as a whole can be thought of as one more of the vanities expressed in the title.

A common critical topic is to address various objects in the book and the characters&#x27; relationships with them, such as Rebecca&#x27;s diamonds or the piano Amelia values when she thinks it came from George and dismisses upon learning that Dobbin provided it. Marxist and similar schools of criticism that go farther and see Thackeray condemning consumerism and capitalism. However, while Thackeray is pointed in his criticism of the commodification of women in the marriage market, his variations on Ecclesiastes&#x27;s &quot;all is vanity&quot; are often interpreted as personal rather than institutional. He also has broad sympathy with a measure of comfort and financial and physical &quot;snugness&quot;. At one point, the narrator even makes a &quot;robust defense of his lunch&quot;: &quot;It is all vanity to be sure: but who will not own to liking a little of it? I should like to know what well-constituted mind, merely because it is transitory, dislikes roast-beef?&quot;

Despite the clear implications of Thackeray&#x27;s illustration on the topic, John Sutherland has argued against Becky having murdered Jos on the basis of Thackeray&#x27;s criticism of the &quot;Newgate novels&quot; of Edward Bulwer-Lytton and other authors of Victorian crime fiction. Although what Thackeray principally objected to was glorification of a criminal&#x27;s deeds, his intent may have been to entrap the Victorian reader with their own prejudices and make them think the worst of Becky Sharp even when they have no proof of her actions.

==Adaptations==

The book has inspired a number of adaptations:

===Radio===
*&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (7 January 1940), the CBS Radio series &quot;Campbell Playhouse&quot;, hosted by Orson Welles, broadcast a one-hour adaptation featuring Helen Hayes and Agnes Moorehead.
*&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (6 December 1947), the NBC Radio series &quot;Favorite Story&quot;, hosted by Ronald Colman, broadcast a half-hour adaptation with Joan Lorring as &quot;Becky Sharp&quot;
*&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (2004), BBC Radio 4 broadcast an adaptation of the novel by Stephen Wyatt, starring Emma Fielding as Becky, Stephen Fry as the Narrator, Katy Cavanagh as Amelia, David Calder, Philip Fox, Jon Glover, Geoffrey Whitehead as Mr. Osborne, Ian Masters as Mr. Sedley, Alice Hart as Maria Osborne, and Margaret Tyzack as Miss Crawley; this was subsequently re-broadcast on BBC Radio 4 Extra in 20 fifteen-minute episodes.
*&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (2019), BBC Radio 4 broadcast a three-part adaptation of the novel by Jim Poyser with additional material by Al Murray (Thackeray&#x27;s actual descendant, who also stars as Thackeray), with Ellie White as Becky Sharp, Helen O&#x27;Hara as Amelia Sedley, Blake Ritson as Rawdon Crawley, Rupert Hill as George Osborne and Graeme Hawley as Dobbin.

===Silent films===
*&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (1911), directed by Charles Kent
*&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (1915), directed by Charles Brabin
*&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (1922), directed by W. Courtney Rowden
*&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (1923), directed by Hugo Ballin

===Sound films===
*&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (1932), directed by Chester M. Franklin and starring Myrna Loy, updating the story to make Becky Sharp a social-climbing governess
*&quot;Becky Sharp&quot; (1935), starring Miriam Hopkins and Frances Dee, the first feature film shot in full-spectrum Technicolor
*&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (2004), directed by Mira Nair and starring Reese Witherspoon as Becky Sharp and Natasha Little, who had played Becky Sharp in the earlier television miniseries of &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, as Lady Jane Sheepshanks

===Television===
*&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (1956-7), a BBC serial adapted by Constance Cox starring Joyce Redman
*&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (1967), a BBC miniseries adapted by Rex Tucker starring Susan Hampshire as Becky Sharp, for which she received an Emmy Award in 1973. This version was also broadcast in 1972 in the US on PBS television as part of &quot;Masterpiece Theatre&quot;.
*&quot;Yarmarka tshcheslaviya&quot; (1976), a two-episode TV miniseries directed by Igor Ilyinsky and Mariette Myatt, staged by the Moscow State Academic Maly Theater of the USSR) 
*&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (1987), a BBC miniseries starring Eve Matheson as Becky Sharp, Rebecca Saire as Amelia Sedley, James Saxon as Jos Sedley and Simon Dormandy as Dobbin.
*&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (1998), a BBC miniseries starring Natasha Little as Becky Sharp
*&quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (2018), a seven-part ITV and Amazon Studios adaptation, starring Olivia Cooke as Becky Sharp, Tom Bateman as Captain Rawdon Crawley, and Michael Palin as Thackeray.

===Theatre===
* &quot;Becky Sharp&quot; (1899), play written by Langdon Mitchell 
* &quot;Becky Sharp&quot; (1924) play written by &quot;Olive Conway&quot; 
* &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (1946), play written by Constance Cox
* &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (2017), play written by Kate Hamill
* &quot;Vanity&quot; (2023), musical written and composed by Bernard J. Taylor
===Fiction===
* &quot;Becky&quot; (2023), novel written by Sarah May

==References==
===Notes===

===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* .
* .
* .
* , reprinted 2009 by Routledge.
* .

==External links==

* 
*The Victorian Web – Thackeray&#x27;s Illustrations to Vanity Fair
* – Glossary of foreign words and phrases in Vanity Fair</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q167768" start="45" end="72" title="William Makepeace Thackeray" label="William Makepeace Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878872" start="101" end="112" title="Becky Sharp" label="Becky Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="184" end="199" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347298" start="247" end="253" title="serial novel" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="413" end="425" title="satire" label="satirisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180348" start="659" end="673" title="Deconstruction (literature)" label="deconstructing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="711" end="727" title="Hero#Modern fiction" label="literary heroism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505819" start="837" end="843" title="frame story" label="framed"/>
<link wikidata="Q588750" start="849" end="860" title="puppet play" label="puppet play"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243831" start="897" end="912" title="authorial voice" label="authorial voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q650118" start="926" end="936" title="unreliable narrator" label="unreliable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257444" start="1048" end="1086" title="film adaptation" label="audio, film, and television adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119493" start="1123" end="1149" title="Vanity Fair (British magazine)" label="British lifestyle magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q775274" start="1340" end="1352" title="The Big Read" label="The Big Read"/>
<link wikidata="Q108206" start="1438" end="1449" title="John Bunyan" label="John Bunyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q268211" start="1463" end="1486" title="The Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Progress" label="Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195178" start="1496" end="1505" title="English Dissenters" label="Dissenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="1506" end="1514" title="allegory" label="allegory"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="2004" end="2009" title="London Times" label="Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342007" start="2062" end="2073" title="Robert Bell (writer)" label="Robert Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574424" start="2150" end="2171" title="Kensal Green Cemetery" label="Kensal Green Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142799" start="2969" end="2980" title="Vanity Fair (magazines)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505819" start="3065" end="3071" title="frame story" label="framed"/>
<link wikidata="Q588750" start="3101" end="3112" title="puppetry" label="puppet show"/>
<link wikidata="Q510323" start="3248" end="3269" title="Speakers&amp;#x27; Corner" label="Speakers&amp;#x27; Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q123738" start="3273" end="3282" title="Hyde Park, London" label="Hyde Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q650118" start="3390" end="3400" title="unreliable narrator" label="unreliable"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="4028" end="4046" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="5204" end="5212" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="6163" end="6181" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Battle of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="6645" end="6663" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Battle of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q120643519" start="6799" end="6814" title="genteel poverty" label="genteel poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="7472" end="7485" title="George IV of the United Kingdom" label="Prince Regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144077" start="7528" end="7543" title="acting charades" label="acting charades"/>
<link wikidata="Q131157" start="7579" end="7591" title="Clytemnestra" label="Clytemnestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q115449" start="7596" end="7605" title="Philomela" label="Philomela"/>
<link wikidata="Q155570" start="9846" end="9852" title="Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach" label="Weimar"/>
<link wikidata="Q150981" start="9856" end="9863" title="North German Confederation" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="11766" end="11784" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Battle of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152596" start="12359" end="12382" title="Jane Octavia Brookfield" label="Jane Octavia Brookfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q192673" start="12634" end="12643" title="Iphigenia" label="Iphigenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878872" start="12834" end="12847" title="Becky Sharp (character)" label="Rebecca Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="13476" end="13488" title="anti-heroine" label="anti-heroine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469874" start="14770" end="14779" title="lady&amp;#x27;s companion" label="companion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131157" start="15543" end="15555" title="Clytemnestra" label="Clytemnestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125040" start="15618" end="15626" title="Eriphyle" label="Eriphyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q742" start="15630" end="15636" title="Jean Racine" label="Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q903424" start="15644" end="15653" title="Iphigénie" label="retelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233770" start="15663" end="15681" title="Iphigenia at Aulis" label="Iphigenia at Aulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563727" start="15699" end="15706" title="Foil (literature)" label="doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q190082" start="15772" end="15779" title="Arachne" label="Arachne"/>
<link wikidata="Q126916" start="15805" end="15812" title="Minerva" label="Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112591" start="21861" end="21866" title="nabob" label="nabob"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722496" start="21910" end="21919" title="District collector" label="collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347298" start="22680" end="22686" title="serial (literature)" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="22799" end="22804" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q482097" start="24005" end="24020" title="steel engraving" label="steel engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259197" start="24039" end="24053" title="Wood engraving" label="Wood engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="24809" end="24818" title="royalties" label="royalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="24877" end="24878" title="GBP" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772832" start="24915" end="24929" title="The Virginians" label="The Virginians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="25330" end="25338" title="Bible" label="Biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133523" start="25346" end="25354" title="Jephthah" label="Jephthah"/>
<link wikidata="Q192673" start="25391" end="25400" title="Iphigenia" label="Iphigenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577515" start="25466" end="25472" title="Samuel" label="Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346367" start="25496" end="25502" title="Hannah (biblical figure)" label="Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155501" start="25538" end="25541" title="Jewish God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q362021" start="25549" end="25552" title="Eli (biblical figure)" label="Eli"/>
<link wikidata="Q182559" start="25986" end="25993" title="mermaid" label="mermaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131157" start="26441" end="26453" title="Clytemnestra" label="Clytemnestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q898739" start="26541" end="26549" title="laudanum" label="laudanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378539" start="26950" end="26955" title="British libel law" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356938" start="27025" end="27044" title="Francis Seymour-Conway, 3rd Marquess of Hertford" label="Marquis of Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q34190" start="27483" end="27497" title="Henry Fielding" label="Henry Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="27719" end="27724" title="Punch, or the London Charivari" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q955464" start="27802" end="27808" title="parson" label="parson"/>
<link wikidata="Q127332" start="28018" end="28034" title="Charlotte Brontë" label="Charlotte Brontë"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321250" start="29962" end="29968" title="vanity" label="vanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q192077" start="29973" end="29983" title="melancholia" label="melancholy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166502" start="30050" end="30055" title="greed (deadly sin)" label="greed"/>
<link wikidata="Q484" start="30057" end="30065" title="laziness" label="idleness"/>
<link wikidata="Q728497" start="30071" end="30075" title="snob" label="snob"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925193" start="30099" end="30105" title="lie" label="deceit"/>
<link wikidata="Q201650" start="30110" end="30119" title="hypocrisy" label="hypocrisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q667661" start="30547" end="30554" title="Literary realism" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q334173" start="30728" end="30739" title="opportunism" label="opportunism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900116" start="30869" end="30884" title="Victorian morality" label="moral reformism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33005760" start="31051" end="31070" title="omniscient narrator" label="omniscient narrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q523064" start="31413" end="31429" title="Lord David Cecil" label="Lord David Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="32278" end="32293" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="32295" end="32302" title="Tolstoy" label="Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161531" start="32316" end="32329" title="War and Peace" label="War and Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110781" start="33219" end="33226" title="Marxist criticism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="33305" end="33316" title="consumerism" label="consumerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131072" start="33460" end="33472" title="Ecclesiastes" label="Ecclesiastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063544" start="33486" end="33499" title="all is vanity" label="all is vanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259703" start="34021" end="34036" title="John Sutherland (author)" label="John Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983504" start="34138" end="34151" title="Newgate novel" label="Newgate novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q318462" start="34162" end="34182" title="Edward Bulwer-Lytton" label="Edward Bulwer-Lytton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022995" start="34620" end="34629" title="CBS Radio" label="CBS Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906829" start="34643" end="34661" title="The Campbell Playhouse (radio series)" label="Campbell Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="34679" end="34691" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213302" start="34735" end="34746" title="Helen Hayes" label="Helen Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q231221" start="34751" end="34766" title="Agnes Moorehead" label="Agnes Moorehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q58037172" start="34816" end="34825" title="NBC Radio" label="NBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976927" start="34839" end="34853" title="Favorite Story" label="Favorite Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q181786" start="34871" end="34884" title="Ronald Colman" label="Ronald Colman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689" start="34924" end="34936" title="Joan Lorring" label="Joan Lorring"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="34997" end="35008" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610895" start="35049" end="35062" title="Stephen Wyatt" label="Stephen Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298583" start="35073" end="35086" title="Emma Fielding" label="Emma Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="35097" end="35108" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378489" start="35126" end="35139" title="Katy Cavanagh" label="Katy Cavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173906" start="35151" end="35163" title="David Calder (actor)" label="David Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183553" start="35165" end="35175" title="Philip Fox (actor)" label="Philip Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208715" start="35177" end="35187" title="Jon Glover" label="Jon Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534970" start="35189" end="35207" title="Geoffrey Whitehead" label="Geoffrey Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q439778" start="35284" end="35299" title="Margaret Tyzack" label="Margaret Tyzack"/>
<link wikidata="Q795579" start="35355" end="35372" title="BBC Radio 4 Extra" label="BBC Radio 4 Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="35437" end="35448" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704500" start="35538" end="35547" title="Al Murray" label="Al Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905849" start="35684" end="35696" title="Blake Ritson" label="Blake Ritson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380302" start="35716" end="35727" title="Rupert Hill" label="Rupert Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q522069" start="35750" end="35763" title="Graeme Hawley" label="Graeme Hawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q430893" start="35840" end="35852" title="Charles Kent (actor)" label="Charles Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q18709150" start="35854" end="35877" title="Vanity Fair (1915 film)" label="&amp;quot;Vanity Fair&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915014" start="35920" end="35931" title="Vanity Fair (1922 film)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822346" start="35984" end="35995" title="Vanity Fair (1923 film)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787466" start="36022" end="36033" title="Hugo Ballin" label="Hugo Ballin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4008598" start="36060" end="36071" title="Vanity Fair (1932 film)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q105941" start="36131" end="36140" title="Myrna Loy" label="Myrna Loy"/>
<link wikidata="Q613284" start="36216" end="36227" title="Becky Sharp (film)" label="Becky Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q242477" start="36251" end="36265" title="Miriam Hopkins" label="Miriam Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q265391" start="36270" end="36281" title="Frances Dee" label="Frances Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046841" start="36347" end="36358" title="Vanity Fair (2004 film)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q466320" start="36385" end="36394" title="Mira Nair" label="Mira Nair"/>
<link wikidata="Q44063" start="36408" end="36425" title="Reese Witherspoon" label="Reese Witherspoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q275360" start="36445" end="36459" title="Natasha Little" label="Natasha Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q19735233" start="36603" end="36614" title="Vanity Fair (1956 TV series)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="36633" end="36636" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163517" start="36655" end="36668" title="Constance Cox" label="Constance Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q442956" start="36678" end="36690" title="Joyce Redman" label="Joyce Redman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915015" start="36698" end="36709" title="Vanity Fair (1967 TV serial)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="36726" end="36729" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11997721" start="36752" end="36762" title="Rex Tucker" label="Rex Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q435040" start="36772" end="36787" title="Susan Hampshire" label="Susan Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878872" start="36791" end="36802" title="Becky Sharp (character)" label="Becky Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="36830" end="36840" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="36903" end="36906" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297878" start="36935" end="36954" title="Masterpiece Theatre" label="Masterpiece Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358989" start="37046" end="37059" title="Igor Ilyinsky" label="Igor Ilyinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915017" start="37150" end="37161" title="Vanity Fair (1987 TV serial)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="37178" end="37181" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416185" start="37202" end="37214" title="Eve Matheson" label="Eve Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q613284" start="37218" end="37229" title="Becky Sharp (film)" label="Becky Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301899" start="37231" end="37244" title="Rebecca Saire" label="Rebecca Saire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142804" start="37263" end="37274" title="James Saxon (actor)" label="James Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518638" start="37293" end="37307" title="Simon Dormandy" label="Simon Dormandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6351152" start="37326" end="37337" title="Vanity Fair (1998 TV serial)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="37354" end="37357" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q275360" start="37378" end="37392" title="Natasha Little" label="Natasha Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q613284" start="37396" end="37407" title="Becky Sharp (film)" label="Becky Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q56599307" start="37415" end="37426" title="Vanity Fair (2018 TV series)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="37454" end="37457" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740868" start="37462" end="37476" title="Amazon Studios" label="Amazon Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q15069963" start="37498" end="37510" title="Olivia Cooke" label="Olivia Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q11721652" start="37527" end="37538" title="Tom Bateman (actor)" label="Tom Bateman"/>
<link wikidata="Q223985" start="37570" end="37583" title="Michael Palin" label="Michael Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075844" start="37663" end="37679" title="Langdon Mitchell" label="Langdon Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q96413511" start="37764" end="37775" title="Vanity Fair (play)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163517" start="37806" end="37819" title="Constance Cox" label="Constance Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q45972315" start="37870" end="37881" title="Kate Hamill" label="Kate Hamill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893276" start="37943" end="37960" title="Bernard J. Taylor" label="Bernard J. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422586" start="38020" end="38029" title="Sarah May" label="Sarah May"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40124" wikidata="Q23048822" url="?curid=40124" title="Acetic acid bacteria">
<text>Acetic acid bacteria (AAB) are a group of Gram-negative bacteria which oxidize sugars or ethanol and produce acetic acid during fermentation. The acetic acid bacteria consist of 10 genera in the family Acetobacteraceae. Several species of acetic acid bacteria are used in industry for production of certain foods and chemicals.

==Description==
All acetic acid bacteria are rod-shaped and obligate aerobes. Acetic acid bacteria are airborne and are ubiquitous in nature. They are actively present in environments where ethanol is being formed as a product of the fermentation of sugars. They can be isolated from the nectar of flowers and from damaged fruit. Other good sources are fresh apple cider and unpasteurized beer that has not been filter sterilized. In these liquids, they grow as a surface film due to their aerobic nature and active motility. Fruit flies or vinegar eels are considered common vectors in the propagation of acetic acid bacteria.

The growth of &quot;Acetobacter&quot; in wine can be suppressed through effective sanitation, by complete exclusion of air from wine in storage, and by the use of moderate amounts of sulfur dioxide in the wine as a preservative.

==Metabolism==
Vinegar is produced when acetic acid bacteria act on alcoholic beverages such as wine. Specific oxidation reactions occur through oxidative fermentation, which creates vinegar as a byproduct. In the biotechnological industry, these bacteria&#x27;s oxidation mechanism is exploited to produce a number of compounds such as l-ascorbic acid, dihydroxyacetone, gluconic acid, and cellulose. Besides food industry, some acetic acid bacteria are used as biocatalysts for the industrial production of compounds. They are used as the important biocatalysts for the development of eco-friendly fermentation processes as an alternative to the chemical synthesis. Some genera, such as &quot;Acetobacter&quot;, can oxidize ethanol to carbon dioxide and water using Krebs cycle enzymes. Other genera, such as &quot;Gluconobacter&quot;, do not oxidize ethanol, as they do not have a full set of Krebs cycle enzymes. As these bacteria produce acid, they are usually acid-tolerant, growing well below pH 5.0, although the pH optimum for growth is 5.4-6.3. &quot;Acetobacter xylinum&quot; is able to synthesize cellulose, something normally done only by plants.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Ecological occurrence of &quot;Gluconacetobacter diazotrophicus&quot; and nitrogen-fixing Acetobacteraceae members: their possible role in plant growth promotion 2008. Microb Ecol. 55(1):130-40.
* Genera and species in acetic acid bacteria, 2008 Int. J. Food Microbiol. Volume 125, Issue 1, Pages 15–24.
* Polyphasic taxonomy of acetic acid bacteria: An overview of the currently applied methodology, 2008 Int. J. Food Microbiol. Volume 125, Issue 1, Pages 2–14
* Biotechnological applications of acetic acid bacteria, 2008, Critical Reviews in Biotechnology, Volume 28, Issue 2, 101-124
* Evaluation of viability and growth of &quot;Acetobacter senegalensis&quot; under different stress conditions, 2013 Int. J. Food Microbiol.Volume 163, issue 2-3, 204-213

==External links==
* International conference on acetic acid bacteria</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23048822" start="0" end="20" title="Acetic acid bacteria" label="Acetic acid bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q23048822" start="22" end="25" title="Acetic acid bacteria" label="AAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q632006" start="42" end="55" title="Gram-negative" label="Gram-negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="71" end="78" title="Oxidation" label="oxidize"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="79" end="84" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="89" end="96" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="109" end="120" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976083" start="128" end="140" title="Aerobic fermentation" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="181" end="187" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q32299" start="202" end="218" title="Acetobacteraceae" label="Acetobacteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075150" start="389" end="404" title="obligate aerobe" label="obligate aerobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="617" end="623" title="nectar (plant)" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q167296" start="694" end="699" title="cider" label="cider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054318" start="855" end="866" title="Drosophilidae" label="Fruit flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368890" start="870" end="882" title="Turbatrix aceti" label="vinegar eels"/>
<link wikidata="Q107994" start="905" end="912" title="Vector (epidemiology)" label="vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="1141" end="1155" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q41354" start="1203" end="1210" title="Vinegar" label="Vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1333" end="1355" title="Aerobic fermentation#Aerobic fermentation in acetic acid bacteria" label="oxidative fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133895" start="1956" end="1967" title="Krebs cycle" label="Krebs cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25861011" start="2249" end="2268" title="Acetobacter xylinum" label="Acetobacter xylinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="2297" end="2306" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40127" wikidata="Q310202" url="?curid=40127" title="Arthrobacter">
<text>Arthrobacter (from the Greek, &quot;jointed small stick”) is a genus of bacteria that is commonly found in soil. All species in this genus are Gram-positive obligate aerobes that are rods during exponential growth and cocci in their stationary phase. &quot;Arthrobacter&quot; have a distinctive method of cell division called &quot;snapping division&quot; or reversion in which the outer bacterial cell wall ruptures at a joint.

==Description==
&quot;Arthrobacter&quot; can be grown on mineral salts pyridone broth, where colonies have a greenish metallic center on incubated at . Under the microscope, &quot;Arthrobacter&quot; appear as rods when rapidly dividing, and cocci when in stationary phase. Dividing cells may also appear as chevrons (&quot;V&quot; shapes). Other notable characteristics are that it can use pyridone as its sole carbon source, and that its cocci are resistant to desiccation and starvation.

==Use in industry==
&quot;Arthrobacter&quot;, like other bacterial genera including &quot;Brevibacterium&quot;, &quot;Microbacterium&quot;, and &quot;Corynebacterium&quot; are used for industrial production of L-glutamate. In industrial applications, &quot;Arthrobacter&quot; is often grown with low-cost sugar sources such as cane or beet molasses, starch hydrolysates from corn or cassava tubers, or tapioca. Along with sugar, ammonia and ammonium salts are added as a nitrogen source. The vitamins, minerals, and some other types of nutrients can be provided by adding corn steep liquour.

==Other uses==
Various &quot;Arthrobacter&quot; species have been investigated for other commercial applications. &quot;A. crystallopoietes&quot; and &quot;A. chlorophenolicus&quot; have been shown to reduce hexavalent chromium and 4-chlorophenol levels in contaminated soil, suggesting they may be useful for bioremediation. Similarly, &quot;Arthrobacter&quot; sp. strain R1 (American Type Culture Collection strain number 49987) has been shown to grow on a variety of aromatic compounds, including homocyclic compounds, such as hydroxybenzoates, as well as N-heterocycles, including pyridine and picoline.
&quot;Arthrobacter&quot; sp. H65-7 produces the enzyme inulase II that converts inulin into the medically relevant nutrient difructose anhydride.

The enzyme Alu obtained from &quot;Arthrobacter luteus&quot; is able to cleave Alu sequences which is frequently repeated in human DNA.

==Species==
&quot;Arthrobacter&quot; comprises the following species:

* &quot;A. agilis&quot; 
* &quot;A. alkaliphilus&quot; 
* &quot;A. alpinus&quot; 

* &quot;A. bambusae&quot; 

* &quot;A. bussei&quot; 
* &quot;&quot;A. casei&quot; 
* &quot;A. castelli&quot; 
* &quot;A. celericrescens&quot; 
* &quot;A. cheniae&quot; 

* &quot;A. citreus&quot; 

* &quot;A. crusticola&quot; 
* &quot;A. crygenae&quot; 
* &quot;A. cryoconiti&quot; 

* &quot;A. crystallopoietes&quot; 

* &quot;A. cupressi&quot; 

* &quot;A. deserti&quot; 
* &quot;A. dextranlyticum&quot; 
* &quot;A. dokdonellae&quot; 
* &quot;A. echini&quot; 


* &quot;A. flavus&quot; 
* &quot;A. frigidicola&quot; 
* &quot;A. gandavensis&quot; 

* &quot;A. ginkgonis&quot; 
* &quot;A. ginsengisoli&quot;&quot; 
* &quot;A. glacialis&quot; 

* &quot;A. globiformis&quot; 
* &quot;A. gyeryongensis&quot; 
* &quot;A. halodurans&quot; 

* &quot;A. humicola&quot; 
* &quot;&quot;A. ipsi&quot; 
* &quot;A. jiangjiafuii&quot; 

* &quot;A. keyseri&quot; 
* &quot;A. koreensis&quot; 
* &quot;A. liuii&quot; 
* &quot;A. livingstonensis&quot; 
* &quot;A. luteolus&quot; 
* &quot;A. luteus&quot;&quot; 

* &quot;A. methylotrophus&quot; 
* &quot;A. mobilis&quot; 
* &quot;A. monumenti&quot; 

* &quot;A. nanjingensis&quot; 

* &quot;&quot;A. nitrophenolicus&quot; 
* &quot;A. oryzae&quot; 

* &quot;A. paludis&quot; 
* &quot;A. paraffineus&quot; 
* &quot;A. parietis&quot; 
* &quot;A. pascens&quot; 

* &quot;A. photogonimos&quot;&quot; 

* &quot;A. pigmenti&quot; 
* &quot;A. pityocampae&quot; 
* &quot;A. pokkalii&quot; 
* &quot;A. psychrochitiniphilus&quot; 
* &quot;A. psychrolactophilus&quot; 

* &quot;A. ramosus&quot; 
* &quot;A. rhombi&quot; 
* &quot;A. roseus&quot; 
* &quot;A. ruber&quot; 
* &quot;A. russicus&quot; 

* &quot;&quot;A. saudimassiliensis&quot; 

* &quot;A. sedimenti&quot; 
* &quot;A. senegalensis&quot;&quot; 

* &quot;A. silvisoli&quot; 
* &quot;A. silviterrae&quot; 
* &quot;A. stackebrandtii&quot; 
* &quot;A. subterraneus&quot; 

* &quot;&quot;A. sulfonylureivorans&quot; 

* &quot;A. sunyaminii&quot; 
* &quot;A. tecti&quot; 
* &quot;A. terrae&quot; 

* &quot;A. terricola&quot; 
* &quot;A. tumbae&quot; 

* &quot;A. ulcerisalmonis&quot; 


* &quot;A. wenxiniae&quot;&quot; 
* &quot;A. woluwensis&quot; 
* &quot;A. yangruifuii&quot; 
* &quot;A. zhaoguopingii&quot; 
==References==
==External links==
*Arthrobacter Genome Projects (from Genomes OnLine Database)
*Comparative Analysis of Arthrobacter Genomes (at DOE&#x27;s IMG system)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="63" end="68" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="72" end="80" title="bacterium" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="117" end="124" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="143" end="156" title="Gram-positive" label="Gram-positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075150" start="157" end="172" title="obligate aerobe" label="obligate aerobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="183" end="186" title="bacterial shape" label="rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q582659" start="195" end="213" title="exponential growth" label="exponential growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="218" end="223" title="bacterial shape" label="cocci"/>
<link wikidata="Q762045" start="233" end="249" title="Stationary phase (biology)" label="stationary phase"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="359" end="368" title="reversion (microbiology)" label="reversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q128700" start="398" end="407" title="cell wall" label="cell wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864386" start="487" end="515" title="mineral salts pyridone broth" label="mineral salts pyridone broth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17591262" start="820" end="828" title="pyridone" label="pyridone"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="841" end="847" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q903071" start="892" end="903" title="desiccation" label="desiccation"/>
<link wikidata="Q148611" start="1011" end="1025" title="Brevibacterium" label="Brevibacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839228" start="1039" end="1053" title="Microbacterium" label="Microbacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q133976" start="1071" end="1086" title="Corynebacterium" label="Corynebacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965723" start="1634" end="1653" title="Arthrobacter crystallopoietes" label="A. crystallopoietes"/>
<link wikidata="Q62857550" start="1670" end="1689" title="Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus" label="A. chlorophenolicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660666" start="1722" end="1741" title="hexavalent chromium" label="hexavalent chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179668" start="1746" end="1760" title="4-Chlorophenol" label="4-chlorophenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q816441" start="1824" end="1838" title="bioremediation" label="bioremediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210385" start="2099" end="2107" title="pyridine" label="pyridine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092388" start="2112" end="2120" title="picoline" label="picoline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2177" end="2187" title="inulase II" label="inulase II"/>
<link wikidata="Q201552" start="2202" end="2208" title="inulin" label="inulin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2246" end="2266" title="difructose anhydride" label="difructose anhydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354251" start="2304" end="2323" title="Arthrobacter luteus" label="Arthrobacter luteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q412199" start="2348" end="2361" title="Alu element" label="Alu sequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034414" start="2485" end="2494" title="Arthrobacter agilis" label="A. agilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24915523" start="2510" end="2525" title="Arthrobacter alkaliphilus" label="A. alkaliphilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24915524" start="2541" end="2551" title="Arthrobacter alpinus" label="A. alpinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24911882" start="2568" end="2579" title="Arthrobacter bambusae" label="A. bambusae"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372402" start="2596" end="2605" title="Arthrobacter bussei" label="A. bussei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2627" end="2635" title="Arthrobacter casei" label="A. casei"/>
<link wikidata="Q24959743" start="2651" end="2662" title="Arthrobacter castelli" label="A. castelli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2678" end="2695" title="Arthrobacter celericrescens" label="A. celericrescens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2711" end="2721" title="Arthrobacter cheniae" label="A. cheniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q24977186" start="2738" end="2748" title="Arthrobacter citreus" label="A. citreus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2765" end="2778" title="Arthrobacter crusticola" label="A. crusticola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2794" end="2805" title="Arthrobacter crygenae" label="A. crygenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q24911894" start="2821" end="2834" title="Arthrobacter cryoconiti" label="A. cryoconiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965723" start="2851" end="2870" title="Arthrobacter crystallopoietes" label="A. crystallopoietes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24911899" start="2887" end="2898" title="Arthrobacter cupressi" label="A. cupressi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29566528" start="2915" end="2925" title="Arthrobacter deserti" label="A. deserti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2941" end="2958" title="Arthrobacter dextranlyticum" label="A. dextranlyticum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2974" end="2988" title="Arthrobacter dokdonellae" label="A. dokdonellae"/>
<link wikidata="Q29566504" start="3004" end="3013" title="Arthrobacter echini" label="A. echini"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834025" start="3031" end="3040" title="Arthrobacter flavus" label="A. flavus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3056" end="3070" title="Arthrobacter frigidicola" label="A. frigidicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q24959755" start="3086" end="3100" title="Arthrobacter gandavensis" label="A. gandavensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42531285" start="3117" end="3129" title="Arthrobacter ginkgonis" label="A. ginkgonis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3145" end="3160" title="Arthrobacter ginsengisoli" label="A. ginsengisoli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3182" end="3194" title="Arthrobacter glacialis" label="A. glacialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24977192" start="3211" end="3225" title="Arthrobacter globiformis" label="A. globiformis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24911921" start="3241" end="3257" title="Arthrobacter gyeryongensis" label="A. gyeryongensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24911930" start="3273" end="3286" title="Arthrobacter halodurans" label="A. halodurans"/>
<link wikidata="Q24915587" start="3303" end="3314" title="Arthrobacter humicola" label="A. humicola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3336" end="3343" title="Arthrobacter ipsi" label="A. ipsi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3359" end="3374" title="Arthrobacter jiangjiafuii" label="A. jiangjiafuii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3391" end="3401" title="Arthrobacter keyseri" label="A. keyseri"/>
<link wikidata="Q24959772" start="3417" end="3429" title="Arthrobacter koreensis" label="A. koreensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24908364" start="3445" end="3453" title="Arthrobacter liuii" label="A. liuii"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834030" start="3469" end="3487" title="Arthrobacter livingstonensis" label="A. livingstonensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24959774" start="3503" end="3514" title="Arthrobacter luteolus" label="A. luteolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354251" start="3530" end="3539" title="Arthrobacter luteus" label="A. luteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24959780" start="3562" end="3579" title="Arthrobacter methylotrophus" label="A. methylotrophus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3595" end="3605" title="Arthrobacter mobilis" label="A. mobilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24959781" start="3621" end="3633" title="Arthrobacter monumenti" label="A. monumenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q24908375" start="3650" end="3665" title="Arthrobacter nanjingensis" label="A. nanjingensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3688" end="3706" title="Arthrobacter nitrophenolicus" label="A. nitrophenolicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24915618" start="3722" end="3731" title="Arthrobacter oryzae" label="A. oryzae"/>
<link wikidata="Q56292526" start="3748" end="3758" title="Arthrobacter paludis" label="A. paludis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3774" end="3788" title="Arthrobacter paraffineus" label="A. paraffineus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24959793" start="3804" end="3815" title="Arthrobacter parietis" label="A. parietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24977248" start="3831" end="3841" title="Arthrobacter pascens" label="A. pascens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3858" end="3873" title="Arthrobacter photogonimos" label="A. photogonimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q24959801" start="3896" end="3907" title="Arthrobacter pigmenti" label="A. pigmenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q24911998" start="3923" end="3937" title="Arthrobacter pityocampae" label="A. pityocampae"/>
<link wikidata="Q56292528" start="3953" end="3964" title="Arthrobacter pokkalii" label="A. pokkalii"/>
<link wikidata="Q24915655" start="3980" end="4003" title="Arthrobacter psychrochitiniphilus" label="A. psychrochitiniphilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24959803" start="4019" end="4040" title="Arthrobacter psychrolactophilus" label="A. psychrolactophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24977257" start="4057" end="4067" title="Arthrobacter ramosus" label="A. ramosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24977269" start="4083" end="4092" title="Arthrobacter rhombi" label="A. rhombi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354256" start="4108" end="4117" title="Arthrobacter roseus" label="A. roseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q56292527" start="4133" end="4141" title="Arthrobacter ruber" label="A. ruber"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962056" start="4157" end="4168" title="Arthrobacter russicus" label="A. russicus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4191" end="4211" title="Arthrobacter saudimassiliensis" label="A. saudimassiliensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4228" end="4240" title="Arthrobacter sedimenti" label="A. sedimenti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4256" end="4271" title="Arthrobacter senegalensis" label="A. senegalensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4294" end="4306" title="Arthrobacter silvisoli" label="A. silvisoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q56292529" start="4322" end="4336" title="Arthrobacter silviterrae" label="A. silviterrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q24959823" start="4352" end="4369" title="Arthrobacter stackebrandtii" label="A. stackebrandtii"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834043" start="4385" end="4400" title="Arthrobacter subterraneus" label="A. subterraneus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4423" end="4444" title="Arthrobacter sulfonylureivorans" label="A. sulfonylureivorans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4461" end="4474" title="Arthrobacter sunyaminii" label="A. sunyaminii"/>
<link wikidata="Q24959825" start="4490" end="4498" title="Arthrobacter tecti" label="A. tecti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4514" end="4523" title="Arthrobacter terrae" label="A. terrae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4540" end="4552" title="Arthrobacter terricola" label="A. terricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q24959828" start="4568" end="4577" title="Arthrobacter tumbae" label="A. tumbae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4594" end="4611" title="Arthrobacter ulcerisalmonis" label="A. ulcerisalmonis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4629" end="4641" title="Arthrobacter wenxiniae" label="A. wenxiniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834045" start="4663" end="4676" title="Arthrobacter woluwensis" label="A. woluwensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4692" end="4706" title="Arthrobacter yangruifuii" label="A. yangruifuii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4722" end="4738" title="Arthrobacter zhaoguopingii" label="A. zhaoguopingii"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="4891" end="4901" title="United States Department of Energy" label="DOE&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042907" start="4902" end="4912" title="Integrated Microbial Genomes System" label="IMG system"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40130" wikidata="Q6864386" url="?curid=40130" title="Mineral salts pyridone broth">
<text>Mineral salts pyridine broth is a selective medium for bacteria that can metabolize pyridine (which is an unusual carbon source that a select few types of bacteria can use). This medium is used to isolate bacteria belonging to the genus &quot;Arthrobacter&quot; among other bacteria genera.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6864386" start="0" end="28" title="Mineral salts pyridone broth" label="Mineral salts pyridine broth"/>
<link wikidata="Q575920" start="34" end="50" title="selective medium" label="selective medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="55" end="63" title="bacterium" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="73" end="83" title="metabolism" label="metabolize"/>
<link wikidata="Q210385" start="84" end="92" title="pyridine" label="pyridine"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="114" end="120" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q310202" start="243" end="255" title="Arthrobacter" label="Arthrobacter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40132" wikidata="Q2120540" url="?curid=40132" title="The Muppet Show">
<text>The Muppet Show is a variety sketch comedy television series created by Jim Henson and starring the Muppets. It is presented as a variety show, featuring recurring sketches and musical numbers interspersed with ongoing plot-lines with running gags taking place backstage and in other areas of the venue. 

&quot;The Muppet Show&quot; is known for its uniquely designed characters, burlesque nature, slapstick, sometimes absurdist and surreal humour, and parodies. Within its context, Kermit the Frog (performed by Henson) acts as showrunner and host, who tries to maintain control of the overwhelming antics of the other Muppet characters as well as appease the rotating slate of guest stars. As &quot;The Muppet Show&quot; became popular, many celebrities were eager to perform with the Muppets on television and in subsequent films.

Henson produced two pilot episodes for ABC in 1974 and 1975, but neither went forward as a series. While other networks in the United States rejected Henson&#x27;s proposals, British producer Lew Grade expressed enthusiasm for the project and agreed to co-produce &quot;The Muppet Show&quot; for ATV in the United Kingdom for ITV network. &quot;The Muppet Show&quot; was produced by ITC Entertainment and Henson Associates with programmes produced and recorded at the ATV Elstree Studios in Borehamwood, Hertfordshire. 

The series was premiered in the UK on 5 September 1976 and ended on 23 May 1981. Five seasons, totalling 120 episodes, were broadcast on ATV and other ITV franchises in the UK and in first-run syndication in the United States from 1976 to 1981.

The cast of performers over the course of the series included Henson, Frank Oz (credited as featured performer as well as creative consultant), Jerry Nelson, Richard Hunt, Dave Goelz, Steve Whitmire, Fran Brill, Eren Özker, Louise Gold, Kathryn Mullen, Karen Prell, Brian Muehl, Bob Payne, John Lovelady, Jane Henson, Peter Friedman, Betsy Baytos, and dancer Graham Fletcher. Many of the performers also worked on &quot;Sesame Street&quot;, whose characters made sporadic appearances on &quot;The Muppet Show&quot;. Jack Burns served as the head writer for the first season, before Jerry Juhl became the head writer from the second season. The music was performed by ATV&#x27;s musical director Jack Parnell and his orchestra.

The rights to the series have been owned by The Muppets Studio (a division of The Walt Disney Company) since they were acquired from The Jim Henson Company in 2004.

==History==

Since its debut in 1969, &quot;Sesame Street&quot; had given Jim Henson&#x27;s Muppet characters exposure. However, he began to perceive that he was becoming typecast as a children&#x27;s entertainer. Subsequently, he began to conceive a programme for a more adult audience. Two television specials, &quot;The Muppets Valentine Show&quot; (1974) and &quot;The Muppet Show: Sex and Violence&quot; (1975), were produced for ABC and are considered pilots for &quot;The Muppet Show&quot;. Neither of them were ordered to series. However, the prime-time access rule was recently enacted, moving the 7:30 to 8 pm ET slot from the networks to their affiliates. CBS became interested in Henson&#x27;s series proposals and expressed intent to broadcast it weekly on its owned and operated stations. According to Henson&#x27;s pitch reel, George Schlatter was originally involved.

Lew Grade, the proprietor of the British commercial station ATV, was familiar with puppet television programmes, having underwritten the various works of Gerry Anderson, while also producing two specials with Henson: &quot;Julie on Sesame Street&quot; and a special on Herb Alpert &amp; the Tijuana Brass. Grade offered Henson a deal that resulted in the latter&#x27;s programme being produced at the ATV Elstree Studios. ATV, as part of the ITV network, would broadcast the programme to other ITV stations in the United Kingdom, and its distribution arm, ITC Entertainment, would handle international broadcasts. Henson set aside his misgivings about syndication and accepted.

Meanwhile, Henson&#x27;s Muppets were featured in &quot;The Land of Gorch&quot; skits during the first (1975–76) season of the American comedy television programme &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;. Although they lasted for only that one season on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; because of conflicts with that show&#x27;s writers and producers, Henson and his team learned a great deal from being involved with the production. They gained institutional knowledge about adapting and quickly creating a television programme within a seven-day period. Henson also gained valuable friendships with multiple celebrities through his work on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;. Henson and his team were later able to use these skills and relationships on &quot;The Muppet Show&quot;.

&quot;The Muppet Show&quot; was first aired in September 1976 in the UK and by December the series had around 14 million viewers tuning in on Sunday evenings. In January 1977, over 100 countries had either acquired the series or were making offers, which had resulted in over £6 million in overseas sales and by its third season in 1978 it had a weekly worldwide audience of 235 million.

==Overview==
===Opening and closing sequences===
&quot;The Muppet Show Theme&quot; (written by Henson and Sam Pottle in 1976) is the show&#x27;s theme song. While the opening sequence changed from season to season, the overall concept remained the same. Each episode began with &quot;The Muppet Show&quot; logo on a title card. The centre of the &quot;O&quot; then opened to reveal host Kermit the Frog, who announced, &quot;It&#x27;s &quot;The Muppet Show&quot;, with our very special guest star, [name of guest star]!&quot; usually cheering afterwards.

During the first season, the theme song contained a joke from Fozzie Bear and featured Kermit introducing the guest star (&quot;To introduce our guest star, that&#x27;s what I&#x27;m here to do, so it really makes me happy to introduce to you...&quot;). At the song&#x27;s end, Gonzo the Great appeared in front of the &quot;Muppet Show&quot; banner, attempting to play the &quot;O&quot; in &quot;Show&quot; like a gong, with various comical results.

From the second to fourth seasons, the joke and Kermit&#x27;s introduction were replaced by a short quip from Statler and Waldorf, then a shot of the audience singing &quot;Why don&#x27;t they get things started?&quot; The fifth season version had an extra verse from the hecklers (&quot;Why do we always come here? I guess we&#x27;ll never know. It&#x27;s kind of like a torture to have to watch the show!&quot;). At the end of the song, Gonzo appeared inside the &quot;O&quot; in &quot;Show&quot; to play the final note on a trumpet; again, with various comical results.

Each episode ended with an extended instrumental performance of &quot;The Muppet Show Theme&quot; by the Muppet orchestra before Statler and Waldorf gave the last laugh of the night, followed by Zoot playing an off-key final note on his saxophone. Some last-laugh sequences had other Muppets on the balcony. For example, in one episode, the Muppets of &quot;Sesame Street&quot; appeared behind Statler and Waldorf, who told them, &quot;How should we know how to get to Sesame Street? We don&#x27;t even know how to get out of this stupid theatre box!&quot;

Every season, the TV version of the song was presented with re-worked lyrics. While the opening sequence evolved visually over the show&#x27;s five seasons, the musical composition remained essentially the same. Over the years, the song has become a staple of the Muppets franchise as a whole.

===Muppet Theater===
The Muppet Theater is the setting for &quot;The Muppet Show&quot;, a grand old vaudeville house that has seen better days. In episode 106, Kermit identifies the name of the theatre as The Benny Vandergast Memorial Theater, although other episodes merely identify it as &quot;the Muppet Theater&quot;. It is also identified as simply &quot;Muppet Theater&quot; in &quot;It&#x27;s a Very Merry Muppet Christmas Movie&quot;. It is then that the theatre becomes registered as a historical landmark, and it cannot be shut down. In the film, the theatre is shown to be in New York City.

According to &quot;The Phantom of the Muppet Theater&quot;, the theatre was built by a stage actor named John Stone in 1802. At some point, a production of &quot;Hamlet&quot; ran in the theatre, with Stone playing the title role. An alternative exterior is also shown in the book.

Locations seen in the Muppet Theater include backstage right (which includes Kermit&#x27;s desk), the dressing rooms, the attic (seen in four compilation videos released in 1985), the canteen, the prop room, the stage, Statler and Waldorf&#x27;s box, the auditorium, reception, the recording studio, the stage door lobby, the boiler room and the back alley. Some of these sets were later re-used as the Happiness Hotel in &quot;The Great Muppet Caper&quot;. A replica of the theatre is used as the setting for the &quot;Muppet*Vision 3D&quot; attraction at Disney&#x27;s Hollywood Studios.

Scooter&#x27;s uncle J.P. Grosse owns the theatre and rents it to the Muppets. In a deleted scene from &quot;It&#x27;s a Very Merry Muppet Christmas Movie&quot;, Kermit reveals that J.P. has died and left the theatre to the Muppets in his will. This would have taken place some time after 1996, as J.P. can be seen (and referred to as such by the head of the KMUP network) in episode 107 of &quot;Muppets Tonight&quot;, the 1990s reworking of &quot;The Muppet Show&quot;.

In the film &quot;The Muppets&quot;, a badly deteriorated version of the Muppet Theater is located next to Muppet Studios in Los Angeles. The Muppets reunite in hopes of raising enough money to buy the theatre from the oil magnate Tex Richman before he can demolish it and start drilling for oil on the site.

===Characters and performers===

Many of the characters who appeared on &quot;The Muppet Show&quot; have appeared in previous and subsequent Muppet productions.

===Guest stars===
No guest star ever appeared twice on &quot;The Muppet Show&quot;, although John Denver appeared both on the show and in two specials (&quot;John Denver and the Muppets: A Christmas Together&quot; and &quot;John Denver &amp; the Muppets: Rocky Mountain Holiday&quot;), while Dudley Moore reappeared in the special &quot;The Muppets Go to the Movies&quot;. Additionally, several guest stars from the series had cameos in the first three Muppet theatrical films, and the season four guest Alan Arkin had a cameo in &quot;The Muppets&quot;. Originally, the producers had to call on their personal contacts to appeal to them to appear, especially considering that doing so required an overseas trip to Britain. However, the situation changed when the ballet dancer Rudolf Nureyev offered to appear; his performance on this unusual TV programme produced so much favourable publicity that the series became one of the most sought after for various celebrities to appear in.

Many episodes featured actors, such as Steve Martin, Harvey Korman, Sylvester Stallone, Julie Andrews, Carol Burnett, Liza Minnelli, Christopher Reeve, Raquel Welch, Joel Grey and Dom DeLuise; some had veteran performers like Ethel Merman, Bob Hope, Danny Kaye, Don Knotts, Liberace, Peter Ustinov, James Coburn, Lena Horne, Zero Mostel and Vincent Price, and others had well-known pop singers, including Elton John, Diana Ross, Harry Belafonte, Kenny Rogers, Linda Ronstadt, Alice Cooper, Paul Simon, Helen Reddy, Debbie Harry and Leo Sayer. Sayer&#x27;s show used his hit song &quot;The Show Must Go On&quot; with slightly changed lyrics in the second verse, from &quot;I wish I could tear down the walls of this theatre&quot; to &quot;I wish I could tear down the walls of this Muppet Theatre&quot;. Some guest stars, such as the Monty Python star John Cleese, co-wrote much of their own episodes. The second-to-last episode, in 1981, had the then-James Bond actor Roger Moore, while the final episode to be taped guest-starred the actor and dancer Gene Kelly. Mark Hamill appeared in one episode as both himself and Luke Skywalker, his role in the &quot;Star Wars&quot; film series. Two of Henson&#x27;s childhood idols, Edgar Bergen and Milton Berle, also guest-starred during the second season.

In 1977, Rita Moreno won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program for her appearance. The next year, Peter Sellers — who chose not to appear as himself, instead appearing in a variety of characters — and Bernadette Peters earned nominations for the same award. One episode had the staff writer Chris Langham (who wrote some episodes of this show, starting in the third season) guest-starring when Richard Pryor was unable to make the taping of the episode at the last minute.

An early tradition was to present the guest star with a Muppet likeness of themselves as a parting gift at the end of the show, but this only lasted for the first two episodes produced, with Connie Stevens and Juliet Prowse. The high cost and effort of creating these unique Muppets, scheduling conflicts, and potential legal issues contributed to the decline of this practice, although Muppet caricatures and parodies continued to appear. The practice did, however, take place for actors Michael Caine and Tim Curry, who were the lead performers in &quot;The Muppet Christmas Carol&quot; and &quot;Muppet Treasure Island&quot;, respectively.

==Recurring sketches==

*&quot;At the Dance&quot; – The sketch was a regular during the first season but was used less frequently from the second season onward. Muppet characters (some of them being Whatnots) circulated on a semi-formal dance floor offering rapid fire one-liner jokes and come-backs as the couples passed in front of the camera. Debuted in &quot;The Muppet Show: Sex and Violence&quot;, and played a large role in the plot for a season five episode.
*&quot;Bear on Patrol&quot; – Fozzie Bear is a luckless police officer named Patrol Bear and Link Hogthrob is the incompetent chief of police who are always in the silliest situations with the criminals brought in. The voice of the announcer was performed by Jerry Nelson. Debuted in the third season.
*&quot;Blackouts&quot; – Short, comic sketches with the show&#x27;s guest star traditional to vaudeville that end with the lights turning off or a quick closing of the curtain. Only appeared in the first season.
*&quot;Cold Openings&quot; – The Cold Openings appeared at the beginning of each episode and officially introduced the guest star. During the first season, Kermit introduced the guest star during the opening theme. His introduction was followed by a clip of the guest star, usually surrounded by a group of Muppets. Beginning in the second season, the Cold Openings appeared before the opening theme song. Scooter visited the guest star in his/her dressing room, usually saying &quot;Fifteen seconds to curtain&quot;. This was then followed by a brief joke. In the fifth season, the guest star entered the Muppet Theatre and was greeted by Pops the Doorman. Pops always said, &quot;Who are you?&quot; as soon as he saw the guest star. After the guest star introduced himself/herself to Pops, a joke would follow.
*&quot;An Editorial by Sam the Eagle&quot; – Sam the Eagle gives an editorial on a specific topic which ends up occurring during the editorial. Only appeared in the second season.
*&quot;The Electric Mayhem&quot; – A variety of musical sketches featuring Dr. Teeth and the Electric Mayhem.
*&quot;Fozzie Bear&#x27;s Act&quot; – Fozzie Bear goes on stage and performs his famously silly jokes. Statler and Waldorf heckle him in a perpetual rivalry. The sketches became less frequent as Fozzie&#x27;s off-stage presence became more prevalent. In one first-season episode, however, Fozzie, with help from Bruce Forsyth, turned the tables on Statler and Waldorf who waved a white flag in surrender. It mainly appeared during the first season, but made occasional appearances in later seasons.
*&quot;Gonzo&#x27;s Stunts&quot; – These sketches detail the stunts of The Great Gonzo where something would usually go wrong.
*&quot;Muppet Labs&quot; – Muppet Labs is &quot;Where the future is being made today!&quot; These segments featured the latest invention from Dr. Bunsen Honeydew with his assistant Beaker having the worst of its inevitable malfunction. During the first season, Honeydew hosted Muppet Labs by himself. The writers soon realised that another character was necessary to show his failings, which resulted in Beaker being introduced in season two.
*&quot;Muppet Melodrama&quot; – A sketch where Uncle Deadly captured Miss Piggy and put her in perilous plights to force her to marry him. Wayne would often have to be the one to save her. Only appeared in the third season.
*&quot;Muppet News Flash&quot; – The Muppet Newsman delivers a news brief about a bizarre incident or human-interest story. During the first season, these segments frequently had an interview with the episode&#x27;s guest star, who portrayed a person connected to the story. Beginning with the second season, the Muppet Newsman almost invariably suffered some calamity associated with the story, such as being knocked out by a falling light fixture after he reported that the company manufacturing it had dropped production.
*&quot;Muppet Sports&quot; – A sports sketch that features different sporting activities that are covered by Louis Kazagger. Debuted in the third season.
*&quot;Musical Chickens&quot; – A flock of Muppet chickens pecked the keys of a piano and played a classic song to show off their musical talents.
*&quot;Panel Discussions&quot; – A sketch where Kermit the Frog, the guest star and other Muppets discuss various topics. Only appeared in the first season.
*&quot;Pigs in Space&quot; – Parody of science fiction programmes like &quot;Star Trek&quot;, but also 1930s sci-fi serials. The spacecraft is called USS &quot;Swinetrek&quot; and the title voice-over is a parody of &quot;Lost in Space&quot;. It features Captain Link Hogthrob, Dr. Julius Strangepork (the name a take-off on &quot;Dr. Strangelove&quot;), and Miss Piggy as First Mate. Usually, the sketches involved the long-suffering Piggy putting up with the wacko Strangepork and the brain dead Link treating her as an inferior because she is a female (even though she arguably dwarfs them in brainpower). The early sketches usually had odd introductions for all the characters, such as calling Link the &quot;flappable captain&quot;, Miss Piggy the &quot;flirtatious first mate&quot;, and referring to Dr. Strangepork as &quot;describable&quot;. Strangepork usually had the most unusual description of the three during these introductions as he was the oddest member of the group. This portion of the introduction was dropped during season three, and the announcer simply claimed it was &quot;time for...Piiiiiigs...iiiin...spaaaaaaace!&quot; Debuted in the second season.
*&quot;Planet Koozebane&quot; – A sketch about a planet containing strange alien lifeforms like the Koozebanian creatures, the Koozebanian Phoob, the Fazoobs, the Koozebanian Spooble, the Four Fazoobs and the Merdlidops. This was a common stop for the Swinetrek crew. The planet also appeared later in &quot;Muppet Babies&quot;, the &quot;Space Cowboys&quot; episode of &quot;Jim Henson&#x27;s Little Muppet Monsters&quot; and &quot;CityKids&quot; (which had different Koozebanian aliens). Kermit the Frog later reported from Koozebane in a 1992 &quot;Good Morning America&quot; appearance. Planet Koozebane was also referred to in the &quot;Science Fiction&quot; episode of &quot;The Jim Henson Hour&quot; and in the video game &quot;Muppets Party Cruise&quot;.
*&quot;A Poem by Rowlf&quot; – Rowlf the Dog recited a classic poem while other Muppets interrupt him. Only appeared in the first season.
*&quot;Rowlf at the Piano&quot; – Rowlf the Dog would sing classical songs and would occasionally be accompanied by the other Muppet characters.
*&quot;The Swedish Chef&quot; – A cooking show parody. It consists of the Swedish Chef, who speaks mock Swedish, semi-comprehensible gibberish which parodies the characteristic vowel sounds and intonation of Swedish. He attempts to cook a dish with great enthusiasm until the punchline hits. A hallmark of these sketches was the improvisation between Jim Henson (who performed the Chef&#x27;s head and voice) and Frank Oz (who was his hands). One would often make something up on the spot, making the other puppeteer comply with the action. Famous gags include &quot;chickie in du baskie&quot; (&quot;two points!&quot;), Swedish meatballs that bounce, and smashing a cake with a baseball bat after it begins insulting the Chef in mock Japanese. Debuted in the pilot &quot;Sex and Violence&quot;.
*&quot;Talk Spots&quot; – While sitting on a wall, Kermit the Frog talked to the guest star and was occasionally joined by the other Muppets. Mostly appeared during the first season, but made occasional appearances during the second season, and made two appearances in the third season (one of which had Sam the Eagle and the Swedish Chef in place of Kermit).
*&quot;Talking Houses&quot; – A bunch of houses that tell jokes to each other. Only appeared during the first season.
*&quot;UK Spots&quot; – Due to shorter commercial breaks in the United Kingdom, every episode of &quot;The Muppet Show&quot; lasted two minutes longer in the UK than in the United States. The extra segments that were filmed to cover this time difference have been referred to as &quot;UK Spots&quot;. Most of these consisted of a short song and never featured the guest star.
*&quot;Vendaface&quot; – The Vendaface (voiced by Jerry Nelson) is a vending machine that can give any Muppet a facelift. Apparently, Vendaface was only meant to be used once, but David Lazer said that they should not build such an expensive puppet only to use it once. The writers then decided to have him on the show a few more times in the first season. The Vendaface later appeared in episode 318 as the Vendawish (voiced by Jerry Nelson) which was a wish-granting machine.
*&quot;Veterinarian&#x27;s Hospital&quot; – Parody of the soap opera &quot;General Hospital&quot; and other medical dramas, this segment consists of Dr. Bob (played by Rowlf the Dog) cracking corny jokes in the operating room with Nurses Piggy and Janice, much to the bemusement of the frazzled patient. Each instalment ends with Dr. Bob and his nurses looking around in puzzlement as a disembodied narrator tells viewers to &quot;tune in next time, when you&#x27;ll hear Nurse Piggy / Dr. Bob / Nurse Janice say...&quot;, whereupon one of the three &#x27;medics&#x27; will prompt a corny response from one of the others. On a number of occasions, the &quot;Veterinarian&#x27;s Hospital&quot; sketch crossed over with the cast or set of another, such as &quot;At the Dance&quot; or &quot;Pigs in Space&quot;. On one occasion, Dr. Bob was the patient while the guest star (Christopher Reeve) played a doctor going to operate on Dr. Bob, and once Nurse Piggy was replaced (much to her chagrin) by guest star Loretta Swit, parodying her Nurse Houlihan character from &quot;M*A*S*H&quot;. In the first series, the narration was usually performed by John Lovelady, but Jerry Nelson performed the role in both the Harvey Korman and Rita Moreno episodes, before taking over the role permanently from the Phyllis Diller episode. In the introduction, Dr. Bob went from &quot;a former orthopedic surgeon&quot; to &quot;a quack&quot; who has &quot;gone to the dogs&quot;.
*&quot;Wayne and Wanda&quot; – Each sketch had Wayne and Wanda singing a song, only to be interrupted by some sort of pun relating to a lyric. Sam the Eagle introduced these sketches, as he felt that they were among the few cultured aspects of the show. Only appeared during the first season, although a few new sketches appeared in later seasons with just Wayne.

==Episodes==

The Muppet Show ran for five seasons, with minor alterations taking place each season.

==Soundtracks==
The Muppet Show
The Muppet Show - Volume 2
Singles

==Awards and nominations==

&quot;The Muppet Show&quot; was nominated for nine BAFTA Awards during its run, winning three. It was nominated for 21 Primetime Emmy Awards, winning four, including the 1978 award for Outstanding Comedy-Variety or Music Series. It was presented with a Peabody Award in 1978. Also in 1978, the show received the Television Award of Merit from the Mary Washington Colonial Chapter of the National Society of the Daughters of the American Revolution.

The series also won the top Variety Prize in the Golden Rose of Montreux international Contest in May 1977.

===Primetime Emmy Awards===
===Others===
==Home media==
===Compilation releases===
In 1985, Playhouse Video released a collection of video compilations under the Jim Henson&#x27;s Muppet Video banner. Ten videos were released, featuring original linking material in addition to clips from the show.

Videos included:
* &quot;The Muppet Revue&quot; (titled &quot;Kermit and Fozzie&#x27;s Favourite Moments&quot; in the UK) – Hosted by Kermit and Fozzie as they clean up the attic, with guest stars Linda Ronstadt, Paul Williams, Harry Belafonte, and Rita Moreno
* &quot;The Kermit and Piggy Story&quot; – Hosted by Kermit and Miss Piggy as they reminisce over their moments on the show, with guest stars Raquel Welch, Tony Randall, Cheryl Ladd, and Loretta Swit
* &quot;Children&#x27;s Songs and Stories with the Muppets&quot; – Hosted by Scooter as he looks through a scrapbook of children&#x27;s songs from the show, with interruptions by other Muppet characters(all voiced by Jim Henson) as he constantly tries to introduce his favorite song, &quot;Six String Orchestra&quot;, with guest stars Julie Andrews, John Denver, Twiggy, Brooke Shields, Judy Collins, and Charles Aznavour
* &quot;Rock Music with the Muppets&quot; – Hosted by Dr. Teeth with assistance by Beaker in a recording studio, with guest stars Debbie Harry, Linda Ronstadt, Alice Cooper, Ben Vereen, Helen Reddy, Leo Sayer, Loretta Swit, and Paul Simon
* &quot;Muppet Treasures&quot; – Hosted by Kermit and Fozzie as they once again clean out the attic, with guest stars Zero Mostel, Loretta Lynn, Paul Simon, Buddy Rich, Peter Sellers, and Ethel Merman
* &quot;Gonzo Presents Muppet Weird Stuff&quot; – Hosted by Gonzo and Camilla at Gonzo&#x27;s trailer home, which Gonzo tries to pass off as a mansion, with guest stars John Cleese, Jean Stapleton, Dom DeLuise, Julie Andrews, Vincent Price, and Madeline Kahn
* &quot;Country Music with the Muppets&quot; – Hosted by Rowlf at a barnyard radio station, with guest stars Mac Davis, John Denver, Crystal Gayle, Loretta Lynn, Roger Miller, Roy Clark, Johnny Cash, Roy Rogers, and Dale Evans
* &quot;Muppet Moments&quot; – Once again hosted by Kermit and Fozzie as they clean the attic, with guest stars Pearl Bailey, Bernadette Peters, Lena Horne, Andy Williams, Zero Mostel, and Liza Minnelli
* &quot;Rowlf&#x27;s Rhapsodies with the Muppets&quot; – Hosted by Rowlf, with guest stars Marisa Berenson, Peter Sellers, George Burns, Petula Clark, and Steve Martin
* &quot;Fozzie&#x27;s Muppet Scrapbook&quot; – Hosted by Fozzie in the attic as he looks through a scrapbook of his material from the show, with guest stars Raquel Welch, Beverly Sills, and Milton Berle

In 1993, Jim Henson Video released two compilations under the &quot;It&#x27;s the Muppets&quot; banner, &quot;Meet the Muppets&quot; and &quot;More Muppets, Please!&quot; Later, three volumes of &quot;The Very Best of The Muppet Show&quot; were released on VHS and DVD in the UK (volume 3 was a release of full episodes as opposed to compilations). Unlike the Playhouse Video releases, &quot;It&#x27;s the Muppets&quot; and &quot;The Very Best of The Muppet Show&quot; did not include any original footage or guest star clips, but all compilation collections did include material cut from the original US broadcasts.

===Series releases===
In 1994, Buena Vista Home Video under the Jim Henson Video imprint released &quot;The Muppet Show: Monster Laughs with Vincent Price&quot;, featuring the episodes with Vincent Price and Alice Cooper. Both episodes were edited. In addition to replacing the first series opening and the ending logos with Zoot, the Vincent Price episode was edited to remove the songs &quot;I&#x27;m Looking Through You&quot; and &quot;You&#x27;ve Got a Friend&quot; (the latter of which would be cut again when released on the first series DVD) as well as a sketch with the Talking Houses, while the Alice Cooper episode removed Robin the Frog&#x27;s performance of &quot;Somewhere Over the Rainbow&quot;.

Time-Life and Jim Henson Home Entertainment began marketing &quot;best of&quot; volumes of &quot;The Muppet Show&quot; for mail-order in 2001, with six initial volumes with three episodes on each VHS and DVD. Unique to each episode was an introduction by Jim Henson&#x27;s son, Brian. Nine more volumes were added for 2002, the series&#x27; 25th anniversary. The collection was available for retail in 2002 via Columbia TriStar Home Entertainment and Jim Henson Home Entertainment by which time Time-Life had released its tenth volume.

Buena Vista Home Entertainment released the first three seasons on DVD between 2005 and 2008. The rights to the episodes and characters used in &quot;The Muppet Show&quot;, and subsequent film outings, were bought in February 2004 by The Walt Disney Company.

Several songs were cut from the series 1 DVD release due to music licensing issues. There have also been some cuts in the intro sequence, and backstage scenes leading up to these songs. However, episodes that used Disney music remained unaltered (for example, episode 14 of series 1 used &quot;Never Smile at a Crocodile&quot; from &quot;Peter Pan&quot;).

:* &quot;Stormy Weather&quot; (Joel Grey episode) sung by Wayne and Wanda
:* &quot;Gone with the Wind&quot; (Jim Nabors episode) sung by Jim Nabors
:* &quot;The Danceros&quot; (Jim Nabors episode) sung by The Danceros
:* &quot;All of Me&quot; (Paul Williams episode) sung by Two Monsters
:* &quot;Old Fashioned Way&quot; (Charles Aznavour episode) sung by Charles Aznavour with Mildred Huxtetter
:* &quot;You&#x27;ve Got A Friend&quot; (Vincent Price episode) sung by Vincent Price, Uncle Deadly and a chorus of Muppet Monsters

The only uncut release of Season 1 on DVD so far is the German DVD release by Buena Vista Home Entertainment Germany in 2010 (which also contains English audio). However, the intro and end credit sequences on this release are in German. Also, the Paul Williams episode is missing a scene following &quot;All of Me&quot; wherein Fozzie and Scooter first discuss the &quot;Old Telephone Pole bit&quot;. This scene does appear (albeit slightly abridged) in the international release. The German version also lacks the song &quot;In My Life&quot; performed by Twiggy, instead substituting it with a performance of &quot;Lean on Me&quot; by German singer Mary Roos.

===Streaming===
&quot;The Muppet Show&quot; was released for streaming on Disney+ on 19 February 2021. However, two episodes featuring guests Brooke Shields and Chris Langham are omitted from the streaming service. In several European countries, the episode with John Denver is omitted as well. A content advisory was attached to several episodes describing &quot;negative depictions and/or mistreatment of people or cultures&quot;.

==See also==
* Adult puppeteering

==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* The Jim Henson Works at the University of Maryland. 70+ digital videos available to students, scholars and visitors at the University of Maryland (College Park, Maryland)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q336181" start="21" end="28" title="Variety show" label="variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="29" end="42" title="sketch comedy" label="sketch comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191037" start="72" end="82" title="Jim Henson" label="Jim Henson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953422" start="96" end="107" title="the Muppets" label="the Muppets"/>
<link wikidata="Q217117" start="381" end="390" title="burlesque" label="burlesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="399" end="408" title="slapstick" label="slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q333625" start="420" end="429" title="absurdism" label="absurdist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092460" start="434" end="448" title="surreal humour" label="surreal humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="454" end="462" title="parody" label="parodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107971" start="484" end="499" title="Kermit the Frog" label="Kermit the Frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440873" start="530" end="540" title="showrunner" label="showrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228" start="680" end="691" title="guest appearance" label="guest stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="856" end="870" title="television pilot" label="pilot episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="875" end="878" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q336801" start="1028" end="1037" title="Lew Grade" label="Lew Grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399070" start="1132" end="1135" title="Associated Television" label="ATV"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="1162" end="1165" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149951" start="1219" end="1236" title="ITC Entertainment" label="ITC Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914692" start="1241" end="1258" title="The Jim Henson Company" label="Henson Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261685" start="1304" end="1323" title="ATV Elstree Studios" label="ATV Elstree Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q19773" start="1327" end="1338" title="Borehamwood" label="Borehamwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="1340" end="1353" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1540" end="1561" title="Broadcast syndication#First-run syndication in the U.S." label="first-run syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q311319" start="1673" end="1681" title="Frank Oz" label="Frank Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183567" start="1725" end="1744" title="creative consultant" label="creative consultant"/>
<link wikidata="Q468028" start="1747" end="1759" title="Jerry Nelson" label="Jerry Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q561809" start="1761" end="1773" title="Richard Hunt (puppeteer)" label="Richard Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761980" start="1775" end="1785" title="Dave Goelz" label="Dave Goelz"/>
<link wikidata="Q34939" start="1787" end="1801" title="Steve Whitmire" label="Steve Whitmire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665614" start="1803" end="1813" title="Fran Brill" label="Fran Brill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622371" start="1815" end="1825" title="Eren Ozker" label="Eren Özker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688762" start="1827" end="1838" title="Louise Gold" label="Louise Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377099" start="1840" end="1854" title="Kathryn Mullen" label="Kathryn Mullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116718" start="1856" end="1867" title="Karen Prell" label="Karen Prell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964758" start="1869" end="1880" title="Brian Meehl" label="Brian Muehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933611" start="1882" end="1891" title="Bob Payne" label="Bob Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245377" start="1893" end="1906" title="John Lovelady" label="John Lovelady"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866176" start="1908" end="1919" title="Jane Henson" label="Jane Henson"/>
<link wikidata="Q682752" start="1921" end="1935" title="Peter Friedman" label="Peter Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q155629" start="2023" end="2036" title="Sesame Street" label="Sesame Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157136" start="2119" end="2129" title="Jack Burns" label="Jack Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349850" start="2185" end="2195" title="Jerry Juhl" label="Jerry Juhl"/>
<link wikidata="Q943134" start="2298" end="2310" title="Jack Parnell" label="Jack Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327964" start="2375" end="2393" title="The Muppets Studio" label="The Muppets Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="2409" end="2432" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914692" start="2464" end="2486" title="The Jim Henson Company" label="The Jim Henson Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261214" start="2789" end="2807" title="television special" label="television special"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627471" start="2816" end="2842" title="The Muppets Valentine Show" label="The Muppets Valentine Show"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2866" end="2899" title="The Muppet Show: Sex and Violence" label="The Muppet Show: Sex and Violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="2932" end="2935" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243353" start="3048" end="3065" title="prime-time access" label="prime-time access"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="3117" end="3119" title="North American Eastern Time Zone" label="ET"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="3164" end="3167" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359017" start="3271" end="3297" title="owned and operated station" label="owned and operated station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544347" start="3339" end="3355" title="George Schlatter" label="George Schlatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q336801" start="3382" end="3391" title="Lew Grade" label="Lew Grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q596137" start="3536" end="3550" title="Gerry Anderson" label="Gerry Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308604" start="3605" end="3627" title="Julie on Sesame Street" label="Julie on Sesame Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q344822" start="3651" end="3686" title="Herb Alpert &amp;amp; the Tijuana Brass" label="Herb Alpert &amp;amp; the Tijuana Brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261685" start="3783" end="3802" title="ATV Elstree Studios" label="ATV Elstree Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="3824" end="3835" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149951" start="3938" end="3955" title="ITC Entertainment" label="ITC Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="4034" end="4045" title="Broadcast syndication" label="syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745368" start="4117" end="4134" title="The Land of Gorch" label="The Land of Gorch"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="4231" end="4250" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408027" start="5330" end="5340" title="Sam Pottle" label="Sam Pottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839277" start="5842" end="5853" title="Fozzie Bear" label="Fozzie Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731177" start="6058" end="6073" title="Gonzo (Muppet)" label="Gonzo the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q714997" start="6342" end="6361" title="Statler and Waldorf" label="Statler and Waldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q714997" start="6935" end="6954" title="Statler and Waldorf" label="Statler and Waldorf"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7001" end="7005" title="Dr. Teeth and the Electric Mayhem#Zoot" label="Zoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455986" start="7275" end="7288" title="Sesame Street (fictional location)" label="Sesame Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="7759" end="7769" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171313" start="8049" end="8094" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Very Merry Muppet Christmas Movie" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Very Merry Muppet Christmas Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="8424" end="8430" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8589" end="8604" title="theatre (structure)#Basic elements of a theatre structure" label="backstage right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218526" start="8972" end="8994" title="The Great Muppet Caper" label="The Great Muppet Caper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327959" start="9064" end="9080" title="Muppet*Vision 3D" label="Muppet*Vision 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345090" start="9101" end="9132" title="Disney&amp;#x27;s Hollywood Studios" label="Disney&amp;#x27;s Hollywood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361724" start="9135" end="9149" title="Scooter (Muppet)" label="Scooter&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426628" start="9532" end="9547" title="Muppets Tonight" label="Muppets Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q550558" start="9626" end="9637" title="The Muppets (2011 film)" label="The Muppets"/>
<link wikidata="Q105460" start="10173" end="10184" title="John Denver" label="John Denver"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10238" end="10287" title="John Denver and the Muppets: A Christmas Together" label="John Denver and the Muppets: A Christmas Together"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355904" start="10304" end="10357" title="Rocky Mountain Holiday" label="John Denver &amp;amp; the Muppets: Rocky Mountain Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q310343" start="10372" end="10384" title="Dudley Moore" label="Dudley Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908009" start="10417" end="10445" title="The Muppets Go to the Movies" label="The Muppets Go to the Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q108283" start="10584" end="10594" title="Alan Arkin" label="Alan Arkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q84217" start="10858" end="10872" title="Rudolf Nureyev" label="Rudolf Nureyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q16473" start="11105" end="11117" title="Steve Martin" label="Steve Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q717656" start="11119" end="11132" title="Harvey Korman" label="Harvey Korman"/>
<link wikidata="Q40026" start="11134" end="11152" title="Sylvester Stallone" label="Sylvester Stallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q161819" start="11154" end="11167" title="Julie Andrews" label="Julie Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q255565" start="11169" end="11182" title="Carol Burnett" label="Carol Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q14441" start="11184" end="11197" title="Liza Minnelli" label="Liza Minnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q174311" start="11199" end="11216" title="Christopher Reeve" label="Christopher Reeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q229545" start="11218" end="11230" title="Raquel Welch" label="Raquel Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q316641" start="11232" end="11241" title="Joel Grey" label="Joel Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q348209" start="11246" end="11257" title="Dom DeLuise" label="Dom DeLuise"/>
<link wikidata="Q129087" start="11292" end="11304" title="Ethel Merman" label="Ethel Merman"/>
<link wikidata="Q94081" start="11306" end="11314" title="Bob Hope" label="Bob Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q213425" start="11316" end="11326" title="Danny Kaye" label="Danny Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q555236" start="11328" end="11338" title="Don Knotts" label="Don Knotts"/>
<link wikidata="Q347528" start="11340" end="11348" title="Liberace" label="Liberace"/>
<link wikidata="Q55796" start="11350" end="11363" title="Peter Ustinov" label="Peter Ustinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4227" start="11365" end="11377" title="James Coburn" label="James Coburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q112307" start="11379" end="11389" title="Lena Horne" label="Lena Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q191952" start="11391" end="11402" title="Zero Mostel" label="Zero Mostel"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="11407" end="11420" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="11471" end="11481" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q36290" start="11483" end="11493" title="Diana Ross" label="Diana Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q214959" start="11495" end="11510" title="Harry Belafonte" label="Harry Belafonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q217160" start="11512" end="11524" title="Kenny Rogers" label="Kenny Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q229375" start="11526" end="11540" title="Linda Ronstadt" label="Linda Ronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q332032" start="11542" end="11554" title="Alice Cooper" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028" start="11556" end="11566" title="Paul Simon" label="Paul Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q233362" start="11568" end="11579" title="Helen Reddy" label="Helen Reddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215026" start="11581" end="11593" title="Debbie Harry" label="Debbie Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q363074" start="11598" end="11607" title="Leo Sayer" label="Leo Sayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507317" start="11651" end="11670" title="The Show Must Go On (Leo Sayer song)" label="The Show Must Go On"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="11899" end="11911" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q25014" start="11917" end="11928" title="John Cleese" label="John Cleese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009573" start="12017" end="12027" title="James Bond (character)" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q134333" start="12034" end="12045" title="Roger Moore" label="Roger Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q73089" start="12118" end="12128" title="Gene Kelly" label="Gene Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q210447" start="12130" end="12141" title="Mark Hamill" label="Mark Hamill"/>
<link wikidata="Q51746" start="12186" end="12200" title="Luke Skywalker" label="Luke Skywalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="12224" end="12233" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q721957" start="12291" end="12303" title="Edgar Bergen" label="Edgar Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q558933" start="12308" end="12320" title="Milton Berle" label="Milton Berle"/>
<link wikidata="Q230151" start="12377" end="12388" title="Rita Moreno" label="Rita Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377021" start="12397" end="12486" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q177984" start="12522" end="12535" title="Peter Sellers" label="Peter Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q231391" start="12625" end="12642" title="Bernadette Peters" label="Bernadette Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107190" start="12715" end="12728" title="Chris Langham" label="Chris Langham"/>
<link wikidata="Q294912" start="12818" end="12831" title="Richard Pryor" label="Richard Pryor"/>
<link wikidata="Q262507" start="13089" end="13103" title="Connie Stevens" label="Connie Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811137" start="13108" end="13121" title="Juliet Prowse" label="Juliet Prowse"/>
<link wikidata="Q123351" start="13387" end="13400" title="Michael Caine" label="Michael Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q52392" start="13405" end="13414" title="Tim Curry" label="Tim Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q714721" start="13454" end="13480" title="The Muppet Christmas Carol" label="The Muppet Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788520" start="13497" end="13519" title="Muppet Treasure Island" label="Muppet Treasure Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137237" start="13741" end="13749" title="Whatnot (Muppet)" label="Whatnots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449301" start="13767" end="13778" title="semi-formal" label="semi-formal"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13905" end="13938" title="The Muppet Show: Sex and Violence" label="The Muppet Show: Sex and Violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839277" start="14039" end="14050" title="Fozzie Bear" label="Fozzie Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137237" start="14102" end="14115" title="Link Hogthrob" label="Link Hogthrob"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855502" start="14135" end="14150" title="chief of police" label="chief of police"/>
<link wikidata="Q468028" start="14268" end="14280" title="Jerry Nelson" label="Jerry Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361724" start="14929" end="14936" title="Scooter (Muppet)" label="Scooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137237" start="15163" end="15179" title="Pops (Muppet)" label="Pops the Doorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156517" start="15591" end="15624" title="Dr. Teeth and the Electric Mayhem" label="Dr. Teeth and the Electric Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245136" start="15938" end="15951" title="Bruce Forsyth" label="Bruce Forsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731177" start="16196" end="16211" title="Gonzo (Muppet)" label="The Great Gonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4844536" start="16394" end="16413" title="Bunsen Honeydew" label="Dr. Bunsen Honeydew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546234" start="16433" end="16439" title="Beaker (Muppet)" label="Beaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137237" start="16742" end="16754" title="Uncle Deadly (Muppet)" label="Uncle Deadly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267970" start="16764" end="16774" title="Miss Piggy" label="Miss Piggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137237" start="16952" end="16970" title="The Muppet Newsman" label="The Muppet Newsman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17979" end="17988" title="Star Trek: The Original Series" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q536137" start="18124" end="18137" title="Lost in Space" label="Lost in Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137237" start="18180" end="18202" title="Dr. Julius Strangepork" label="Dr. Julius Strangepork"/>
<link wikidata="Q105702" start="18233" end="18248" title="Dr. Strangelove" label="Dr. Strangelove"/>
<link wikidata="Q502263" start="19387" end="19400" title="Muppet Babies (1984 TV series)" label="Muppet Babies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195569" start="19455" end="19495" title="Jim Henson&amp;#x27;s Little Muppet Monsters" label="Jim Henson&amp;#x27;s Little Muppet Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958703" start="19512" end="19520" title="CityKids" label="CityKids"/>
<link wikidata="Q825946" start="19631" end="19651" title="Good Morning America" label="Good Morning America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743268" start="19760" end="19779" title="The Jim Henson Hour" label="The Jim Henson Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937126" start="19814" end="19834" title="Muppets Party Cruise" label="Muppets Party Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457145" start="20159" end="20171" title="cooking show" label="cooking show"/>
<link wikidata="Q700" start="20199" end="20211" title="Swedish Chef" label="Swedish Chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="20229" end="20236" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q786484" start="20258" end="20267" title="gibberish" label="gibberish"/>
<link wikidata="Q311319" start="20538" end="20546" title="Frank Oz" label="Frank Oz"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20897" end="20913" title="The Muppet Show: Sex and Violence" label="Sex and Violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q468028" start="21825" end="21837" title="Jerry Nelson" label="Jerry Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423937" start="21887" end="21895" title="facelift" label="facelift"/>
<link wikidata="Q468028" start="22204" end="22216" title="Jerry Nelson" label="Jerry Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136370" start="22328" end="22344" title="General Hospital" label="General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786567" start="22361" end="22374" title="medical drama" label="medical drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q174311" start="23125" end="23142" title="Christopher Reeve" label="Christopher Reeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q238862" start="23259" end="23271" title="Loretta Swit" label="Loretta Swit"/>
<link wikidata="Q494244" start="23323" end="23330" title="M*A*S*H (TV series)" label="M*A*S*H"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245377" start="23398" end="23411" title="John Lovelady" label="John Lovelady"/>
<link wikidata="Q468028" start="23417" end="23429" title="Jerry Nelson" label="Jerry Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q717656" start="23461" end="23474" title="Harvey Korman" label="Harvey Korman"/>
<link wikidata="Q230151" start="23479" end="23490" title="Rita Moreno" label="Rita Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q230512" start="23550" end="23564" title="Phyllis Diller" label="Phyllis Diller"/>
<link wikidata="Q216685" start="23628" end="23638" title="orthopedic" label="orthopedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752648" start="24197" end="24212" title="The Muppet Show (album)" label="The Muppet Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752650" start="24213" end="24239" title="The Muppet Show 2" label="The Muppet Show - Volume 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="24328" end="24339" title="BAFTA Award" label="BAFTA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="24396" end="24416" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243517" start="24462" end="24504" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety, Music or Comedy Series" label="Outstanding Comedy-Variety or Music Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="24530" end="24543" title="Peabody Award" label="Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541947" start="24688" end="24724" title="Daughters of the American Revolution" label="Daughters of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q109726625" start="24928" end="24943" title="Playhouse Video" label="Playhouse Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120540" start="24998" end="25028" title="Jim Henson&amp;#x27;s Muppet Video" label="Jim Henson&amp;#x27;s Muppet Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q229375" start="25333" end="25347" title="Linda Ronstadt" label="Linda Ronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q927415" start="25349" end="25362" title="Paul Williams (songwriter)" label="Paul Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q214959" start="25364" end="25379" title="Harry Belafonte" label="Harry Belafonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q230151" start="25385" end="25396" title="Rita Moreno" label="Rita Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q229545" start="25539" end="25551" title="Raquel Welch" label="Raquel Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q286717" start="25553" end="25565" title="Tony Randall" label="Tony Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q218884" start="25567" end="25578" title="Cheryl Ladd" label="Cheryl Ladd"/>
<link wikidata="Q238862" start="25584" end="25596" title="Loretta Swit" label="Loretta Swit"/>
<link wikidata="Q161819" start="25932" end="25945" title="Julie Andrews" label="Julie Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q105460" start="25947" end="25958" title="John Denver" label="John Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q229442" start="25960" end="25966" title="Twiggy" label="Twiggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189400" start="25968" end="25982" title="Brooke Shields" label="Brooke Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q254576" start="25984" end="25996" title="Judy Collins" label="Judy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785" start="26002" end="26018" title="Charles Aznavour" label="Charles Aznavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q215026" start="26149" end="26161" title="Debbie Harry" label="Debbie Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q229375" start="26163" end="26177" title="Linda Ronstadt" label="Linda Ronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q332032" start="26179" end="26191" title="Alice Cooper" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q770841" start="26193" end="26203" title="Ben Vereen" label="Ben Vereen"/>
<link wikidata="Q233362" start="26205" end="26216" title="Helen Reddy" label="Helen Reddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q363074" start="26218" end="26227" title="Leo Sayer" label="Leo Sayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q238862" start="26229" end="26241" title="Loretta Swit" label="Loretta Swit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028" start="26247" end="26257" title="Paul Simon" label="Paul Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q191952" start="26376" end="26387" title="Zero Mostel" label="Zero Mostel"/>
<link wikidata="Q272931" start="26389" end="26401" title="Loretta Lynn" label="Loretta Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028" start="26403" end="26413" title="Paul Simon" label="Paul Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q318339" start="26415" end="26425" title="Buddy Rich" label="Buddy Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q177984" start="26427" end="26440" title="Peter Sellers" label="Peter Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q129087" start="26446" end="26458" title="Ethel Merman" label="Ethel Merman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25014" start="26628" end="26639" title="John Cleese" label="John Cleese"/>
<link wikidata="Q271856" start="26641" end="26655" title="Jean Stapleton" label="Jean Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q348209" start="26657" end="26668" title="Dom DeLuise" label="Dom DeLuise"/>
<link wikidata="Q161819" start="26670" end="26683" title="Julie Andrews" label="Julie Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="26685" end="26698" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q234068" start="26704" end="26717" title="Madeline Kahn" label="Madeline Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q910761" start="26827" end="26836" title="Mac Davis" label="Mac Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105460" start="26838" end="26849" title="John Denver" label="John Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q434512" start="26851" end="26864" title="Crystal Gayle" label="Crystal Gayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q712359" start="26880" end="26892" title="Roger Miller" label="Roger Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q721819" start="26894" end="26903" title="Roy Clark" label="Roy Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="26905" end="26916" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q367129" start="26918" end="26928" title="Roy Rogers" label="Roy Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q438048" start="26934" end="26944" title="Dale Evans" label="Dale Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q462118" start="27057" end="27069" title="Pearl Bailey" label="Pearl Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q231391" start="27071" end="27088" title="Bernadette Peters" label="Bernadette Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q112307" start="27090" end="27100" title="Lena Horne" label="Lena Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q214548" start="27102" end="27115" title="Andy Williams" label="Andy Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q14441" start="27134" end="27147" title="Liza Minnelli" label="Liza Minnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q285419" start="27239" end="27254" title="Marisa Berenson" label="Marisa Berenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q344793" start="27271" end="27283" title="George Burns" label="George Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q236212" start="27285" end="27297" title="Petula Clark" label="Petula Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16473" start="27303" end="27315" title="Steve Martin" label="Steve Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q235517" start="27487" end="27500" title="Beverly Sills" label="Beverly Sills"/>
<link wikidata="Q558933" start="27506" end="27518" title="Milton Berle" label="Milton Berle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053254" start="28169" end="28191" title="Buena Vista Home Video" label="Buena Vista Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914692" start="28202" end="28218" title="The Jim Henson Company" label="Jim Henson Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445861" start="28532" end="28560" title="I&amp;#x27;m Looking Through You" label="I&amp;#x27;m Looking Through You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813448" start="28577" end="28601" title="You&amp;#x27;ve Got a Friend" label="You&amp;#x27;ve Got a Friend"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28771" end="28785" title="List of Muppets#Robin the Frog" label="Robin the Frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q161402" start="28814" end="28840" title="Somewhere Over the Rainbow" label="Somewhere Over the Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806643" start="28849" end="28858" title="Time-Life" label="Time-Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914692" start="28863" end="28892" title="The Jim Henson Company" label="Jim Henson Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q734401" start="29260" end="29295" title="Columbia TriStar Home Entertainment" label="Columbia TriStar Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053254" start="29386" end="29416" title="Buena Vista Home Entertainment" label="Buena Vista Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="29620" end="29643" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118679" start="29940" end="29966" title="Never Smile at a Crocodile" label="Never Smile at a Crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q270470" start="29984" end="29993" title="Peter Pan (1953 film)" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q316641" start="30034" end="30043" title="Joel Grey" label="Joel Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q963787" start="30112" end="30122" title="Jim Nabors" label="Jim Nabors"/>
<link wikidata="Q963787" start="30180" end="30190" title="Jim Nabors" label="Jim Nabors"/>
<link wikidata="Q927415" start="30247" end="30260" title="Paul Williams (songwriter)" label="Paul Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785" start="30325" end="30341" title="Charles Aznavour" label="Charles Aznavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="30440" end="30453" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053254" start="30610" end="30640" title="Buena Vista Home Entertainment" label="Buena Vista Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q927415" start="30779" end="30792" title="Paul Williams (songwriter)" label="Paul Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818379" start="30836" end="30845" title="All of Me (jazz standard)" label="All of Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324384" start="31058" end="31068" title="In My Life" label="In My Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q229442" start="31088" end="31094" title="Twiggy" label="Twiggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423445" start="31148" end="31158" title="Lean on Me (song)" label="Lean on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q77582" start="31182" end="31191" title="Mary Roos" label="Mary Roos"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958752" start="31268" end="31275" title="Disney+" label="Disney+"/>
<link wikidata="Q189400" start="31336" end="31350" title="Brooke Shields" label="Brooke Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107190" start="31355" end="31368" title="Chris Langham" label="Chris Langham"/>
<link wikidata="Q105460" start="31457" end="31468" title="John Denver" label="John Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q15829738" start="31491" end="31507" title="Trauma trigger" label="content advisory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685933" start="31643" end="31661" title="Adult puppeteering" label="Adult puppeteering"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40133" wikidata="Q131307" url="?curid=40133" title="Bacillus cereus">
<text>Bacillus cereus is a Gram-positive rod-shaped bacterium commonly found in soil, food, and marine sponges. The specific name, &quot;cereus&quot;, meaning &quot;waxy&quot; in Latin, refers to the appearance of colonies grown on blood agar. Some strains are harmful to humans and cause foodborne illness due to their spore-forming nature, while other strains can be beneficial as probiotics for animals, and even exhibit mutualism with certain plants. &quot;B. cereus&quot; bacteria may be aerobes or facultative anaerobes, and like other members of the genus &quot;Bacillus&quot;, can produce protective endospores. They have a wide range of virulence factors, including phospholipase C, cereulide, sphingomyelinase, metalloproteases, and cytotoxin K, many of which are regulated via quorum sensing. &quot;B. cereus&quot; strains exhibit flagellar motility.

The &quot;Bacillus cereus&quot; group comprises seven closely related species: &quot;B. cereus&quot; &quot;sensu stricto&quot; (referred to herein as &quot;B. cereus&quot;), &quot;B. anthracis&quot;, &quot;B. thuringiensis&quot;, &quot;B. mycoides&quot;, &quot;B. pseudomycoides&quot;, and &quot;B. cytotoxicus&quot;; or as six species in a &quot;Bacillus cereus&quot; sensu lato: &quot;B. weihenstephanensis&quot;, &quot;B. mycoides&quot;, &quot;B. pseudomycoides&quot;, &quot;B. cereus&quot;, &quot;B. thuringiensis&quot;, and &quot;B. anthracis&quot;. A phylogenomic analysis combined with average nucleotide identity (ANI) analysis revealed that the &quot;B. anthracis&quot; species also includes strains annotated as &quot;B. cereus&quot; and &quot;B. thuringiensis.&quot;

==History==
Colonies of &quot;B. cereus&quot; were originally isolated by Percy F. Frankland from a gelatine plate left exposed to the air in a cow shed in 1887. In the 2010s, examination of warning letters issued by the US Food and Drug Administration issued to pharmaceutical manufacturing facilities addressing facility microbial contamination revealed that the most common contaminant was &quot;B. cereus&quot;.

Several new enzymes have been discovered in &quot;B. cereus&quot;, such as AlkC and AlkD, both of which are involved in DNA repair.

== Microbiology ==

&quot;B. cereus&quot; is a rod-shaped bacterium with a Gram-positive cell envelope. Depending on the strain, it may be aerobic or facultatively anaerobic. Most strains are mesophilic, having an optimal temperature between 25 °C and 37 °C, and neutralophilic, preferring neutral pH, but some have been found to grow in environments with much more extreme conditions.

These bacteria are both spore-forming and biofilm-forming, presenting a large challenge to the food industry due to their contamination capability. Biofilms of &quot;B. cereus&quot; most commonly form on air-liquid interfaces or on hard surfaces such as glass. &quot;B. cereus&quot; display flagellar motility, which has been shown to aid in biofilm formation via an increased ability to reach surfaces suitable for biofilm formation, to spread the biofilm over a larger surface area, and to recruit planktonic, or single, free-living bacteria. Biofilm formation may also occur while in spore form due to varying adhesion ability of spores.

Their flagella are peritrichous, meaning there are many flagella located all around the cell body that can bundle together at a single location on the cell to propel it. This flagellar property also allows the cell to change directions of movement depending on where on the cell the flagellum filaments come together to generate movement.

Some studies and observations have shown that silica particles the size of a few nanometers have been deposited in a spore coat layer in the extracytoplasmic region of the &quot;Bacillus cereus&quot; spore. The layer was first discovered by the use of scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), however the images taken did not have resolution high enough to determine the precise location of the silica. Some investigators hypothesize that the layer helps different spores from sticking together. It has also been shown to provide some resistance to acidic environments. The silica coat is related to the permeability of the spore&#x27;s inner membrane. Strong mineral acids are able to break down spore permeability barriers and kill the spore. However, when the spore has a silica coating, it may reduce the permeability of the membrane and provide resistance to many acids.

=== Metabolism ===
&quot;Bacillus cereus&quot; has mechanisms for both aerobic and anaerobic respiration, making it a facultative anaerobe. Its aerobic pathway consists of three terminal oxidases: cytochrome aa3, cytochrome caa3, and cytochrome bd, the use of each dependent on the amount of oxygen present in the environment. The &quot;B. cereus&quot; genome encodes genes for metabolic enzymes including NADH dehydrogenases, succinate dehydrogenase, complex III, and cytochrome c oxidase, as well as others. &quot;Bacillus cereus&quot; can metabolize several different compounds to create energy, including carbohydrates, proteins, peptides, and amino acids.

The Embden-Meyerhof pathway is the predominant pathway used by &quot;Bacillus cereus&quot; to catabolize glucose at every stage of the cell&#x27;s development, according to estimates of a radiorespirometric method of glucose catabolism. This is true at times of germinative phases, as well as sporogenic phases. At the filamentous, granular, forespore, and transitional stages, the Embden-Meyerhof pathway was responsible for the catabolism of 98% of the cell&#x27;s glucose. The remainder of the glucose was catabolized by the hexose monophosphate oxidative pathway.

Analysis of the core genome of &quot;B. cereus&quot; reveals a limited presence of enzymes meant for breakdown of polysaccharides and a prevalence of proteases and amino acid degradation and transport pathways, indicating that their preferred diet consists of proteins and their breakdown products.

An isolate of a bacterium found to produce PHBs was identified as &quot;B. cereus&quot; through analysis of 16S rRNA sequences as well as similarity of morphological and biochemical characteristics. PHBs may be produced when there is excess carbon or limited essential nutrients present in the environment, and they are later broken down by the microbe as a fuel source under starvation conditions. This indicates the potential role of &quot;B. cereus&quot; in producing biodegradable plastic substitutes. PHB production was highest when provided with glucose as a carbon source.

== Genomics ==
The genome of &quot;B. cereus&quot; has been characterized and shown to contain over 5 million bp of DNA. Out of these, more than 5500 protein-encoding genes have been identified, of which the top categories of genes with known functions include: metabolic processes, processing of proteins, virulence factors, response to stress, and defense mechanisms. Many of the genes categorized as virulence factors, stress responses, and defense mechanisms encode factors in antibiotic resistance. There are approximately 600 genes which are common in 99% of the taxa of &quot;B. cereus&quot; sensu lato, which constitutes around 1% of all genes in the pan-genome. Due to the prevalence of horizontal gene transfer among bacteria, the pan-genome of &quot;B. cereus&quot; is continually expanding. The GC content of its DNA across all strains is approximately 35%.

Following exposure to non-lethal acid shock at pH 5.4-5.5, the arginine deiminase gene in &quot;B. cereus&quot;, &quot;arcA,&quot; shows substantial up-regulation. This gene is part of the &quot;arcABC&quot; operon which is induced by low-pH environments in &quot;Listeria monocytogenes&quot;, and is associated with growth and survival in acidic environments. This suggests that this gene is also important for survival of &quot;B. cereus&quot; in acidic environments.

The activation of virulence factors has been shown to be transcriptionally regulated via quorum-sensing in &quot;B. cereus.&quot; The activation of many virulence factors secreted is dependent on the activity of the Phospholipase C regulator (PlcR), a transcriptional regulator which is most active at the beginning of the stationary phase of growth. A small peptide called PapR acts as the effector in the quorum-sensing pathway, and when reimported into the cell, it interacts with PlcR to activate transcription of these virulence genes. When point mutations were introduced into the plcR gene using the CRISPR/Cas9 system, it was observed that the mutated bacteria lost their hemolytic and phospholipase activity.

The flagella of &quot;B. cereus&quot; are encoded by 2 to 5 &quot;fla&quot; genes, depending on the strain.

== Identification ==

For the isolation and enumeration of &quot;B. cereus&quot;, there are two standardized methods by International Organization for Standardization (ISO): ISO 7932 and ISO 21871. Because of &quot;B. cereus&quot;″ ability to produce lecithinase and its inability to ferment mannitol, there are some proper selective media for its isolation and identification such as mannitol-egg yolk-polymyxin (MYP) and polymyxin-pyruvate-egg yolk-mannitol-bromothymol blue agar (PEMBA). &quot;B. cereus&quot; colonies on MYP have a violet-red background and are surrounded by a zone of egg-yolk precipitate.

Below is a list of differential techniques and results that can help to identify &quot;B. cereus&quot; from other bacteria and &quot;Bacillus&quot; species.
* Anaerobic growth: Positive
* Voges Proskauer test: Positive
* Acid produced from
** -glucose: Positive
** -arabinose: Negative
** -xylose: Negative
** -mannitol: Negative
* Starch hydrolysis: Positive
* Nitrate reduction: Positive
* Degradation of tyrosine: Positive
* Growth at
** above 50 °C: Negative
* Use of citrate: Positive

The Central Public Health Laboratory in the United Kingdom tests for motility, hemolysis, rhizoid growth, susceptibility to γ-phage, and fermentation of ammonium salt-based glucose but no mannitol, arabinose, or xylose.

==Growth==
The optimal growth temperature range for &quot;B. cereus&quot; is 30-40 °C. At , a population of &quot;B. cereus&quot; can double in as little as 20 minutes or as long as 3 hours, depending on the food product. Spores of &quot;B. cereus&quot; are not metabolically active, but can rapidly become active and begin replicating once they encounter adequate growth conditions.

==Ecology==
Like most &quot;Bacilli,&quot; the most common ecosystem of &quot;Bacillus cereus&quot; is the soil. In concert with arbuscular mycorrhiza (and &quot;Rhizobium leguminosarum&quot; in clover), they can up-regulate plant growth in heavy metal soils by decreasing heavy metal concentrations via bioaccumulation and biotransformation in addition to increasing phosphorus, nitrogen, and potassium uptake in certain plants. &quot;B. cereus&quot; was also shown to aid in survival of earthworms in heavy metal soils resulting from the use of metal-based fungicides, showing increases in biomass, reproduction and reproductive viability, and a decrease in metal content of tissues in those inoculated with the bacterium. These results suggest strong possibilities for its application in ecological bioremediation. Evidence of bioremediation potential by &quot;Bacillus cereus&quot; was also found in the aquatic ecosystem, where organic nitrogen and phosphorus wastes polluting a eutrophic lake were broken down in the presence of &quot;B. cereus&quot;.

In a study measuring the ability of &quot;B. cereus&quot; to degrade keratin in chicken feathers, bacteria were found to sufficiently biodegrade keratin via hydrolytic mechanisms. These results indicate its potential to degrade keratinous waste from the poultry industry for potential recycling of the byproducts.

&quot;B. cereus&quot; competes with Gram-negative bacteria species such as &quot;Salmonella&quot; and &quot;Campylobacter&quot; in the gut; its presence reduces the number of Gram-negative bacteria, specifically via antibiotic activity via enzymes such as cereins that impede their quorum sensing ability and exhibit bactericidal activity. In food animals such as chickens, rabbits and pigs, some harmless strains of &quot;B. cereus&quot; are used as a probiotic feed additive to reduce &quot;Salmonella&quot; in the animals&#x27; intestines and cecum. This improves the animals&#x27; growth, as well as food safety for humans who eat them. In addition, &quot;B. cereus&quot; create and release enzymes that aid in the digestion of materials that are typically difficult to digest, such as woody plant matter, in the guts of other organisms.

The strain is a biofungicide. A study by Figueroa-López &quot;et al.&quot; showed that the presence of this strain reduced &quot;Fusarium verticillioides&quot; growth. B25 shows promise for reduction of mycotoxin concentrations in grains.

==Pathogenesis==
&quot;B. cereus&quot; is responsible for a minority of foodborne illnesses (2–5%), causing severe nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. &quot;Bacillus&quot; foodborne illnesses occur due to survival of the bacterial endospores when contaminated food is not, or is inadequately, cooked. Cooking temperatures less than or equal to allow some &quot;B. cereus&quot; spores to survive. This problem is compounded when food is then improperly refrigerated, allowing the endospores to germinate. Cooked foods not meant for either immediate consumption or rapid cooling and refrigeration should be kept at temperatures below or above . Germination and growth generally occur between 10 °C and 50 °C, though some strains can grow at low temperatures, and Bacillus cytotoxicus strains have been shown to grow at temperatures up to . Bacterial growth results in production of enterotoxins, one of which is highly resistant to heat and acids (pH levels between 2 and 11); ingestion leads to two types of illness: diarrheal and emetic (vomiting) syndrome. The enterotoxins produced by &quot;B. cereus&quot; have beta-hemolytic activity.
* The diarrheal type is associated with a wide range of foods, has an 8-to-16-hour incubation time, and is associated with diarrhea and gastrointestinal pain. Also known as the &#x27;long-incubation&#x27; form of &quot;B. cereus&quot; food poisoning, it might be difficult to differentiate from poisoning caused by &quot;Clostridium perfringens&quot;. Enterotoxin can be inactivated after heating at for 5 minutes, but whether its presence in food causes the symptom is unclear, since it degrades in stomach enzymes; its subsequent production by surviving &quot;B. cereus&quot; spores within the small intestine may be the cause of illness.
* The &#x27;emetic&#x27; form commonly results from rice which is cooked at a time and temperature insufficient to kill any spores present, then improperly refrigerated. The remaining spores can produce a toxin, cereulide, which is not inactivated by later reheating. This form leads to nausea and vomiting 1–5 hours after consumption. Distinguishing from other short-term bacterial foodborne intoxications, such as by &quot;Staphylococcus aureus,&quot; can be difficult. Emetic toxin can withstand for 90 minutes. As a result of the emetic type&#x27;s association with rice, it is sometimes referred to colloquially as &#x27;fried rice syndrome&#x27;.

The diarrhetic syndromes observed in patients are thought to stem from the three toxins: hemolysin BL (Hbl), nonhemolytic enterotoxin (Nhe), and cytotoxin K (CytK). The &quot;nhe&quot;/&quot;hbl&quot;/&quot;cytK&quot; genes are located on the chromosome of the bacteria. Transcription of these genes is controlled by &quot;PlcR&quot;. These genes occur in the taxonomically related &quot;B. thuringiensis&quot; and &quot;B. anthracis&quot;, as well. These enterotoxins are all produced in the small intestine of the host, thus thwarting digestion by host endogenous enzymes. The Hbl and Nhe toxins are pore-forming toxins closely related to ClyA of &quot;E. coli&quot;. The proteins exhibit a conformation known as a &quot;beta-barrel&quot; that can insert into cellular membranes due to a hydrophobic exterior, thus creating pores with hydrophilic interiors. The effect is loss of cellular membrane potential and eventually cell death.

Previously, it was thought that the timing of the toxin production was responsible for the two different courses of disease, but it has since been found that the emetic syndrome is caused by the toxin cereulide, which is found only in emetic strains and is not part of the &quot;standard toolbox&quot; of &quot;B. cereus&quot;. Cereulide is a cyclic polypeptide containing three repeats of four amino acids: -oxy-—-—-oxy-—- (similar to valinomycin produced by &quot;Streptomyces griseus&quot;) produced by nonribosomal peptide synthesis. Cereulide is believed to bind to 5-hydroxytryptamine 3 (5-HT3) serotonin receptors, activating them and leading to increased afferent vagus nerve stimulation. It was shown independently by two research groups to be encoded on multiple plasmids: pCERE01 or pBCE4810. Plasmid pBCE4810 shares homology with the &quot;B. anthracis&quot; virulence plasmid pXO1, which encodes the anthrax toxin. Periodontal isolates of &quot;B. cereus&quot; also possess distinct pXO1-like plasmids. Like most of cyclic peptides containing nonproteogenic amino acids, cereulide is resistant to heat, proteolysis, and acid conditions.

&quot;B. cereus&quot; is also known to cause difficult-to-eradicate chronic skin infections, though less aggressive than necrotizing fasciitis. &quot;B. cereus&quot; can also cause keratitis.

While often associated with gastrointestinal illness, &quot;B. cereus&quot; is also associated with illnesses such as fulminant bacterial infection, central nervous system involvement, respiratory tract infection, and endophthalmitis. Endophthalmitis is the most common form of extra-gastrointestinal pathogenesis, which is an infection of the eye that may cause permanent vision loss. Infections typically cause a corneal ring abscess, followed by other symptoms such as pain, proptosis, and retinal hemorrhage. While different from &quot;B. anthracis, B. cereus&quot; contains some toxin genes originally found in &quot;B. anthracis&quot; that are attributed to anthrax-like respiratory tract infections.

A case study was published in 2019 of a catheter-related bloodstream infection of &quot;B. cereus&quot; in a 91-year-old male previously being treated with hemodialysis via PermCath for end-stage renal disease. He presented with chills, tachypnea, and high-grade fever, his white blood cell count and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (CRP) were significantly elevated, and CT imaging revealed a thoracic aortic aneurysm. He was successfully treated for the aneurysm with intravenous vancomycin, oral fluoroquinolones, and PermCath removal. Another case study of &quot;B. cereus&quot; infection was published in 2021 of a 30-year-old woman with lupus who was diagnosed with infective endocarditis after receiving a catheter. The blood samples were positive for B. cereus and the patient was subsequently treated with vancomycin. PCR was also used to verify toxins that the isolate produces.

=== Diagnosis ===

In case of foodborne illness, the diagnosis of &quot;B. cereus&quot; can be confirmed by the isolation of more than 100,000 &quot;B. cereus&quot; organisms per gram from epidemiologically implicated food, but such testing is often not done because the illness is relatively harmless and usually self-limiting.

=== Prognosis ===
Most emetic patients recover within 6 to 24 hours, but in some cases, the toxin can be fatal via fulminant hepatic failure. In 2014, 23 newborns in the UK receiving total parenteral nutrition contaminated with &quot;B. cereus&quot; developed sepsis, with three of the infants later dying as a result of infection.

=== Prevention ===
While &quot;B. cereus&quot; vegetative cells are killed during normal cooking, spores are more resistant. Viable spores in food can become vegetative cells in the intestines and produce a range of diarrheal enterotoxins, so elimination of spores is desirable. In wet heat (poaching, simmering, boiling, braising, stewing, pot roasting, steaming), spores require more than 5 minutes at at the coldest spot to be destroyed. In dry heat (grilling, broiling, baking, roasting, searing, sautéing), for 1 hour kills all spores on the exposed surface. This process of eliminating spores is very important, as spores of &quot;B. cereus&quot; are particularly resistant, even after pasteurization or exposure to gamma rays.

&quot;B. cereus&quot; and other members of &quot;Bacillus&quot; are not easily killed by alcohol; they have been known to colonize distilled liquors and alcohol-soaked swabs and pads in numbers sufficient to cause infection.

A study of an isolate of &quot;Bacillus cereus&quot; that was isolated from the stomach of a sheep was shown to be able to break down β-cypermethrin (β-CY) which has been known to be an antimicrobial agent. This strain, known as GW-01, can break down β-CY at a significant rate when the bacterial cells are in high concentrations relative to the antimicrobial agent. It has also been noted that the ability to break down β-CY is inducible. However, as the concentration of β-CY increases, the rate of β-CY degradation decreases. This suggests that the agent also functions as a toxin against the GW-01 strain. This is significant as it shows that in the right concentrations, β-CY can be used as an antimicrobial agent against &quot;Bacillus cereus&quot;.

==Diseases in aquatic animals==
&quot;Bacillus cereus&quot; group bacteria, notably &quot;B. cereus&quot; and &quot;B. thuringiensis&quot;, are also pathogenic to multiple aquatic organisms including Chinese softshell turtle (&quot;Pelodiscus sinensis&quot;), causing infection characterized by gross lesions such as hepatic congestion and enlarged spleen with high mortality.

== Bacteriophages ==
Bacteria of the &quot;B. cereus&quot; group are infected by bacteriophages belonging to the family Tectiviridae. This family includes tailless phages that have a lipid membrane or vesicle beneath the icosahedral protein shell and that are formed of approximately equal amounts of virus-encoded proteins and lipids derived from the host cell&#x27;s plasma membrane. Upon infection, the lipid membrane becomes a tail-like structure used in genome delivery. The genome is composed of about 15-kilobase, linear, double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) with long, inverted terminal-repeat sequences (100 base pairs). GIL01, Bam35, GIL16, AP50, and Wip1 are examples of temperate tectiviruses infecting the &quot;B. cereus&quot; group.

== See also ==
* &quot;Bacillus cereus&quot; biovar &quot;anthracis&quot;

== References ==
== External links ==
* Bacillus cereus genomes and related information at PATRIC, a Bioinformatics Resource Center funded by NIAID
* Type strain of &quot;Bacillus cereus&quot; at Bac&quot;Dive&quot; – the Bacterial Diversity Metadatabase</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="21" end="34" title="Gram-positive bacteria" label="Gram-positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q212032" start="35" end="45" title="Bacillus" label="rod-shaped"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="74" end="78" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="173" end="178" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q574816" start="226" end="236" title="blood agar" label="blood agar"/>
<link wikidata="Q272002" start="283" end="300" title="foodborne illness" label="foodborne illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816730" start="377" end="387" title="probiotics" label="probiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q193124" start="487" end="494" title="Aerobic organism" label="aerobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091848" start="498" end="518" title="facultative anaerobe" label="facultative anaerobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q212032" start="563" end="571" title="Bacillus" label="Bacillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q828761" start="602" end="611" title="endospore" label="endospore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623405" start="640" end="656" title="virulence factor" label="virulence factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q420248" start="669" end="684" title="phospholipase C" label="phospholipase C"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949467" start="686" end="695" title="cereulide" label="cereulide"/>
<link wikidata="Q425402" start="697" end="731" title="Metalloproteinase" label="sphingomyelinase, metalloproteases"/>
<link wikidata="Q117445535" start="737" end="748" title="cytotoxin K" label="cytotoxin K"/>
<link wikidata="Q905754" start="782" end="796" title="quorum sensing" label="quorum sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="836" end="845" title="Flagellum" label="flagellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33596" start="846" end="854" title="motility" label="motility"/>
<link wikidata="Q614156" start="1037" end="1049" title="Bacillus anthracis" label="B. anthracis"/>
<link wikidata="Q310467" start="1063" end="1079" title="Bacillus thuringiensis" label="B. thuringiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838972" start="1093" end="1104" title="Bacillus mycoides" label="B. mycoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836719" start="1118" end="1135" title="Bacillus pseudomycoides" label="B. pseudomycoides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1153" end="1167" title="Bacillus cytotoxicus" label="B. cytotoxicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838972" start="1244" end="1265" title="Bacillus weihenstephanensis" label="B. weihenstephanensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q541695" start="1710" end="1728" title="Percy F. Frankland" label="Percy F. Frankland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179254" start="1736" end="1744" title="gelatine" label="gelatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544127" start="1827" end="1842" title="FDA Warning Letter" label="warning letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="1857" end="1888" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="US Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180757" start="1899" end="1927" title="pharmaceutical manufacturing" label="pharmaceutical manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2128" end="2132" title="AlkC" label="AlkC"/>
<link wikidata="Q21400335" start="2137" end="2141" title="AlkD" label="AlkD"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="2173" end="2183" title="DNA repair" label="DNA repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753295" start="2233" end="2243" title="Bacillus (shape)" label="rod-shaped"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="2261" end="2274" title="Gram-positive bacteria" label="Gram-positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q193124" start="2325" end="2332" title="Aerobic organism" label="aerobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091848" start="2336" end="2360" title="Facultative anaerobic organism" label="facultatively anaerobic."/>
<link wikidata="Q669652" start="2378" end="2388" title="Mesophile" label="mesophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q828761" start="2597" end="2610" title="Bacterial spore" label="spore-forming"/>
<link wikidata="Q467410" start="2615" end="2622" title="biofilm" label="biofilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="3234" end="3246" title="peritrichous" label="peritrichous"/>
<link wikidata="Q134219" start="5786" end="5800" title="polysaccharide" label="polysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q212410" start="5822" end="5830" title="protease" label="protease"/>
<link wikidata="Q424469" start="6015" end="6019" title="Polyhydroxybutyrate" label="PHBs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037930" start="7212" end="7222" title="pan-genome" label="pan-genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q24722788" start="7487" end="7505" title="arginine deiminase" label="arginine deiminase"/>
<link wikidata="Q905754" start="7984" end="7998" title="Quorum sensing" label="quorum-sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q762045" start="8218" end="8234" title="Stationary phase (biology)" label="stationary phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="8843" end="8889" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270077" start="8974" end="8985" title="lecithinase" label="lecithinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q407646" start="9015" end="9023" title="mannitol" label="mannitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q575920" start="9047" end="9062" title="Selective medium" label="selective media"/>
<link wikidata="Q189790" start="9495" end="9511" title="Anaerobic organism" label="Anaerobic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q74148" start="9524" end="9544" title="Voges–Proskauer test" label="Voges Proskauer test"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="9675" end="9685" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q272467" start="9698" end="9715" title="Nitrogen fixation" label="Nitrate reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q188017" start="9743" end="9751" title="tyrosine" label="tyrosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="9808" end="9815" title="citrate" label="citrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="10310" end="10323" title="Metabolism" label="metabolically"/>
<link wikidata="Q929080" start="10372" end="10383" title="Fission (biology)" label="replicating"/>
<link wikidata="Q149128" start="10461" end="10468" title="Bacilli" label="Bacilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q520825" start="10562" end="10583" title="arbuscular mycorrhiza" label="arbuscular mycorrhiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934108" start="10595" end="10618" title="Rhizobium leguminosarum" label="Rhizobium leguminosarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q148675" start="10628" end="10634" title="Trifolium repens" label="clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q105789" start="10674" end="10685" title="Heavy metals" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="10686" end="10690" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q864231" start="10737" end="10752" title="bioaccumulation" label="bioaccumulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q816441" start="11235" end="11249" title="bioremediation" label="bioremediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189474" start="11561" end="11568" title="keratin" label="keratin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150839" start="11888" end="11898" title="Salmonella" label="Salmonella"/>
<link wikidata="Q131488" start="11915" end="11928" title="Campylobacter" label="Campylobacter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="11942" end="11945" title="Gut (zoology)" label="gut"/>
<link wikidata="Q20708283" start="12063" end="12069" title="cerein" label="cerein"/>
<link wikidata="Q804539" start="12124" end="12136" title="Bactericide" label="bactericidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="12171" end="12179" title="chickens" label="chickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9394" start="12181" end="12187" title="rabbit" label="rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="12193" end="12196" title="pig" label="pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441186" start="12270" end="12283" title="feed additive" label="feed additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="12338" end="12347" title="intestine" label="intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q185317" start="12353" end="12358" title="cecum" label="cecum"/>
<link wikidata="Q193237" start="12666" end="12678" title="biofungicide" label="biofungicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q26828071" start="12779" end="12803" title="Fusarium verticillioides" label="Fusarium verticillioides"/>
<link wikidata="Q422449" start="12853" end="12862" title="mycotoxin" label="mycotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="12881" end="12886" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="13005" end="13011" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="13013" end="13021" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="13027" end="13035" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q828761" start="13263" end="13269" title="Endospore" label="spores"/>
<link wikidata="Q747713" start="13338" end="13350" title="Refrigeration" label="refrigerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q913343" start="13617" end="13641" title="Psychrotrophic bacteria" label="grow at low temperatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q421978" start="13766" end="13777" title="enterotoxin" label="enterotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="13832" end="13834" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q193566" start="14108" end="14123" title="Incubation period" label="incubation time"/>
<link wikidata="Q309465" start="14346" end="14369" title="Clostridium perfringens" label="Clostridium perfringens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11090" start="14621" end="14636" title="small intestine" label="small intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="14871" end="14876" title="toxin" label="toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949467" start="14878" end="14887" title="cereulide" label="cereulide"/>
<link wikidata="Q188121" start="15091" end="15112" title="Staphylococcus aureus" label="Staphylococcus aureus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746278" start="15409" end="15418" title="hemolysin" label="hemolysin"/>
<link wikidata="Q421978" start="15442" end="15453" title="enterotoxin" label="enterotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q246181" start="15465" end="15474" title="cytotoxin" label="cytotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q310467" start="15702" end="15730" title="Bacillus thuringiensis" label="&amp;quot;B. thuringiensis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q614156" start="15735" end="15759" title="Bacillus anthracis" label="&amp;quot;B. anthracis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15961" end="15965" title="ClyA" label="ClyA"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="15975" end="15982" title="Escherichia coli" label="E. coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q310424" start="16043" end="16054" title="beta-barrel" label="beta-barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="16110" end="16121" title="hydrophobic" label="hydrophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192197" start="16157" end="16168" title="hydrophilic" label="hydrophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q389844" start="16211" end="16229" title="membrane potential" label="membrane potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949467" start="16459" end="16468" title="cereulide" label="cereulide"/>
<link wikidata="Q417504" start="16694" end="16705" title="valinomycin" label="valinomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623385" start="16724" end="16744" title="Streptomyces griseus" label="Streptomyces griseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443801" start="16764" end="16794" title="Nonribosomal peptide" label="nonribosomal peptide synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="16859" end="16868" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q382417" start="16921" end="16929" title="Afferent nerve fiber" label="afferent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062293" start="16930" end="16953" title="vagus nerve stimulation" label="vagus nerve stimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172778" start="17031" end="17038" title="plasmid" label="plasmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935986" start="17171" end="17184" title="anthrax toxin" label="anthrax toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145674" start="17530" end="17551" title="necrotizing fasciitis" label="necrotizing fasciitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q757838" start="17590" end="17599" title="keratitis" label="keratitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="18350" end="18358" title="catheter" label="catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q391744" start="18466" end="18478" title="hemodialysis" label="hemodialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054718" start="18506" end="18519" title="renal disease" label="renal disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q570920" start="18547" end="18556" title="tachypnea" label="tachypnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q886518" start="18584" end="18606" title="white blood cell count" label="white blood cell count"/>
<link wikidata="Q422766" start="18611" end="18646" title="high-sensitivity C-reactive protein" label="high-sensitivity C-reactive protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="18686" end="18696" title="CT imaging" label="CT imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q616003" start="18717" end="18732" title="aortic aneurysm" label="aortic aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q424027" start="18796" end="18806" title="vancomycin" label="vancomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13669486" start="18813" end="18828" title="fluoroquinolone" label="fluoroquinolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q272002" start="19234" end="19251" title="foodborne illness" label="foodborne illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192530" start="19649" end="19674" title="fulminant hepatic failure" label="fulminant hepatic failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q21653202" start="19717" end="19743" title="total parenteral nutrition" label="total parenteral nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="19794" end="19800" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q412024" start="20964" end="20976" title="cypermethrin" label="cypermethrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q754028" start="21817" end="21836" title="Pelodiscus sinensis" label="Pelodiscus sinensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q165028" start="22044" end="22057" title="bacteriophage" label="bacteriophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q569755" start="22083" end="22095" title="Tectivirus" label="Tectiviridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q423279" start="22146" end="22160" title="lipid membrane" label="lipid membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11367" start="22291" end="22296" title="lipid" label="lipid"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="22332" end="22347" title="Cell membrane" label="plasma membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="22474" end="22482" title="kilobase" label="kilobase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="22508" end="22511" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048217" start="22720" end="22776" title="Bacillus cereus biovar anthracis" label="&amp;quot;Bacillus cereus&amp;quot; biovar &amp;quot;anthracis&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40135" wikidata="Q750388" url="?curid=40135" title="Lumen gentium">
<text>, the Dogmatic Constitution on the Church, is one of the principal documents of the Second Vatican Council. This dogmatic constitution was promulgated by Pope Paul VI on 21 November 1964, following approval by the assembled bishops by a vote of 2,151 to 5. As is customary with significant Roman Catholic Church documents, it is known by its incipit, &quot;&quot;, Latin for &#x27;Light of the Nations&#x27;.

The eight chapters of the document can be paired thematically: chapters one and two treat the church&#x27;s nature and historical existence, chapters three and four treat different roles in the church, chapters five and six treat holiness and religious life, while chapters seven and eight discuss the saints and Mary.

==Contents==

===Chapter 1: The Mystery of the Church (1–8)===
In its first chapter on ecclesiology, the constitution states that &quot;all the just, from Adam and &#x27;from Abel, the just one, to the last of the elect,&#x27; will be gathered together with the Father in the universal Church[...] a people made one with the unity of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.&quot;(2) &quot;Christ made His brothers, called together from all nations, mystically the components of His own Body.&quot;(7)

It goes on to describe &quot;the sole Church of Christ which in the Creed is professed as one, holy, catholic and apostolic, which our Saviour, after His Resurrection, commissioned Peter to shepherd, and him and the other apostles to extend and direct with authority, which He erected for all ages as &#x27;the pillar and mainstay of the truth.&#x27; This Church, constituted and organized as a society in the present world, subsists in the Catholic Church, which is governed by the successor of Peter and by the bishops in communion with him, although many elements of sanctification and of truth are found outside its visible confines.&quot;(8)

Pope Francis has taken a central theme of his pontificate from § 8 on the Church following Christ in his poverty and humility in order to bring the Good News to the poor.

===Chapter 2: On The People of God (9–17)===

====Church is the people of God====
One of the key portions of is its second chapter, with its declaration that the Church is &quot;the People of God&quot;:
====Common and ministerial priesthoods====

The three-fold ministry of Christ is also exercised by every baptized. Thus in a sense all the baptized share in the priesthood of Christ:

====Possibility of salvation for those outside the Church====
In the second chapter, the Council teaches that God wills to save people not just as individuals but as a people. For this reason God chose the Israelite people to be his own people and established a covenant with it, as a preparation and figure of the covenant ratified in Christ that constitutes the new People of God, which would be one, not according to the flesh, but in the Spirit and which is called the Church of Christ.(9)

Consequently, &quot;it [the Council] teaches that the Church, now sojourning on earth as an exile, is necessary for salvation. Christ, present to us in His Body, which is the Church, is the one Mediator and the unique way of salvation.&quot; Those who &quot;knowing that the Catholic Church was made necessary by Christ, would refuse to enter or to remain in it, could not be saved.&quot;(14)

All human beings are called to belong to the Church. Not all are yet fully incorporated into the Church, but &quot;the Church recognizes that in many ways she is linked with those who, being baptized, are honored with the name of Christian, though they do not profess the faith in its entirety or do not preserve unity of communion with the successor of Peter.&quot;(15) In addition, the Council describes how non-Christians and non-theists are related to the Church and that God does not deny them the helps necessary for salvation:

====New Evangelization====
The New Evangelization message in the Catholic Church is rooted in LG 17 and is one of the signs that the Church is seeking to fulfill . As the Father sent the Son, so he too sent the Apostles (Matthew 28:18–20).

===Chapter 3: The Hierarchical Structure of the Church and In Particular on the Episcopate (18–29)===
The third chapter of the document, which spoke of the bishops as a &quot;college&quot;(22) that, within the Church, succeeds to the place of the &quot;college&quot; or &quot;stable group&quot; of the apostles(19) and is &quot;the subject of supreme and full power over the universal Church, provided we understand this body together with its head, the Roman Pontiff.&quot;(22)

Conservative bishops in the council were fearful that the idea of the College of Bishops would be interpreted as a new conciliarism, a 15th-century idea that an ecumenical council was the supreme authority under Christ in the Catholic Church. Of the members of the council, 322, a substantial minority, voted against any mention whatever in the document of a &quot;college&quot; of bishops), and were now proposing 47 amendments to chapter III. Accordingly, a &quot;Preliminary Note of Explanation&quot; (in Latin, , often referred to as &quot;the &quot;) intended to reconcile them with the text was added on 16 November 1964. The Note reaffirmed that the college of bishops exercises its authority only with the assent of the pope, thus safeguarding the primacy and pastoral independence of the pope.

The Note achieved its purpose: on the following day, 17 November, the No votes against chapter III dropped to 46, a number that may have included some who opposed it because they felt the Preliminary Note of Explanation had weakened the concept of collegiality. In the final vote on 18 November only five of the 2200+ participants voted against the dogmatic constitution as a whole.

The Note is introduced by the following words: &quot;A preliminary note of explanation is being given to the Council Fathers from higher authority, regarding the Modi bearing on Chapter III of the Schema de Ecclesia; the doctrine set forth in Chapter III ought to be explained and understood in accordance with the meaning and intent of this explanatory note.&quot; &quot;Higher authority&quot; refers to the Pope, Paul VI, and &quot;the Schema de Ecclesia&quot; to the draft text for the dogmatic constitution . By &quot;the Modi&quot; is meant the proposals for amendments of that draft text which some of the Council participants had presented.

The Note was thus added by papal authority, consistently with the idea that the consent of the Pope, as head of the College of Bishops was necessary, and that he had the &quot;right to make his consent dependent on an interpretation determined in advance&quot;.

The Preliminary Note of Explanation did not in fact alter the value of the statement on collegiality in the text of : it &quot;strengthened the adherence to the doctrine of the First Vatican Council on the primacy, but it did not subsequently strike out anything from the direct divine origin of the episcopal office and its function, and the responsibility of the College of Bishops for the Universal Church.&quot;

Part 4 of the Note reads:

Bishop Christopher Butler, a major contributor to the council and strong proponent of its teachings, finds that the document gives a &quot;reaffirmation&quot; to &quot;a genuine sacramental episcopal collegiality&quot; which was thrown into the background by the premature ending of Vatican I. He goes on to say:

He concludes that the Church which makes contemporary the saving truth of the gospel &quot;is the sign and the instrument of the unity of the whole human race.&quot;

This part of the document also endorsed the revival of the office of deacon as found in the early church, as a permanent vocation rather than a stage through which candidates for the priesthood pass, as had been the case since about the 5th century, and that it should open to married men. It said that:

===Chapter 4: The Laity (30–38)===

=== Chapter 5: The Universal Call to Holiness in the Church (39–42) ===
The theme of the universal call to holiness was built on in the fifth chapter:

=== Chapter 6: The Religious (43–47) ===
&quot;The religious state clearly manifests that the Kingdom of God and its needs, in a very special way, are raised above all earthly considerations. Finally it clearly shows all men both the unsurpassed breadth of the strength of Christ the King and the infinite power of the Holy Spirit marvelously working in the Church.&quot; It is considered a &quot;deepening of the baptismal character&quot;. The religious life is conducive to the building up of other persons and of the world in Christ.

=== Chapter 7: The Eschatological Nature of the Pilgrim Church and Its Union with the Church in Heaven (48–51) ===
Chapter 7 affirms the oneness of the Church on earth with the Church in heaven. It makes an indirect allusion to the future fulfillment of Bible prophecy in history. It continues themes of sanctification and holiness from earlier sections. It affirms the ancient Church practices of remembering the saints and imploring their intercession. It affirms &quot;the sacred Liturgy, wherein the power of the Holy Spirit acts upon us through sacramental signs&quot; and anticipates worship in heaven.

=== Chapter 8: The Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of God, in the Mystery of Christ and the Church (52–69) ===
The chapter on Mary was the subject of debate. Original plans had called for a separate document about the role of Mary, keeping the document on the Church &quot;ecumenical,&quot; in the sense of &quot;non-offensive&quot; to Protestant Christians, who viewed special veneration of Mary with suspicion. However, the Council Fathers insisted, with the support of the Pope, that, as Mary&#x27;s place is within the Church, treatment of her should appear within the Constitution on the Church.

Vatican II was sensitive to the views of other Christians, as the council, at the request of Pope John XXIII, hoped to promote Christian unity, but knew there are different concepts about Mary among other Christians, especially Protestants. The council in its one mention of Mary as &quot;Mediatrix&quot;, spoke of her as strengthening – not lessening – confidence in Christ as the one essential Mediator. The council, in speaking of Mary, used a biblical approach, with strong emphasis on her pilgrimage of faith. They also drew heavily from the Fathers of the Church, which Christians of all denominations respect.

Pope Paul VI, in a speech to the council fathers, called the document &quot;a vast synthesis of the Catholic doctrine regarding the place which the Blessed Mary occupies in the mystery of Christ and of the Church.&quot;

Bishop Christopher Butler mentions that prior to Vatican II the one area where Catholic theology was allowed to develop uncritically, apart from the total life of theology, was in devotion to Mary, so that &quot;it began to seem that the Catholicism of the future would approximate more and more to the condition of an Italian tribal cult.&quot; This century-long drift was brought to an end by the Council on October 29, 1963, &quot;a fixed point of the Marian paradigm shift,&quot; the date on which the Council decided, in a very close vote, to not give Mary a separate document but to situate her properly within the larger Church.

==Issues surrounding the document==

===Contributors===
Marie Rosaire Gagnebet O.P. (1904–1983) professor of theology at the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas, &quot;Angelicum&quot; from 1938 to 1976 and during Vatican II, was influential in the redaction of the .

===Traditionalist reaction===
Certain Traditionalist Catholic groups, particularly Sedevacantists, consider to be the demarcation of when the Roman Church fell into heresy, pointing to the use of &quot;subsistit in&quot; rather than &quot;est&quot; as an abdication of the Church&#x27;s historic (and to them compulsory) identification of itself alone as God&#x27;s church. In an interview with the , Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger responded to this criticism:

===Possibility of salvation outside the Catholic Church===
One point of confusion was the document&#x27;s treatment of the possibility of salvation outside of the Catholic Church. In 2000, Pope John Paul II issued with the theme of &quot;the unicity and salvific universality of Jesus Christ and the Church&quot;. He also stated earlier in the encyclical, , &quot;The universality of salvation means that it is granted not only to those who explicitly believe in Christ and have entered the Church.&quot; This affirmed the belief that not only Catholics can achieve salvation and sanctification. Such a belief would prove to be controversial among many traditionalist Catholics, even to this day.

==See also==
* Light unto the nations

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==
* English translation of &quot;Lumen gentium&quot; on the website of the Holy See</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q750388" start="0" end="0" title="Lumen gentium" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q750388" start="6" end="41" title="Lumen gentium" label="Dogmatic Constitution on the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="84" end="106" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q620035" start="113" end="134" title="dogmatic constitution" label="dogmatic constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="154" end="166" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="290" end="311" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161138" start="342" end="349" title="incipit" label="incipit"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="365" end="370" title="Latin (language)" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502643" start="1658" end="1669" title="&amp;quot;Subsistit in&amp;quot; in Lumen Gentium" label="subsists in"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="1881" end="1893" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48968314" start="3895" end="3913" title="New Evangelization" label="New Evangelization"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="4407" end="4415" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163981" start="4704" end="4716" title="conciliarism" label="conciliarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="5093" end="5098" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="6188" end="6195" title="Paul VI" label="Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039893" start="7136" end="7154" title="Christopher Butler (bishop)" label="Christopher Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894109" start="8040" end="8066" title="universal call to holiness" label="universal call to holiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062893" start="8517" end="8536" title="Sacramental character" label="baptismal character"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="9373" end="9377" title="Mary (mother of Jesus)" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="9520" end="9530" title="Ecumenism" label="ecumenical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582954" start="10138" end="10147" title="Mediatrix" label="Mediatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="10615" end="10627" title="Blessed Virgin Mary" label="Blessed Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039893" start="10695" end="10713" title="Christopher Butler (bishop)" label="Christopher Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="11404" end="11408" title="Dominican Order" label="O.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q246887" start="11450" end="11516" title="Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas" label="Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas, &amp;quot;Angelicum&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q199993" start="11639" end="11662" title="Traditionalist Catholic" label="Traditionalist Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48124" start="11684" end="11698" title="Sedevacantism" label="Sedevacantists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502643" start="11803" end="11815" title="&amp;quot;Subsistit in&amp;quot; in Lumen Gentium" label="subsistit in"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="12011" end="12027" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Joseph Ratzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="12247" end="12264" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q192054" start="12624" end="12633" title="salvation" label="salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="12638" end="12652" title="sanctification" label="sanctification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903457" start="12771" end="12793" title="Light unto the nations" label="Light unto the nations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40137" wikidata="Q786393" url="?curid=40137" title="Dei verbum">
<text>Dei verbum, the Second Vatican Council&#x27;s Dogmatic Constitution on Divine Revelation, was promulgated by Pope Paul VI on 18 November 1965, following approval by the assembled bishops by a vote of 2,344 to 6. It is one of the principal documents of the Second Vatican Council.

The phrase &quot;Dei verbum&quot; is Latin for &quot;Word of God&quot; and is taken from the first line of the document, as is customary for titles of major Catholic documents.

==Contents==
===Concerning sacred Tradition and sacred Scripture===
In Chapter II under the heading &quot;Handing On Divine Revelation&quot; the Constitution states among other points:

Hence there exists a close connection and communication between sacred Tradition and sacred Scripture. For both of them, flowing from the same divine wellspring, in a certain way merge into a unity and tend toward the same end. For Sacred Scripture is the word of God inasmuch as it is consigned to writing under the inspiration of the divine Spirit, while sacred tradition takes the word of God entrusted by Christ the Lord and the Holy Spirit to the Apostles, and hands it on to their successors in its full purity, so that led by the light of the Spirit of truth, they may in proclaiming it preserve this word of God faithfully, explain it, and make it more widely known. Consequently it is not from Sacred Scripture alone that the Church draws her certainty about everything which has been revealed. Therefore both sacred tradition and Sacred Scripture are to be accepted and venerated with the same sense of loyalty and reverence.

The Word of God is transmitted both through the canonical texts of Sacred Scripture, and through Sacred Tradition, which includes various forms such as liturgy, prayers, and the teachings of the Apostles and their successors. The Church looks to Tradition as a protection against errors that could arise from private interpretation.

===Concerning the inspiration and interpretation of sacred Scripture===

The teaching of the Magisterium on the interpretation of Scripture was summarized in DV 12, expressly devoted to biblical interpretation. Dei Verbum distinguished between two levels of meaning, the literal sense intended by the biblical writers and the further understanding that may be attained due to context within the whole of Scripture.

===The Old Testament (14–16)===

In Chapter IV, Dei Verbum affirms the saying of Augustine that &quot;the New Testament is hidden in the Old, and that the Old Testament is manifest in the New&quot; (DV 16).

===Sacred Scripture in the Life of the Church===
&quot;Easy access to Sacred Scripture should be provided for all the Christian faithful.&quot; To this end the Church sees to it that suitable and correct translations are made into different languages, especially from the original texts of the sacred books. Frequent reading of the divine Scriptures is encouraged for all the Christian faithful, and prayer should accompany the reading of Sacred Scripture, &quot;so that God and man may talk together&quot;. Some are ordained to preach the Word, while others reveal Christ in the way they live and interact in the world.

==Scholarly opinion==

The schema, or draft document, prepared for the first council session (October–December 1962) reflected the conservative theology of the Holy Office under Cardinal Ottaviani. Pope John intervened directly to promote instead the preparation of a new draft which was assigned to a mixed commission of conservatives and progressives, and it was this on which the final document was based. The final draft was significantly influenced by the work of Dominican theologian Yves Congar, who had been appointed a &quot;peritus&quot; (expert advisor) at the council.

Joseph Ratzinger, later Pope Benedict XVI, identified three overall themes in &quot;Dei verbum&quot;: (1) the new view of the phenomenon of tradition; (2) the theological problem of the application of critical historical methods to the interpretation of Scripture; and (3) the biblical movement that had been growing from the turn of the twentieth century.

Regarding article 1 of the preface of &quot;Dei verbum&quot;, Ratzinger wrote: &quot;The brief form of the Preface and the barely concealed illogicalities that it contains betray clearly the confusion from which it has emerged.&quot;

==Biblical infallibility and inerrancy==

The Catechism states that &quot;the books of Scripture firmly, faithfully, and without error teach that truth which God, for the sake of our salvation, wished to see confided to the Sacred Scriptures.&quot;

Nevertheless, the Catechism clearly states that &quot;the Christian faith is not a &#x27;religion of the book.&#x27; Christianity is the religion of the &#x27;Word&#x27; of God, a word which is &#x27;not a written and mute word, but the Word is incarnate and living&#x27;. If the Scriptures are not to remain a dead letter, Christ, the eternal Word of the living God, must, through the Holy Spirit, &#x27;open [our] minds to understand the Scriptures.&#x27;&quot;

The Catechism goes on to state that &quot;In Sacred Scripture, God speaks to man in a human way. To interpret Scripture correctly, the reader must be attentive to what the human authors truly wanted to affirm, and to what God wanted to reveal to us by their words.&quot;

&quot;But since Sacred Scripture is inspired, there is another and no less important principle of correct interpretation, without which Scripture would remain a dead letter. &#x27;Sacred Scripture must be read and interpreted in the light of the same Spirit by whom it was written.&#x27;&quot;
There was a controversy during the Council on whether the Roman Catholic Church taught biblical infallibility or biblical inerrancy. Some have interpreted &quot;Dei verbum&quot; as teaching the infallibility position, while others note that the conciliar document often quotes previous documents such as &quot;Providentissimus Deus&quot; and &quot;Divino afflante Spiritu&quot; that suggest inerrancy.

== See also ==
* Divino afflante Spiritu
* Verbum Domini

==Footnotes==
===Works cited===
*&quot;Commentary on the Documents of Vatican II&quot;, volume III, edited by Herbert Vorgrimler, chapter on the Dogmatic Constitution on Divine Revelation, written by Joseph Ratzinger, Aloys Grillmeier, and Béda Rigaux, Herder and Herder, New York, 1969.

==Further reading==
*&quot;The Gift of Scripture&quot;, &quot;Published as a teaching document of the Bishops&#x27; Conferences of England, Wales and Scotland&quot; (2005), The Catholic Truth Society, Ref. SC 80, .
*&quot;Scripture: Dei Verbum (Rediscovering Vatican II)&quot;, by Ronald D. Witherup, .
* 
* Witherup, Ronald D., &quot;The Word of God at Vatican II: Exploring Dei Verbum&quot;, Collegeville, Minnesota: Liturgical Press, 2014.

== Further reading ==

*Arthur Wells, &quot;Bishop Christopher Butler OSB – His Rôle in Dei Verbum&quot;, Part 1 – Part 2
*Bernard Orchard OSB, &quot;Dei Verbum and the Synoptic Gospels&quot; (1990)
*Brian W. Harrison, O.S., &quot;On Rewriting the Bible&quot; (2002) 

==External links==
*Dogmatic Constitution on Divine Revelation – &quot;Dei verbum&quot; (English translation on the Vatican website)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="16" end="38" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q786393" start="46" end="88" title="Dei verbum" label="Dogmatic Constitution on Divine Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="109" end="121" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="318" end="323" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161138" start="374" end="400" title="Incipit" label="first line of the document"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="438" end="446" title="Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485951" start="2009" end="2020" title="Magisterium" label="Magisterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="2413" end="2422" title="Augustine" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="3322" end="3333" title="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith" label="Holy Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q363970" start="3652" end="3663" title="Yves Congar" label="Yves Congar"/>
<link wikidata="Q476451" start="3696" end="3703" title="peritus" label="peritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="3744" end="3760" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Joseph Ratzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q75561" start="4383" end="4392" title="Catechism of the Catholic Church" label="Catechism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="5676" end="5697" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235794" start="5705" end="5727" title="biblical infallibility" label="biblical infallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q158857" start="5731" end="5749" title="biblical inerrancy" label="biblical inerrancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235053" start="5928" end="5949" title="Providentissimus Deus" label="Providentissimus Deus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230698" start="5966" end="5989" title="Divino afflante Spiritu" label="Divino afflante Spiritu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230698" start="6038" end="6061" title="Divino afflante Spiritu" label="Divino afflante Spiritu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304566" start="6064" end="6077" title="Verbum Domini" label="Verbum Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q63842" start="6297" end="6313" title="Aloys Grillmeier" label="Aloys Grillmeier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40138" wikidata="Q762045" url="?curid=40138" title="Bacterial growth">
<text>Bacterial growth is proliferation of bacterium into two daughter cells, in a process called binary fission. Providing no mutation event occurs, the resulting daughter cells are genetically identical to the original cell. Hence, bacterial growth occurs. Both daughter cells from the division do not necessarily survive. However, if the surviving number exceeds unity on average, the bacterial population undergoes exponential growth. The measurement of an exponential bacterial growth curve in batch culture was traditionally a part of the training of all microbiologists; the basic means requires bacterial enumeration (cell counting) by direct and individual (microscopic, flow cytometry), direct and bulk (biomass), indirect and individual (colony counting), or indirect and bulk (most probable number, turbidity, nutrient uptake) methods. Models reconcile theory with the measurements.

==Phases==

In autecological studies, the growth of bacteria (or other microorganisms, as protozoa, microalgae or yeasts) in batch culture can be modeled with four different phases: lag phase (A), log phase or exponential phase (B), stationary phase (C), and death phase (D).
# During lag phase, bacteria adapt themselves to growth conditions. It is the period where the individual bacteria are maturing and not yet able to divide. During the lag phase of the bacterial growth cycle, the synthesis of RNA, enzymes and other molecules occurs. During the lag phase cells change very little because the cells do not immediately reproduce in a new medium. This period of little to no cell division is called the lag phase and can last for 1 hour to several days. During this phase cells are not dormant.
# The log phase (sometimes called the logarithmic phase or the &quot;exponential phase&quot;) is a period characterized by cell doubling. The number of new bacteria appearing per unit time is proportional to the present population. If growth is not limited, doubling will continue at a constant rate so both the number of cells and the rate of population increase doubles with each consecutive time period. For this type of exponential growth, plotting the natural logarithm of cell number against time produces a straight line. The slope of this line is the specific growth rate of the organism, which is a measure of the number of divisions per cell per unit time. The actual rate of this growth (i.e. the slope of the line in the figure) depends upon the growth conditions, which affect the frequency of cell division events and the probability of both daughter cells surviving. Under controlled conditions, cyanobacteria can double their population four times a day and then they can triple their population. Exponential growth cannot continue indefinitely, however, because the medium is soon depleted of nutrients and enriched with wastes.
# The stationary phase is often due to a growth-limiting factor such as the depletion of an essential nutrient, and/or the formation of an inhibitory product such as an organic acid. Stationary phase results from a situation in which growth rate and death rate are equal. The number of new cells created is limited by the growth factor and as a result the rate of cell growth matches the rate of cell death. The result is a “smooth,” horizontal linear part of the curve during the stationary phase. Mutations can occur during stationary phase. Bridges et al. (2001) presented evidence that DNA damage is responsible for many of the mutations arising in the genomes of stationary phase or starving bacteria. Endogenously generated reactive oxygen species appear to be a major source of such damages. Bacteria in this phase sometimes enter dormancy, using hibernation factors to slow their metabolism.
#At death phase (decline phase), bacteria die. This could be caused by lack of nutrients, environmental temperature above or below the tolerance band for the species, or other injurious conditions.
This basic batch culture growth model draws out and emphasizes aspects of bacterial growth which may differ from the growth of macrofauna. It emphasizes clonality, asexual binary division, the short development time relative to replication itself, the seemingly low death rate, the need to move from a dormant state to a reproductive state or to condition the media, and finally, the tendency of lab adapted strains to exhaust their nutrients. In reality, even in batch culture, the four phases are not well defined. The cells do not reproduce in synchrony without explicit and continual prompting (as in experiments with stalked bacteria ) and their exponential phase growth is often not ever a constant rate, but instead a slowly decaying rate, a constant stochastic response to pressures both to reproduce and to go dormant in the face of declining nutrient concentrations and increasing waste concentrations.

The decrease in number of bacteria may even become logarithmic. Hence, this phase of growth may also be called as negative logarithmic or negative exponential growth phase.

Near the end of the logarithmic phase of a batch culture, competence for natural genetic transformation may be induced, as in &quot;Bacillus subtilis&quot; and in other bacteria. Natural genetic transformation is a form of DNA transfer that appears to be an adaptation for repairing DNA damages.

Batch culture is the most common laboratory growth method in which bacterial growth is studied, but it is only one of many. It is ideally spatially unstructured and temporally structured. The bacterial culture is incubated in a closed vessel with a single batch of medium. In some experimental regimes, some of the bacterial culture is periodically removed and added to fresh sterile medium. In the extreme case, this leads to the continual renewal of the nutrients. This is a chemostat, also known as continuous culture. It is ideally spatially unstructured and temporally unstructured, in a steady state defined by the rates of nutrient supply and bacterial growth. In comparison to batch culture, bacteria are maintained in exponential growth phase, and the growth rate of the bacteria is known. Related devices include turbidostats and auxostats. When &quot;Escherichia coli&quot; is growing very slowly with a doubling time of 16 hours in a chemostat most cells have a single chromosome.

Bacterial growth can be suppressed with bacteriostats, without necessarily killing the bacteria. Certain toxins can be used to suppress bacterial growth or kill bacteria. Antibiotics (or, more properly, antibacterial drugs) are drugs used to kill bacteria; they can have side effects or even cause adverse reactions in people, however they are not classified as toxins. In a synecological, true-to-nature situation in which more than one bacterial species is present, the growth of microbes is more dynamic and continual.

Liquid is not the only laboratory environment for bacterial growth. Spatially structured environments such as biofilms or agar surfaces present additional complex growth models.

== The 5th phase: Long-term stationary phase ==
Long-term stationary phase, unlike early stationary phase (in which there is little cell division), is a highly dynamic period in which the birth and death rates are balanced. It&#x27;s been proven that after death phase &quot;E. coli&quot; can be maintained in batch culture for long periods without adding nutrients. By providing sterile distilled water to maintain volume and osmolarity, aerobically grown cultures can be maintained at densities of ~106 colony-forming units (CFUs) per ml for more than 5 years without the addition of nutrients in batch culture.

==Environmental conditions==

Environmental factors influence rate of bacterial growth such as acidity (pH), temperature, water activity, macro and micro nutrients, oxygen levels, and toxins. Conditions tend to be relatively consistent between bacteria with the exception of extremophiles. Bacterium have optimal growth conditions under which they thrive, but once outside of those conditions the stress can result in either reduced or stalled growth, dormancy (such as formation spores), or death. Maintaining sub-optimal growth conditions is a key principle to food preservation.

===Temperature===
Low temperatures tend to reduce growth rates which has led to refrigeration being instrumental in food preservation. Depending on temperature, bacteria can be classified as:

* Psychrophiles
Psychrophiles are extremophilic cold-loving bacteria or archaea with an optimal temperature for growth at about 15 °C or lower (maximal temperature for growth at 20 °C, minimal temperature for growth at 0 °C or lower). Psychrophiles are typically found in Earth&#x27;s extremely cold ecosystems, such as polar ice-cap regions, permafrost, polar surface, and deep oceans.
* Mesophiles
Mesophiles are bacteria that thrive at moderate temperatures, growing best between 20° and 45 °C. These temperatures align with the natural body temperatures of humans, which is why many human pathogens are mesophiles.
* Thermophiles
Survive under temperatures of 45–80 °C.

===Acidity===
Optimal acidity for bacteria tends to be around pH 6.5 to 7.0 with the exception of acidophiles. Some bacteria can change the pH such as by excreting acid resulting in sub-optimal conditions.

===Water activity===
===Oxygen===
Bacteria can be aerobes or anaerobes. Depending on the degree of oxygen required bacteria can fall into the following classes:

# facultative-anaerobes-ie aerotolerant absence or minimal oxygen required for their growth
# obligate-anaerobes grow only in complete absence of oxygen
# facultative aerobes-can grow either in presence or minimal oxygen
# obligate aerobes-grow only in the presence of oxygen

===Micronutrients===
Ample nutrients

===Toxic compounds===
Toxic compounds such as ethanol can hinder growth or kill bacteria. This is used beneficially for disinfection and in food preservation.

==See also==
* Monod equation
* Michaelis–Menten kinetics
*Cell proliferation

==References==
==External links==

*An examination of the exponential growth of bacterial populations
*Science aid: Bacterial Growth High school (GCSE, Alevel) resource.
*Microbial Growth, BioMineWiki 
*From the &quot;Wolfram Demonstrations Project&quot; — requires CDF player (free):
**The Final Number of Bacterial Cells
**Simulating Microbial Count Records with an Expanded Fermi Solution Model
**Incipient Growth Processes with Competing Mechanisms
**Modified Logistic Isothermal Microbial Growth Ratio
**Generalized Logistic (Verhulst) Isothermal Microbial Growth
**Microbial Population Growth, Mortality, and Transitions between Them
**Diauxic Growth of Bacteria on Two Substrates

&quot;This article includes material from an article posted on 26 April 2003 on Nupedia; written by Nagina Parmar; reviewed and approved by the Biology group; editor, Gaytha Langlois; lead reviewer, Gaytha Langlois; lead copyeditors, Ruth Ifcher. and Jan Hogle.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q762045" start="0" end="16" title="Bacterial growth" label="Bacterial growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="37" end="46" title="Bacteria" label="bacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q929080" start="92" end="106" title="binary fission" label="binary fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q582659" start="413" end="431" title="exponential growth" label="exponential growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q898574" start="805" end="814" title="turbidity" label="turbidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049866" start="905" end="918" title="population ecology" label="autecological"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="980" end="988" title="protozoa" label="protozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q589518" start="990" end="1000" title="microalgae" label="microalgae"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="1004" end="1009" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="1186" end="1194" title="bacterium" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="1272" end="1280" title="bacterium" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="2155" end="2164" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="2601" end="2614" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="3335" end="3343" title="Mutation" label="Mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q762045" start="3362" end="3378" title="Stationary phase (biology)" label="stationary phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205747" start="3426" end="3436" title="DNA damage (naturally occurring)" label="DNA damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q424361" start="3566" end="3589" title="reactive oxygen species" label="reactive oxygen species"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3674" end="3682" title="Dormancy#Bacteria" label="dormancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q126910645" start="3690" end="3709" title="Hibernation factor" label="hibernation factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q461499" start="5095" end="5125" title="transformation (genetics)" label="natural genetic transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131238" start="5154" end="5171" title="Bacillus subtilis" label="Bacillus subtilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q902311" start="5796" end="5805" title="chemostat" label="chemostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853757" start="6142" end="6153" title="turbidostat" label="turbidostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827333" start="6159" end="6167" title="auxostat" label="auxostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="6181" end="6197" title="Escherichia coli" label="Escherichia coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q223417" start="6353" end="6365" title="bacteriostat" label="bacteriostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608096" start="6688" end="6701" title="community ecology" label="synecological"/>
<link wikidata="Q177998" start="6958" end="6962" title="agar" label="agar"/>
<link wikidata="Q954757" start="7520" end="7540" title="colony-forming units" label="colony-forming units"/>
<link wikidata="Q206912" start="7905" end="7918" title="extremophiles" label="extremophiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q828761" start="8110" end="8116" title="bacterial spore" label="spores"/>
<link wikidata="Q173514" start="8193" end="8210" title="food preservation" label="food preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q913343" start="8422" end="8434" title="Psychrophile" label="Psychrophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q669652" start="8806" end="8815" title="Mesophile" label="Mesophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q196188" start="9179" end="9190" title="acidophiles" label="acidophiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q193124" start="9338" end="9345" title="aerobes" label="aerobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189790" start="9349" end="9358" title="anaerobes" label="anaerobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="9811" end="9818" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q73984" start="9885" end="9897" title="disinfection" label="disinfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q274579" start="9905" end="9922" title="preservative" label="food preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944979" start="9940" end="9954" title="Monod equation" label="Monod equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q613955" start="9957" end="9982" title="Michaelis–Menten kinetics" label="Michaelis–Menten kinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189101" start="9984" end="10002" title="Cell proliferation" label="Cell proliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632017" start="10222" end="10252" title="Wolfram Demonstrations Project" label="Wolfram Demonstrations Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q17458" start="10772" end="10779" title="Nupedia" label="Nupedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40139" wikidata="Q136602" url="?curid=40139" title="Bdellovibrio">
<text>Bdellovibrio is a genus of gram-negative, obligate aerobic bacteria. One of the more notable characteristics of this genus is that members can prey upon other gram-negative bacteria and feed on the biopolymers, e.g. proteins and nucleic acids, of their hosts. They have two lifestyles: a host-dependent, highly mobile phase, the &quot;attack phase&quot;, in which they form &quot;bdelloplasts&quot; in their host bacteria; and a slow-growing, irregularly shaped, host-independent form.

==Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus==
The most well studied of these is &quot;Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus&quot;, which is found almost exclusively in host dependent growth in nature. In this free swimming attack form after searching for prey using its pili, it burrows through the host outer membrane/ peptidoglycan cell wall and enters the periplasmic space. The &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; bacterium then forms a structure called a bdelloplast. This bdelloplast is created as the host cell is modified to become spherical in shape. Inside the bdelloplast, the singular large flagellum of the predatory Bdellovibrio is lost. The host cell is then rapidly killed allowing the passage of molecules from the interior of the host cytoplasm through to the periplasm freely, and the periplasm dwelling &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; to feed. Using some of these molecules the &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; creates a protective environment by reinforcing the peptidoglycan cell wall of the host in which it now dwells using amidases and transpeptidases. After around 4hrs, depending on ambient temperature, the &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; has increased in size dramatically through this nourishment. It divides to replicate and then leaves via a final lysis of the host&#x27;s cell wall and membranes. The newly emerging &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; use their newly grown powerful flagella to swim away and find the next suitable host. Because of this intermittent bdelloplast stage, and momentary parasitic phase (15-20 mins), &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; could be considered bacterial predators or parasites.

&quot;Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus&quot; was first described by Stolp and Petzold in 1962. In 2012 another member of the Bdellovibrio species was identified &quot;Bdellovibrio tiberius&quot; of the River tiber. This species is more capable of host-independent growth.

Little is known of &quot;Bdellovibrio exovorus&quot;, an extra-parasitic bdellovibrio, which cannot enter its prey, and does not form Bdelloplasts.

==Appearance ==
Under a light microscope, host-dependent &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; appears to be a comma-shaped motile rod that is about 0.3–0.5 by 0.5–1.4 μm in size with a barely discernible flagellum. &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; show up as a growing clear plaque in an &quot;E. coli&quot; &quot;lawn&quot;. Notably, &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; has a sheath that covers its flagellum – a rare feature for bacteria. Flagellar motion stops once &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; has penetrated its prey, and the flagella is then shed.

Host-independent Bdellovibrio appear amorphous, and larger than the predatory phase.

== Culture conditions ==
&quot;B. bacteriovorus&quot; appears to be ubiquitous in nature and manmade habitats. They have been found in soil samples, rhizosphere of plant roots, rivers, oceans, sewage, intestines and feces of birds and mammals, and even in oyster shells and the gills of crabs. &quot;B. bacteriovorus&quot; are able to thrive in almost any habitat, the general requirements are that there needs to be oxygen and some other gram-negative bacteria present in its environment. Its optimal temperature is between 28-30 °C, making &quot;B. bacteriovorus&quot; a mesophile. &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; is grown in the laboratory in its stationary HI (host-independent) phase at 29 °C on yeast peptone broth agar. Host-dependent (predatory) cultures are grown with a population of &quot;E. coli&quot; S-17 at 29 °C for 16 hrs. They may also be cultured using YPSC (yeast extract, peptone, sodium acetate, calcium chloride) overlays or prey lysates.

== Life cycle and parasitism ==
&quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; cells can swim as fast as 160 μm/s, or over 100 times their body-length per second. It swims using a single sheathed polar flagellum with a characteristic dampened filament waveform. &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; attacks other gram-negative bacteria by attaching itself to the prey cell&#x27;s outer membrane and peptidoglycan layer, after which it creates a small hole in the outer membrane. The &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; cell then enters the host periplasmic space. It remains reversibly attached to it for a short &quot;recognition&quot; period.

After the recognition period, it becomes irreversibly attached via the pole opposite the flagellum. Once inside the periplasm, the &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; cell seals the membrane hole and converts the host cell to a spherical morphology, this is due to secretion of , transpeptidases which breaks the peptidoglycan apart, and therefore causes the cell to become amorphous. The two-cell complex formed is called a bdelloplast. The &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; cell uses hydrolytic enzymes to break down the host cell molecules, which it uses to grow filamentously. When the host cell nutrients are exhausted, the filament septates to form progeny &quot;Bdellovibrios&quot;. The progeny become motile before they lyse the host cell and are released into the environment. The entire life cycle takes three to four hours, and produces an average of 3–6 progeny cells from a single &quot;E. coli&quot;, or up to 90 from larger prey such as filamentous &quot;E. coli&quot;.

Targets of &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; species, including &quot;Vibrio vulnificus&quot;, may undergo co-infection by &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; and bacteriophage. Although the &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot; rounding of prey is thought to be evolved to reduce co-infection of multiple &quot;Bdellovibrio&quot;, larger prey that do not round may be infected by multiple Bdello&#x27;s.

== Genomics ==
The genome of &quot;Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus&quot; HD100 was sequenced in 2004. The HD100 genome is nucleotides long, larger than expected given its small size.

==Phylogeny==
The currently accepted taxonomy is based on the List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature (LPSN) and National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)

==See also==
* List of bacterial orders
* List of bacteria genera

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="18" end="23" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q632006" start="27" end="40" title="gram-negative" label="gram-negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075150" start="42" end="58" title="obligate aerobe" label="obligate aerobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="59" end="67" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="143" end="147" title="Predation" label="prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q422649" start="198" end="208" title="biopolymer" label="biopolymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198990" start="820" end="837" title="periplasmic space" label="periplasmic space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="910" end="921" title="bdelloplast" label="bdelloplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q206920" start="1418" end="1431" title="peptidoglycan" label="peptidoglycan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24775735" start="1483" end="1490" title="amidase" label="amidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q420272" start="1496" end="1511" title="DD-Transpeptidase" label="transpeptidases"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2122" end="2127" title="Heinz Stolp" label="Stolp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2132" end="2139" title="H Petzold" label="Petzold"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="2631" end="2633" title="micrometre" label="μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="2668" end="2677" title="flagellum" label="flagellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q804512" start="2764" end="2780" title="bacterial lawn" label="&amp;quot;lawn&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3776" end="3800" title="Peptide agar" label="yeast peptone broth agar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="3875" end="3882" title="Escherichia coli" label="E. coli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4023" end="4035" title="prey lysates" label="prey lysates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4196" end="4211" title="single sheathed" label="single sheathed"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="4212" end="4227" title="polar flagellum" label="polar flagellum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4250" end="4276" title="dampened filament waveform" label="dampened filament waveform"/>
<link wikidata="Q206920" start="4403" end="4416" title="peptidoglycan" label="peptidoglycan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198990" start="4538" end="4555" title="periplasmic space" label="periplasmic space"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="5105" end="5115" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="5116" end="5122" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q188909" start="5257" end="5265" title="Cell division" label="septates"/>
<link wikidata="Q135183" start="5666" end="5683" title="Vibrio vulnificus" label="Vibrio vulnificus"/>
<link wikidata="Q165028" start="5748" end="5761" title="bacteriophage" label="bacteriophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="6095" end="6105" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595107" start="6219" end="6274" title="List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature" label="List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q82494" start="6286" end="6331" title="National Center for Biotechnology Information" label="National Center for Biotechnology Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625318" start="6355" end="6379" title="List of bacterial orders" label="List of bacterial orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607050" start="6382" end="6405" title="List of bacteria genera" label="List of bacteria genera"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40142" wikidata="Q154865" url="?curid=40142" title="Botulism">
<text>Botulism is a rare and potentially fatal illness caused by botulinum toxin, which is produced by the bacterium &quot;Clostridium botulinum&quot;. The disease begins with weakness, blurred vision, feeling tired, and trouble speaking. This may then be followed by weakness of the arms, chest muscles, and legs. Vomiting, swelling of the abdomen, and diarrhea may also occur. The disease does not usually affect consciousness or cause a fever.

Botulism can occur in several ways. The bacterial spores which cause it are common in both soil and water and are very resistant. They produce the botulinum toxin when exposed to low oxygen levels and certain temperatures. Foodborne botulism happens when food containing the toxin is eaten. Infant botulism instead happens when the bacterium develops in the intestines and releases the toxin. This typically only occurs in children less than one year old, as protective mechanisms against development of the bacterium develop after that age. Wound botulism is found most often among those who inject street drugs. In this situation, spores enter a wound, and in the absence of oxygen, release the toxin. The disease is not passed directly between people. Its diagnosis is confirmed by finding the toxin or bacteria in the person in question.

Prevention is primarily by proper food preparation. The toxin, though not the spores, is destroyed by heating it to more than for longer than five minutes. The clostridial spores can be destroyed in an autoclave with moist heat (120°C/ 250°F for at least 15 minutes) or dry heat (160°C for 2 hours) or by irradiation. The spores of group I strains are inactivated by heating at 121°C (250°F) for 3 minutes during commercial canning. Spores of group II strains are less heat-resistant, and they are often damaged by 90°C (194°F) for 10 minutes, 85°C for 52 minutes, or 80°C for 270 minutes; however, these treatments may not be sufficient in some foods. Honey can contain the organism, and for this reason, honey should not be fed to children under 12 months. Treatment is with an antitoxin. In those who lose their ability to breathe on their own, mechanical ventilation may be necessary for months. Antibiotics may be used for wound botulism. Death occurs in 5 to 10% of people. Botulism also affects many other animals. The word is from Latin , meaning &#x27;sausage&#x27;.
== Signs and symptoms ==
The muscle weakness of botulism characteristically starts in the muscles supplied by the cranial nerves—a group of twelve nerves that control eye movements, the facial muscles and the muscles controlling chewing and swallowing. Double vision, drooping of both eyelids, loss of facial expression and swallowing problems may therefore occur. In addition to affecting the voluntary muscles, it can also cause disruptions in the autonomic nervous system. This is experienced as a dry mouth and throat (due to decreased production of saliva), postural hypotension (decreased blood pressure on standing, with resultant lightheadedness and risk of blackouts), and eventually constipation (due to decreased forward movement of intestinal contents). Some of the toxins (B and E) also precipitate nausea, vomiting, and difficulty with talking. The weakness then spreads to the arms (starting in the shoulders and proceeding to the forearms) and legs (again from the thighs down to the feet).

Severe botulism leads to reduced movement of the muscles of respiration, and hence problems with gas exchange. This may be experienced as dyspnea (difficulty breathing), but when severe can lead to respiratory failure, due to the buildup of unexhaled carbon dioxide and its resultant depressant effect on the brain. This may lead to respiratory compromise and death if untreated.

Clinicians frequently think of the symptoms of botulism in terms of a classic triad: bulbar palsy and descending paralysis, lack of fever, and clear senses and mental status (&quot;clear sensorium&quot;).

=== Infant botulism ===
Infant botulism (also referred to as floppy baby syndrome) was first recognized in 1976, and is the most common form of botulism in the United States. Infants are susceptible to infant botulism in the first year of life, with more than 90% of cases occurring in infants younger than six months. Infant botulism results from the ingestion of the &quot;C. botulinum&quot; spores, and subsequent colonization of the small intestine. The infant gut may be colonized when the composition of the intestinal microflora (normal flora) is insufficient to competitively inhibit the growth of &quot;C. botulinum&quot; and levels of bile acids (which normally inhibit clostridial growth) are lower than later in life.

The growth of the spores releases botulinum toxin, which is then absorbed into the bloodstream and taken throughout the body, causing paralysis by blocking the release of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction. Typical symptoms of infant botulism include constipation, lethargy, weakness, difficulty feeding, and an altered cry, often progressing to a complete descending flaccid paralysis. Although constipation is usually the first symptom of infant botulism, it is commonly overlooked.

Honey is a known dietary reservoir of &quot;C. botulinum&quot; spores and has been linked to infant botulism. For this reason, honey is not recommended for infants less than one year of age. Most cases of infant botulism, however, are thought to be caused by acquiring the spores from the natural environment. &quot;Clostridium botulinum&quot; is a ubiquitous soil-dwelling bacterium. Many infant botulism patients have been demonstrated to live near a construction site or an area of soil disturbance.

Infant botulism has been reported in 49 of 50 US states (all save for Rhode Island), and cases have been recognized in 26 countries on five continents.

=== Complications ===
Infant botulism has no long-term side effects.

Botulism can result in death due to respiratory failure. However, in the past 50 years, the proportion of patients with botulism who die has fallen from about 50% to 7% due to improved supportive care. A patient with severe botulism may require mechanical ventilation (breathing support through a ventilator) as well as intensive medical and nursing care, sometimes for several months. The person may require rehabilitation therapy after leaving the hospital.

== Cause ==
&quot;Clostridium botulinum&quot; is an anaerobic, Gram-positive, spore-forming rod. Botulinum toxin is one of the most powerful known toxins: about one microgram is lethal to humans when inhaled. It acts by blocking nerve function (neuromuscular blockade) through inhibition of the excitatory neurotransmitter acetylcholine&#x27;s release from the presynaptic membrane of neuromuscular junctions in the somatic nervous system. This causes paralysis. Advanced botulism can cause respiratory failure by paralysing the muscles of the chest; this can progress to respiratory arrest. Furthermore, acetylcholine release from the presynaptic membranes of muscarinic nerve synapses is blocked. This can lead to a variety of autonomic signs and symptoms described above.

In all cases, illness is caused by the botulinum toxin which the bacterium &quot;C. botulinum&quot; produces in anaerobic conditions and not by the bacterium itself. The pattern of damage occurs because the toxin affects nerves that fire (depolarize) at a higher frequency first.

Mechanisms of entry into the human body for botulinum toxin are described below.

=== Colonization of the gut ===
The most common form in Western countries is infant botulism. This occurs in infants who are colonized with the bacterium in the small intestine during the early stages of their lives. The bacterium then produces the toxin, which is absorbed into the bloodstream. The consumption of honey during the first year of life has been identified as a risk factor for infant botulism; it is a factor in a fifth of all cases. The adult form of infant botulism is termed &quot;adult intestinal toxemia&quot;, and is exceedingly rare.

=== Food ===
Toxin that is produced by the bacterium in containers of food that have been improperly preserved is the most common cause of food-borne botulism. Fish that has been pickled without the salinity or acidity of brine that contains acetic acid and high sodium levels, as well as smoked fish stored at too high a temperature, presents a risk, as does improperly canned food.

Food-borne botulism results from contaminated food in which &quot;C. botulinum&quot; spores have been allowed to germinate in low-oxygen conditions. This typically occurs in improperly prepared home-canned food substances and fermented dishes without adequate salt or acidity. Given that multiple people often consume food from the same source, it is common for more than a single person to be affected simultaneously. Symptoms usually appear 12–36 hours after eating, but can also appear within 6 hours to 10 days.

No withdrawal periods have been established for cows affected by Botulism. Lactating cows injected with various doses of Botulinum toxin C have not resulted in detectable Botulinum neurotoxin in milk produced. Using mouse bioassays and immunostick ELISA tests, botulinum toxin was detected in whole blood and serum but not in milk samples, suggesting that botulinum type C toxin does not enter milk in detectable concentrations. Cooking and pasteurization denatures botulinum toxin but does not necessarily eliminate spores. Botulinum spores or toxins can find their way into the dairy production chain from the environment. Despite the low risk of milk and meat contamination, the protocol for fatal bovine botulism cases appears to be incineration of carcasses and withholding any potentially contaminated milk from human consumption. It is also advised that raw milk from affected cows should not be consumed by humans or fed to calves.

There have been several reports of botulism from pruno wine made of food scraps in prison. In a Mississippi prison in 2016, prisoners illegally brewed alcohol that led to 31 cases of botulism. The research study done on these cases found the symptoms of mild botulism matched the symptoms severe botulism though the outcomes and progression of the disease were different.

=== Wound ===
Wound botulism results from the contamination of a wound with the bacteria, which then secrete the toxin into the bloodstream. This has become more common in intravenous drug users since the 1990s, especially people using black tar heroin and those injecting heroin into the skin rather than the veins. Wound botulism can also come from a minor wound that is not properly cleaned out; the skin grows over the wound thus trapping the spore in an anaerobic environment and creating botulism. One example was a person who cut their ankle while using a weed eater; as the wound healed over, it trapped a blade of grass and spec of soil under the skin that lead to severe botulism requiring hospitalization and rehabilitation for months. Wound botulism accounts for 29% of cases.

=== Inhalation ===
Isolated cases of botulism have been described after inhalation by laboratory workers.

=== Injection (iatrogenic botulism) ===

Symptoms of botulism may occur away from the injection site of botulinum toxin. This may include loss of strength, blurred vision, change of voice, or trouble breathing which can result in death. Onset can be hours to weeks after an injection. This generally only occurs with inappropriate strengths of botulinum toxin for cosmetic use or due to the larger doses used to treat movement disorders. However, there are cases where an off-label use of botulinum toxin resulted in severe botulism and death. Following a 2008 review the FDA added these concerns as a boxed warning. An international grassroots effort led by NeverTox to assemble the people experiencing Iatrogenic Botulism Poisoning (IBP) and provide education and emotional support serves 39,000 people through a Facebook group who are suffering from adverse events from botulinum toxin injections. 
=== Lawsuits about botulism against Pharmaceuticals ===
Prior to the boxed warning labels that included a disclaimer that botulinum toxin injections could cause botulism, there were a series of lawsuits against the pharmaceutical firms that manufactured injectable botulinum toxin. A Hollywood producer&#x27;s wife brought a lawsuit after experiencing debilitating adverse events from migraine treatment. A lawsuit on behalf of a 3-year-old boy who was permanently disabled by a botulinum toxin injection was settled in court during the trial. The family of a 7-year-old boy treated with botulinum toxin injections for leg spasms sued after the boy almost died. Several families of people who died after treatments with botulinum toxin injections brought lawsuits. One lawsuit prevailed for the plaintiff who was awarded compensation of $18 million; the plaintiff was a physician who was diagnosed with botulism by thirteen neurologists at the NIH. Deposition video from that lawsuit quotes a pharmaceutical executive stating that &quot;Botox doesn&#x27;t cause botulism.&quot;

== Mechanism ==
The toxin is the protein botulinum toxin produced under anaerobic conditions (where there is no oxygen) by the bacterium &quot;Clostridium botulinum&quot;.

&quot;Clostridium botulinum&quot; is a large anaerobic Gram-positive bacillus that forms subterminal endospores.

There are eight serological varieties of the bacterium denoted by the letters A to H. The toxin from all of these acts in the same way and produces similar symptoms: the motor nerve endings are prevented from releasing acetylcholine, causing flaccid paralysis and symptoms of blurred vision, ptosis, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea or constipation, cramps, and respiratory difficulty.

Botulinum toxin is broken into eight neurotoxins (labeled as types A, B, C [C1, C2], D, E, F, and G), which are antigenically and serologically distinct but structurally similar. Human botulism is caused mainly by types A, B, E, and (rarely) F. Types C and D cause toxicity only in other animals.

In October 2013, scientists released news of the discovery of type H, the first new botulism neurotoxin found in forty years. However, further studies showed type H to be a chimeric toxin composed of parts of types F and A (FA).

Some types produce a characteristic putrefactive smell and digest meat (types A and some of B and F); these are said to be proteolytic; type E and some types of B, C, D and F are nonproteolytic and can go undetected because there is no strong odor associated with them.

When the bacteria are under stress, they develop spores, which are inert. Their natural habitats are in the soil, in the silt that comprises the bottom sediment of streams, lakes, and coastal waters and ocean, while some types are natural inhabitants of the intestinal tracts of mammals (e.g., horses, cattle, humans), and are present in their excreta. The spores can survive in their inert form for many years.

Toxin is produced by the bacteria when environmental conditions are favourable for the spores to replicate and grow, but the gene that encodes for the toxin protein is actually carried by a virus or phage that infects the bacteria. Little is known about the natural factors that control phage infection and replication within the bacteria.

The spores require warm temperatures, a protein source, an anaerobic environment, and moisture in order to become active and produce toxin. In the wild, decomposing vegetation and invertebrates combined with warm temperatures can provide ideal conditions for the botulism bacteria to activate and produce toxin that may affect feeding birds and other animals. Spores are not killed by boiling, but botulism is uncommon because special, rarely obtained conditions are necessary for botulinum toxin production from C. botulinum spores, including an anaerobic, low-salt, low-acid, low-sugar environment at ambient temperatures.

Botulinum inhibits the release within the nervous system of acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter, responsible for communication between motor neurons and muscle cells. All forms of botulism lead to paralysis that typically starts with the muscles of the face and then spreads towards the limbs. In severe forms, botulism leads to paralysis of the breathing muscles and causes respiratory failure. In light of this life-threatening complication, all suspected cases of botulism are treated as medical emergencies, and public health officials are usually involved to identify the source and take steps to prevent further cases from occurring.

Botulinum toxin A and E specifically cleave the SNAP-25, whereas serotype B, D, F and G cut synaptobrevin. Serotype C cleaves both SNAP-25 and syntaxin. This causes blockade of neurotransmitter acetylcholine release, ultimately leading to paralysis.

== Diagnosis ==
For botulism in babies, diagnosis should be made on signs and symptoms. Confirmation of the diagnosis is made by testing of a stool or enema specimen with the mouse bioassay.

In people whose history and physical examination suggest botulism, these clues are often not enough to allow a diagnosis. Other diseases such as Guillain–Barré syndrome, stroke, and myasthenia gravis can appear similar to botulism, and special tests may be needed to exclude these other conditions. These tests may include a brain scan, cerebrospinal fluid examination, nerve conduction test (electromyography, or EMG), and an edrophonium chloride (Tensilon) test for myasthenia gravis. A definite diagnosis can be made if botulinum toxin is identified in the food, stomach or intestinal contents, vomit or feces. The toxin is occasionally found in the blood in peracute cases. Botulinum toxin can be detected by a variety of techniques, including enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs), electrochemiluminescent (ECL) tests and mouse inoculation or feeding trials. The toxins can be typed with neutralization tests in mice. In toxicoinfectious botulism, the organism can be cultured from tissues. On egg yolk medium, toxin-producing colonies usually display surface iridescence that extends beyond the colony.

== Prevention ==
Although the vegetative form of the bacteria is destroyed by boiling, the spore itself is not killed by the temperatures reached with normal sea-level-pressure boiling, leaving it free to grow and again produce the toxin when conditions are right.

A recommended prevention measure for infant botulism is to avoid giving honey to infants less than 12 months of age, as botulinum spores are often present. In older children and adults the normal intestinal bacteria suppress development of &quot;C. botulinum&quot;.

While commercially canned goods are required to undergo a &quot;botulinum cook&quot; in a pressure cooker at for 3 minutes, and thus rarely cause botulism, there have been notable exceptions. Two were the 1978 Alaskan salmon outbreak and the 2007 Castleberry&#x27;s Food Company outbreak. Foodborne botulism is the rarest form, accounting for only around 15% of cases (US) and has more frequently resulted from home-canned foods with low acid content, such as carrot juice, asparagus, green beans, beets, and corn. However, outbreaks of botulism have resulted from more unusual sources. In July 2002, fourteen Alaskans ate &quot;muktuk&quot; (whale meat) from a beached whale, and eight of them developed symptoms of botulism, two of them requiring mechanical ventilation.

Other, much rarer sources of infection (about every decade in the US) include garlic or herbs stored covered in oil without acidification, chili peppers, improperly handled baked potatoes wrapped in aluminum foil, tomatoes, and home-canned or fermented fish.

When canning or preserving food at home, attention should be paid to hygiene, pressure, temperature, refrigeration and storage. When making home preserves, only acidic fruit such as apples, pears, stone fruits and berries should be used. Tropical fruit and tomatoes are low in acidity and must have some acidity added before they are canned.

Low-acid foods have pH values higher than 4.6. They include red meats, seafood, poultry, milk, and all fresh vegetables except for most tomatoes. Most mixtures of low-acid and acid foods also have pH values above 4.6 unless their recipes include enough lemon juice, citric acid, or vinegar to make them acidic. Acid foods have a pH of 4.6 or lower. They include fruits, pickles, sauerkraut, jams, jellies, marmalades, and fruit butters.

Although tomatoes usually are considered an acid food, some are now known to have pH values slightly above 4.6. Figs also have pH values slightly above 4.6. Therefore, if they are to be canned as acid foods, these products must be acidified to a pH of 4.6 or lower with lemon juice or citric acid. Properly acidified tomatoes and figs are acid foods and can be safely processed in a boiling-water canner.

Oils infused with fresh garlic or herbs should be acidified and refrigerated. Potatoes which have been baked while wrapped in aluminum foil should be kept hot until served or refrigerated. Because the botulism toxin is destroyed by high temperatures, home-canned foods are best boiled for 10 minutes before eating. Metal cans containing food in which bacteria are growing may bulge outwards due to gas production from bacterial growth or the food inside may be foamy or have a bad odor; cans with any of these signs should be discarded.

Any container of food which has been heat-treated and then assumed to be airtight which shows signs of not being so, e.g., metal cans with pinprick holes from rust or mechanical damage, should be discarded. Contamination of a canned food solely with &quot;C. botulinum&quot; may not cause any visual defects to the container, such as bulging. Only assurance of sufficient thermal processing during production, and absence of a route for subsequent contamination, should be used as indicators of food safety.

The addition of nitrites and nitrates to processed meats such as ham, bacon, and sausages reduces growth and toxin production of &quot;C. botulinum&quot;.

=== Vaccine ===
Vaccines are under development, but they have side effects. As of 2017 work to develop a better vaccine was being carried out, but the US FDA had not approved any vaccine against botulism.

== Treatment ==
Botulism is generally treated with botulism antitoxin and supportive care.

Supportive care for botulism includes monitoring of respiratory function. Respiratory failure due to paralysis may require mechanical ventilation for 2 to 8 weeks, plus intensive medical and nursing care. After this time, paralysis generally improves as new neuromuscular connections are formed.

In some abdominal cases, physicians may try to remove contaminated food still in the digestive tract by inducing vomiting or using enemas. Wounds should be treated, usually surgically, to remove the source of the toxin-producing bacteria.

=== Antitoxin ===
Botulinum antitoxin consists of antibodies that neutralize botulinum toxin in the circulatory system by passive immunization. This prevents additional toxin from binding to the neuromuscular junction, but does not reverse any already inflicted paralysis.

In adults, a trivalent antitoxin containing antibodies raised against botulinum toxin types A, B, and E is used most commonly; however, a heptavalent botulism antitoxin has also been developed and was approved by the U.S. FDA in 2013. In infants, horse-derived antitoxin is sometimes avoided for fear of infants developing serum sickness or lasting hypersensitivity to horse-derived proteins. To avoid this, a human-derived antitoxin has been developed and approved by the U.S. FDA in 2003 for the treatment of infant botulism. This human-derived antitoxin has been shown to be both safe and effective for the treatment of infant botulism. However, the danger of equine-derived antitoxin to infants has not been clearly established, and one study showed the equine-derived antitoxin to be both safe and effective for the treatment of infant botulism.

Trivalent (A,B,E) botulinum antitoxin is derived from equine sources utilizing whole antibodies (Fab and Fc portions). In the United States, this antitoxin is available from the local health department via the CDC. The second antitoxin, heptavalent (A,B,C,D,E,F,G) botulinum antitoxin, is derived from &quot;despeciated&quot; equine IgG antibodies which have had the Fc portion cleaved off leaving the F(ab&#x27;)2 portions. This less immunogenic antitoxin is effective against all known strains of botulism where not contraindicated.

== Prognosis ==
The paralysis caused by botulism can persist for two to eight weeks, during which supportive care and ventilation may be necessary to keep the patient alive. Botulism can be fatal in five to ten percent of people who are affected. However, if left untreated, botulism is fatal in 40 to 50 percent of cases.

Infant botulism typically has no long-term side effects but can be complicated by treatment-associated adverse events. The case fatality rate is less than two percent for hospitalized babies.

== Epidemiology ==
Globally, botulism is fairly rare, with approximately 1,000 identified cases yearly.

=== United States ===
In the United States an average of 145 cases are reported each year. Of these, roughly 65% are infant botulism, 20% are wound botulism, and 15% are foodborne. Infant botulism is predominantly sporadic and not associated with epidemics, but great geographic variability exists. From 1974 to 1996, for example, 47% of all infant botulism cases reported in the U.S. occurred in California.

Between 1990 and 2000, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported 263 individual foodborne cases from 160 botulism events in the United States with a case-fatality rate of 4%. Thirty-nine percent (103 cases and 58 events) occurred in Alaska, all of which were attributable to traditional Alaskan aboriginal foods. In the lower 49 states, home-canned food was implicated in 70 events (~69%) with canned asparagus being the most frequent cause. Two restaurant-associated outbreaks affected 25 people. The median number of cases per year was 23 (range 17–43), the median number of events per year was 14 (range 9–24). The highest incidence rates occurred in Alaska, Idaho, Washington, and Oregon. All other states had an incidence rate of 1 case per ten million people or less.

The number of cases of food borne and infant botulism has changed little in recent years, but wound botulism has increased because of the use of black tar heroin, especially in California.

All data regarding botulism antitoxin releases and laboratory confirmation of cases in the US are recorded annually by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and published on their website.
* On 2 July 1971, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) released a public warning after learning that a New York man had died and his wife had become seriously ill due to botulism after eating a can of Bon Vivant vichyssoise soup.
* Between 31 March and 6 April 1977, 59 individuals developed type B botulism. All who fell ill had eaten at the same Mexican restaurant in Pontiac, Michigan, and had consumed a hot sauce made with improperly home-canned jalapeño peppers, either by adding it to their food, or by eating nachos that had been prepared with the hot sauce. The full clinical spectrum (mild symptomatology with neurologic findings through life-threatening ventilatory paralysis) of type B botulism was documented.
* In April 1994, the largest outbreak of botulism in the United States since 1978 occurred in El Paso, Texas. Thirty people were affected; 4 required mechanical ventilation. All ate food from a Greek restaurant. The attack rate among people who ate a potato-based dip was 86% (19/22) compared with 6% (11/176) among people who did not eat the dip (relative risk [RR] = 13.8; 95% confidence interval [CI], 7.6–25.1). The attack rate among people who ate an eggplant-based dip was 67% (6/9) compared with 13% (24/189) among people who did not (RR = 5.2; 95% CI, 2.9–9.5). Botulism toxin type A was detected in patients and in both dips. Toxin formation resulted from holding aluminum foil-wrapped baked potatoes at room temperature, apparently for several days, before they were used in the dips. Food handlers should be informed of the potential hazards caused by holding foil-wrapped potatoes at ambient temperatures after cooking.
* In 2002, fourteen Alaskans ate &quot;muktuk&quot; (whale blubber) from a beached whale, resulting in eight of them developing botulism, with two of the affected requiring mechanical ventilation.
* Beginning in late June 2007, 8 people contracted botulism poisoning by eating canned food products produced by Castleberry&#x27;s Food Company in its Augusta, Georgia plant. It was later identified that the Castleberry&#x27;s plant had serious production problems on a specific line of retorts that had under-processed the cans of food. These issues included broken cooking alarms, leaking water valves and inaccurate temperature devices, all the result of poor management of the company. All of the victims were hospitalized and placed on mechanical ventilation. The Castleberry&#x27;s Food Company outbreak was the first instance of botulism in commercial canned foods in the United States in over 30 years.
* One person died, 21 cases were confirmed, and 10 more were suspected in Lancaster, Ohio when a botulism outbreak occurred after a church potluck in April 2015. The suspected source was a salad made from home-canned potatoes.
* A botulism outbreak occurred in Northern California in May 2017 after 10 people consumed nacho cheese dip served at a gas station in Sacramento County. One man died as a result of the outbreak.

=== United Kingdom ===
The largest recorded outbreak of foodborne botulism in the United Kingdom occurred in June 1989. A total of 27 patients were affected; one patient died. Twenty-five of the patients had eaten one brand of hazelnut yogurt in the week before the onset of symptoms. Control measures included the cessation of all yogurt production by the implicated producer, the withdrawal of the firm&#x27;s yogurts from sale, the recall of cans of the hazelnut conserve, and advice to the general public to avoid the consumption of all hazelnut yogurts.

=== China ===
From 1958 to 1983 there were 986 outbreaks of botulism in China involving 4,377 people with 548 deaths.

====Qapqal disease====
After the Chinese Communist Revolution in 1949, a mysterious plague (named Qapqal disease) was noticed to be affecting several Sibe villages in Qapqal Xibe Autonomous County. It was endemic with distinctive epidemic patterns, yet the underlying cause remained unknown for a long period of time. It caused a number of deaths and forced some people to leave the place.

In 1958, a team of experts were sent to the area by the Ministry of Health to investigate the cases. The epidemic survey conducted proved that the disease was primarily type A botulism, with several cases of type B. The team also discovered that the source of the botulinum was local fermented grain and beans, as well as a raw meat food called &quot;mi song hu hu&quot;. They promoted the improvement of fermentation techniques among local residents, and thus eliminated the disease.

=== Canada ===
From 1985 to 2005 there were outbreaks causing 91 confirmed cases of foodborne botulism in Canada, 85% of which were in Inuit communities, especially Nunavik, as well as First Nations of the coast of British Columbia, following consumption of traditionally prepared marine mammal and fish products.

=== Ukraine ===
In 2017, there were 70 cases of botulism with 8 deaths in Ukraine. The previous year there were 115 cases with 12 deaths. Most cases were the result of dried fish, a common local drinking snack.

===Vietnam===
In 2020, several cases of botulism were reported in Vietnam. All of them were related to a product containing contaminated vegetarian pâté. Some patients were put on life support.

== Other susceptible species ==
Botulism can occur in many vertebrates and invertebrates. Botulism has been reported in such species as rats, mice, chicken, frogs, toads, goldfish, aplysia, squid, crayfish, drosophila and leeches.

Death from botulism is common in waterfowl; an estimated 10,000 to 100,000 birds die of botulism annually. The disease is commonly called &quot;limberneck&quot;. In some large outbreaks, a million or more birds may die. Ducks appear to be affected most often. An enzootic form of duck botulism in the Western US and Canada is known as &quot;western duck sickness&quot;. Botulism also affects commercially raised poultry. In chickens, the mortality rate varies from a few birds to 40% of the flock.

Botulism seems to be relatively uncommon in domestic mammals; however, in some parts of the world, epidemics with up to 65% mortality are seen in cattle. The prognosis is poor in large animals that are recumbent.

In cattle, the symptoms may include drooling, restlessness, incoordination, urine retention, dysphagia, and sternal recumbency. Laterally recumbent animals are usually very close to death. In sheep, the symptoms may include drooling, a serous nasal discharge, stiffness, and incoordination. Abdominal respiration may be observed and the tail may switch on the side. As the disease progresses, the limbs may become paralyzed and death may occur. Phosphorus-deficient cattle, especially in southern Africa, are inclined to ingest bones and carrion containing clostridial toxins and consequently develop &quot;lame sickness&quot; or &quot;lamsiekte&quot;.

The clinical signs in horses are similar to cattle. The muscle paralysis is progressive; it usually begins at the hindquarters and gradually moves to the front limbs, neck, and head. Death generally occurs 24 to 72 hours after initial symptoms and results from respiratory paralysis. Some foals are found dead without other clinical signs.

&quot;Clostridium botulinum&quot; type C toxin has been incriminated as the cause of grass sickness, a condition in horses which occurs in rainy and hot summers in Northern Europe. The main symptom is pharynx paralysis.

Domestic dogs may develop systemic toxemia after consuming &quot;C. botulinum&quot; type C exotoxin or spores within bird carcasses or other infected meat but are generally resistant to the more severe effects of &quot;C. botulinum&quot; type C. Symptoms include flaccid muscle paralysis, which can lead to death due to cardiac and respiratory arrest.

Pigs are relatively resistant to botulism. Reported symptoms include anorexia, refusal to drink, vomiting, pupillary dilation, and muscle paralysis.

In poultry and wild birds, flaccid paralysis is usually seen in the legs, wings, neck and eyelids. Broiler chickens with the toxicoinfectious form may also have diarrhea with excess urates.

=== Prevention in non-human species ===

One of the main routes of exposure for botulism is through the consumption of food contaminated with &quot;C. botulinum&quot;. Food-borne botulism can be prevented in domestic animals through careful inspection of the feed, purchasing high quality feed from reliable sources, and ensuring proper storage. Poultry litter and animal carcasses are places in which &quot;C. botulinum&quot; spores are able to germinate so it is advised to avoid spreading poultry litter or any carcass containing materials on fields producing feed materials due to their potential for supporting &quot;C. botulinum&quot; growth. Additionally, water sources should be checked for dead or dying animals, and fields should be checked for animal remains prior to mowing for hay or silage. Correcting any dietary deficiencies can also prevent animals from consuming contaminated materials such as bones or carcasses. Raw materials used for silage or feed mixed on site should be checked for any sign of mold or rotten appearance. Acidification of animal feed can reduce, but will not eliminate, the risk of toxin formation, especially in carcasses that remain whole.

==== Vaccines in animals ====
Vaccines have been developed for use in animals to prevent botulism. The availability and approval of these vaccines varies depending on the location, with places experiencing more cases generally having more vaccines available and routine vaccination is more common.

A variety of vaccines have been developed for the prevention of botulism in livestock. Most initial vaccinations require multiple doses at intervals from 2–6 weeks, however, some newer vaccines require only one shot. This mainly depends on the type of vaccine and manufacturers recommendations. All vaccines require annual boosters to maintain immunity. Many of these vaccines can be used on multiple species including cattle, sheep, and goats with some labeled for use in horses and mules as well as separate vaccines for mink. Additionally, vaccination during an outbreak is as beneficial as therapeutic treatment in cattle, and this method is also used in horses and pheasants.

The use of region specific toxoids to immunize animals has been shown to be effective. Toxoid types C and D used to immunize cattle is a useful vaccination method in South Africa and Australia. Toxoid has also been shown to be an appropriate method of immunizing minks and pheasants. In endemic areas, for example Kentucky, vaccination with type B toxoid appears to be effective.

== Use in biological warfare and terrorism ==

=== United States ===
Based on CIA research in Fort Detrick on biological warfare, anthrax and botulism were widely regarded as the two most effective options. During the 1950s, a highly lethal strain was discovered during the biological warfare program. The CIA continued to hold 5 grams of &quot;Clostridium botulinum&quot;, even after Nixon&#x27;s ban on biological warfare in 1969. During the Gulf War, when the United States were concerned with a potential biowarfare attack, the efforts around botulism turned to prevention. However, the only way to make antitoxin in the U.S. until the 1990s was by drawing antibodies from a single horse named First Flight, raising much concern from Pentagon health officials.

=== Iraq ===
Iraq has historically possessed many types of germs, including botulism. The American Type Culture Collection sold 5 variants of botulinum to the University of Baghdad in May 1986. 1991 CIA reports also show Iraqis filled shells, warheads, and bombs with biological agents like botulinum (though none have been deployed). The Iraqi air force used the code name &quot;tea&quot; to refer to botulinum, and it was also referred to as bioweapon &quot;A.&quot;

=== Japan ===
A Japanese cult called Aum Shinrikyo created laboratories that produced biological weapons, specifically botulinum, anthrax, and Q fever. From 1990 to 1995, the cult staged numerous unsuccessful bioterrorism attacks on civilians. They sprayed botulinum toxin from a truck in downtown Tokyo and in the Narita airport, but there are no reported cases of botulism as a result.

== See also ==
* List of foodborne illness outbreaks
* Botulinum toxin

== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* WHO fact sheet on botulism
* Botulism in the United States, 1889–1996. Handbook for Epidemiologists, Clinicians and Laboratory Technicians. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Center for Infectious Diseases, Division of Bacterial and Mycotic Diseases 1998.
* NHS choices
* CDC Botulism: Control Measures Overview for Clinicians
* University of California, Santa Cruz Environmental toxicology – Botulism 
* CDC Botulism FAQ</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q154865" start="0" end="8" title="Botulism" label="Botulism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="41" end="48" title="illness" label="illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="59" end="74" title="botulinum toxin" label="botulinum toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131268" start="117" end="138" title="Clostridium botulinum" label="Clostridium botulinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="196" end="209" title="Fatigue (medical)" label="feeling tired"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="409" end="422" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="434" end="439" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q828761" start="482" end="498" title="bacterial spores" label="bacterial spores"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="589" end="604" title="botulinum toxin" label="botulinum toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="800" end="809" title="intestine" label="intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369403" start="1035" end="1054" title="drug injection" label="inject street drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="1938" end="1943" title="Honey" label="Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148719" start="2065" end="2074" title="Heptavalent botulism antitoxin" label="antitoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766250" start="2133" end="2155" title="mechanical ventilation" label="mechanical ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="2185" end="2195" title="Antibiotic" label="Antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2324" end="2329" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180454" start="2475" end="2489" title="cranial nerves" label="cranial nerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q760256" start="2528" end="2541" title="eye movement (sensory)" label="eye movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341604" start="2547" end="2561" title="facial muscles" label="facial muscles"/>
<link wikidata="Q827742" start="2590" end="2597" title="chewing" label="chewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q211669" start="2602" end="2612" title="swallowing" label="swallowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q775940" start="2614" end="2627" title="Diplopia" label="Double vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q622427" start="2629" end="2653" title="Ptosis (eyelid)" label="drooping of both eyelids"/>
<link wikidata="Q505535" start="2755" end="2772" title="Somatic nervous system" label="voluntary muscles"/>
<link wikidata="Q620639" start="2792" end="2835" title="Dysautonomia" label="disruptions in the autonomic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162276" start="2860" end="2882" title="xerostomia" label="a dry mouth and throat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104966" start="2924" end="2944" title="postural hypotension" label="postural hypotension"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="3054" end="3066" title="constipation" label="constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q308695" start="3085" end="3124" title="peristalsis" label="forward movement of intestinal contents"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="3173" end="3179" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="3181" end="3189" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q225957" start="3195" end="3218" title="dysarthria" label="difficulty with talking"/>
<link wikidata="Q754337" start="3418" end="3440" title="muscles of respiration" label="muscles of respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146120" start="3466" end="3478" title="gas exchange" label="gas exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q188008" start="3507" end="3514" title="dyspnea" label="dyspnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q767485" start="3567" end="3586" title="respiratory failure" label="respiratory failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q615759" start="3620" end="3634" title="hypercapnia" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060353" start="3835" end="3847" title="bulbar palsy" label="bulbar palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753547" start="4017" end="4037" title="floppy baby syndrome" label="floppy baby syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q131268" start="4325" end="4349" title="Clostridium botulinum" label="&amp;quot;C. botulinum&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q739734" start="4470" end="4491" title="gut flora" label="intestinal microflora"/>
<link wikidata="Q132809" start="4636" end="4647" title="Clostridia" label="clostridial"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="4721" end="4736" title="botulinum toxin" label="botulinum toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="4858" end="4871" title="acetylcholine" label="acetylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q776995" start="4879" end="4901" title="neuromuscular junction" label="neuromuscular junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456583" start="5064" end="5081" title="flaccid paralysis" label="flaccid paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="5182" end="5187" title="Honey" label="Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q131268" start="5226" end="5238" title="Clostridium botulinum" label="C. botulinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131268" start="5498" end="5519" title="Clostridium botulinum" label="Clostridium botulinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q472287" start="5945" end="5956" title="respiration (physiology)" label="respiratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766250" start="6154" end="6176" title="mechanical ventilation" label="mechanical ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131268" start="6388" end="6409" title="Clostridium botulinum" label="Clostridium botulinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189790" start="6422" end="6431" title="Anaerobic organism" label="anaerobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="6433" end="6446" title="Gram-positive bacteria" label="Gram-positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="6467" end="6482" title="Botulinum toxin" label="Botulinum toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645498" start="6535" end="6544" title="microgram" label="microgram"/>
<link wikidata="Q9620" start="6599" end="6604" title="nerve" label="nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286619" start="6615" end="6637" title="neuromuscular blockade" label="neuromuscular blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="6676" end="6692" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="6693" end="6706" title="acetylcholine" label="acetylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q187181" start="6731" end="6742" title="presynaptic" label="presynaptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q776995" start="6755" end="6777" title="neuromuscular junction" label="neuromuscular junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q505535" start="6786" end="6808" title="somatic nervous system" label="somatic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q767485" start="6861" end="6880" title="respiratory failure" label="respiratory failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774744" start="6942" end="6960" title="respiratory arrest" label="respiratory arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q410959" start="7031" end="7041" title="muscarinic acetylcholine receptor" label="muscarinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041929" start="7634" end="7643" title="Colonization (biology)" label="colonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="7824" end="7829" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="8308" end="8319" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="8329" end="8335" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q131268" start="8517" end="8529" title="Clostridium botulinum" label="C. botulinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q407752" start="9149" end="9159" title="neurotoxin" label="neurotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9184" end="9198" title="mouse bioassay" label="mouse bioassay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9204" end="9226" title="immunostick ELISA test" label="immunostick ELISA test"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118943" start="9958" end="9963" title="pruno" label="pruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369403" start="10454" end="10476" title="Intravenous drug use (recreational)" label="intravenous drug users"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922484" start="10518" end="10534" title="black tar heroin" label="black tar heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535424" start="10545" end="10575" title="skin popping" label="injecting heroin into the skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q840343" start="11144" end="11154" title="inhalation" label="inhalation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="11283" end="11298" title="botulinum toxin" label="botulinum toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q879952" start="11781" end="11794" title="boxed warning" label="boxed warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="13201" end="13216" title="botulinum toxin" label="botulinum toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131268" start="13303" end="13324" title="Clostridium botulinum" label="Clostridium botulinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131268" start="13339" end="13360" title="Clostridium botulinum" label="Clostridium botulinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q828761" start="13434" end="13444" title="endospores" label="endospores"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774739" start="13940" end="13953" title="antigenic variation" label="antigenically"/>
<link wikidata="Q502159" start="13958" end="13969" title="serological" label="serological"/>
<link wikidata="Q33123" start="14479" end="14490" title="proteolytic" label="proteolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165028" start="15239" end="15244" title="bacteriophage" label="phage"/>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="16067" end="16080" title="acetylcholine" label="acetylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="16202" end="16211" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q767485" start="16380" end="16399" title="respiratory failure" label="respiratory failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751242" start="16496" end="16515" title="medical emergency" label="medical emergencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="16840" end="16853" title="acetylcholine" label="acetylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563658" start="17039" end="17044" title="stool test" label="stool"/>
<link wikidata="Q194517" start="17048" end="17053" title="enema" label="enema"/>
<link wikidata="Q864212" start="17078" end="17086" title="bioassay" label="bioassay"/>
<link wikidata="Q205214" start="17234" end="17257" title="Guillain–Barré syndrome" label="Guillain–Barré syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="17259" end="17265" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q8285" start="17271" end="17288" title="myasthenia gravis" label="myasthenia gravis"/>
<link wikidata="Q551875" start="17414" end="17424" title="brain scan" label="brain scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="17426" end="17445" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q507369" start="17482" end="17498" title="electromyography" label="electromyography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177745" start="17516" end="17527" title="edrophonium" label="edrophonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8285" start="17557" end="17574" title="myasthenia gravis" label="myasthenia gravis"/>
<link wikidata="Q557429" start="17751" end="17759" title="peracute" label="peracute"/>
<link wikidata="Q332126" start="17837" end="17870" title="enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay" label="enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay"/>
<link wikidata="Q755961" start="17882" end="17905" title="electrochemiluminescent" label="electrochemiluminescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050459" start="18985" end="19016" title="Castleberry&amp;#x27;s Food Company" label="Castleberry&amp;#x27;s Food Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q338215" start="19149" end="19160" title="Home canning" label="home-canned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190074" start="19198" end="19210" title="carrot juice" label="carrot juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q28367" start="19212" end="19221" title="asparagus (vegetable)" label="asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="19229" end="19233" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q165437" start="19236" end="19240" title="beet" label="beet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="19247" end="19251" title="maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="19348" end="19354" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5653150" start="19381" end="19391" title="whale meat" label="whale meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366544" start="19400" end="19413" title="beached whale" label="beached whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766250" start="19487" end="19509" title="mechanical ventilation" label="mechanical ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="19590" end="19596" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q427457" start="19624" end="19627" title="Cooking oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993312" start="19636" end="19649" title="Souring" label="acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q201959" start="19651" end="19664" title="capsicum" label="chili peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="19711" end="19719" title="aluminum" label="aluminum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444388" start="19755" end="19769" title="fermented fish" label="fermented fish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22022" end="22030" title="Nitrite#Nitrite in food preservation and biochemistry" label="nitrites"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="22035" end="22043" title="nitrates" label="nitrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="22178" end="22185" title="Vaccine" label="Vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q584135" start="22428" end="22437" title="antitoxin" label="antitoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="22561" end="22570" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766250" start="22583" end="22605" title="mechanical ventilation" label="mechanical ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q776995" start="22718" end="22743" title="neuromuscular junction" label="neuromuscular connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q194517" start="22888" end="22893" title="enema" label="enema"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="23047" end="23057" title="Antibody" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="23097" end="23115" title="circulatory system" label="circulatory system"/>
<link wikidata="Q382646" start="23119" end="23139" title="passive immunity" label="passive immunization"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148719" start="23409" end="23439" title="heptavalent botulism antitoxin" label="heptavalent botulism antitoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="23493" end="23496" title="FDA" label="FDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q33121" start="23594" end="23608" title="serum sickness" label="serum sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958765" start="23620" end="23636" title="hypersensitivity" label="hypersensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="24208" end="24218" title="Antibody" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="24333" end="24336" title="Centers for Disease Control" label="CDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148719" start="24360" end="24407" title="Heptavalent botulism antitoxin" label="heptavalent (A,B,C,D,E,F,G) botulinum antitoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79448" start="24456" end="24459" title="Immunoglobulin G" label="IgG"/>
<link wikidata="Q92307203" start="25106" end="25119" title="case fatality" label="case fatality"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="25718" end="25760" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922484" start="26625" end="26641" title="black tar heroin" label="black tar heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="26657" end="26667" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="26890" end="26923" title="U.S. Food and Drug Administration" label="U.S. Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620586" start="27076" end="27086" title="Bon Vivant Soup Company" label="Bon Vivant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294686" start="27087" end="27098" title="vichyssoise" label="vichyssoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q847596" start="27245" end="27262" title="Pontiac, Michigan" label="Pontiac, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q466430" start="27392" end="27398" title="nachos" label="nachos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="27692" end="27706" title="El Paso, Texas" label="El Paso, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="28550" end="28556" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q940033" start="28569" end="28575" title="muktuk" label="muktuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766250" start="28703" end="28725" title="mechanical ventilation" label="mechanical ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050459" start="28840" end="28871" title="Castleberry&amp;#x27;s Food Company" label="Castleberry&amp;#x27;s Food Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q181962" start="28879" end="28895" title="Augusta, Georgia" label="Augusta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q986005" start="29513" end="29528" title="Lancaster, Ohio" label="Lancaster, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q32993" start="30575" end="30603" title="Chinese Communist Revolution" label="Chinese Communist Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044876" start="30692" end="30705" title="Sibe people" label="Sibe villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q997577" start="30709" end="30738" title="Qapqal Xibe Autonomous County" label="Qapqal Xibe Autonomous County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="31525" end="31531" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="31554" end="31559" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074865" start="31584" end="31591" title="Nunavik" label="Nunavik"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="31604" end="31617" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="31634" end="31650" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="31929" end="31943" title="bar food" label="drinking snack"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="32012" end="32019" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q816704" start="32094" end="32098" title="pâté" label="pâté"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="32200" end="32210" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="32216" end="32228" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q136564" start="32322" end="32329" title="aplysia" label="aplysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312154" start="32348" end="32358" title="drosophila" label="drosophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346169" start="32636" end="32644" title="enzootic" label="enzootic"/>
<link wikidata="Q623289" start="33179" end="33188" title="dysphagia" label="dysphagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131268" start="34087" end="34108" title="Clostridium botulinum" label="Clostridium botulinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597491" start="34166" end="34180" title="grass sickness" label="grass sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="34245" end="34260" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q174778" start="34282" end="34289" title="pharynx" label="pharynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="34302" end="34314" title="Domestic dog" label="Domestic dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456583" start="34832" end="34849" title="flaccid paralysis" label="flaccid paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105522" start="34987" end="34992" title="urate" label="urate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438504" start="37635" end="37647" title="Fort Detrick" label="Fort Detrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242560" start="37651" end="37669" title="biological warfare" label="biological warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372204" start="37671" end="37678" title="Anthrax weaponization" label="anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="37847" end="37850" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q131268" start="37886" end="37907" title="Clostridium botulinum" label="Clostridium botulinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603971" start="37926" end="37964" title="Statement on Chemical and Biological Defense Policies and Programs" label="Nixon&amp;#x27;s ban on biological warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="37985" end="37993" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q124504918" start="38239" end="38251" title="First Flight (medical research horse)" label="First Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843042" start="38397" end="38429" title="ATCC (company)" label="American Type Culture Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q550376" start="38466" end="38487" title="University of Baghdad" label="University of Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q217408" start="38814" end="38827" title="Aum Shinrikyo" label="Aum Shinrikyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372204" start="38907" end="38914" title="Anthrax weaponization" label="anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q164818" start="38920" end="38927" title="Q fever" label="Q fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620584" start="39183" end="39218" title="List of foodborne illness outbreaks" label="List of foodborne illness outbreaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="39221" end="39236" title="Botulinum toxin" label="Botulinum toxin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40145" wikidata="Q497578" url="?curid=40145" title="Witan">
<text>The witan () was the king&#x27;s council in the Anglo-Saxon government of England from before the 7th century until the 11th century. It comprised important noblemen, including ealdormen, thegns, and bishops. Meetings of the witan were sometimes called the witenagemot. 

Its primary function was to advise the king on legislation, judicial cases, land transfers, and other matters of national importance. The witan may have elected new kings from among members of the ruling dynasty. After the Norman Conquest in 1066, these roles were performed by a similar council known as the curia regis.

The witan is considered an ancestor of the Parliament of England. Before the 20th century, historians thought it had been a proto-parliament, an institution that was both democratic and representative. In the 20th century, historians shifted to emphasise the witan&#x27;s ad hoc and essentially royal nature.

== Etymology ==
The Old English word () described the counsellors of Anglo-Saxon kings. At the same time, the word could also refer to other kinds of counsellors, such as the witan of a shire court. Wulfstan II, Archbishop of York (1002–1023), wrote in his &quot;Institutes of Polity&quot; that &quot;it is incumbent on bishops, that venerable &#x27;witan&#x27; always travel with them, and dwell with them, at least of the priesthood; that they may consult with them... and who may be their counsellors at every time.&quot; A contemporary account of a dispute over an estate in Middlesex in the 950s refers to a decision of the ().

The most common Old English term for a meeting of the witan is , sometimes expanded as (). Writers of Latin texts used or (). Modern scholars use () as a technical term, but historian John Maddicott noted its rarity in the 11th century with only nine pre-Conquest examples, mainly in the crisis of 1051–1052. Patrick Wormald was also cautious, describing it as &quot;a word always rare and unattested before 1035&quot;.

== Origins ==
The origins of the witan lie in the practice of Germanic kings seeking the advice of their great men. This practice survived within the many Anglo-Saxon kingdoms established after the end of Roman rule in Britain. Maddicott writes that these early &quot;royal assemblies lacked the institutional qualities of regularity, formality of structure, and a distinctive agenda&quot; seen in later assemblies. They were also distinctly local. The first recorded act of a witenagemot was the law code of King Æthelberht of Kent , the earliest document which survives in sustained Old English prose.

Before the 9th century, only church councils, such as the Council of Hertford in 672, transcended the boundaries of individual kingdoms. With the unification of England in the 10th century, the witan acquired a national scope for the first time.

== Attendance and locations ==
According to historian Bryce Lyon, the witan &quot;was an sort of organization with no definite composition or function&quot;. It does appear, however, that an indispensable requirement was the presence of leading secular and ecclesiastical magnates. Kings issued royal charters at meetings of the witan, and the witness lists to these charters also served as attendance lists. About 2,000 charters and 40 law codes attest to the workings of around 300 recorded witan meetings. Typically, scribes listed witnesses in hierarchical order, with the king listed first, followed by: 
* the queen 
* æthelings (princes)
* bishops
* abbots 
* ealdormen (later earls)
* thegns

When English kings claimed overlordship over their Welsh neighbors, the Welsh kings might also be in attendance.

Anglo-Saxon England lacked a fixed capital, and the royal court was itinerant. The witan convened at various locations, including royal palaces, towns, and hunting lodges. Between 900 and 1066, over 50 locations were recorded. London and Winchester were popular meeting places, and other locations included: Abingdon, Amesbury, Andover, Aylesford, Cookham, Dorchester, Faversham, King&#x27;s Enham, Southampton, Wantage, Oxford, Kirtlington, and Woodstock. In the West Country, meetings were held at Gloucester, Axminster, Bath, Calne, Cheddar, Chippenham, Cirencester, Edington, Malmesbury, Winchcombe, and Exeter. While meetings in the North were rare, the witan did convene at Nottingham in 934 and at Lincoln in 1045. The witan could meet at any time, but it often gathered during Christmas, Lent, and Easter when many nobles were present at court.

== Role ==
The witan played a significant role in legislation. The king and his advisers would draft laws and then seek the witan&#x27;s consultation and consent. As Lyon points out, this process was a testament to the king&#x27;s belief in gathering opinions from all parts of the kingdom, which &quot;produced a wider sampling of opinion and gave the law more solid support&quot;. The witan took part in both secular and ecclesiastical legislation. Church law, however, was drafted by the clergy, with lay nobles merely giving consent. 

The witan&#x27;s influence was not limited to legislation. The king sought its advice and consent for extraordinary taxation that would burden the nobility, such as the Danegeld.The witan deliberated on matters of war, peace, and treaties. The declaration of royal wills occurred at witan meetings.

Kings issued charters granting bookland at witan meetings. The witness lists attached to these charters proved that the witan consented to the grants. This practice originated from the late Roman law, which required witnesses for private transactions. Historian Levi Roach explains that the &quot;adoption of this method of authentication for early English diplomas is understandable: in the absence of direct bureaucratic continuity with the late Roman Empire, which effectively precluded sealing or notarial subscription, as practised elsewhere, the use of witnesses, mirroring the methods of authentication used for private transactions on the continent, was an elegant solution.&quot;

== Electing and deposing kings ==
The witan was noted by contemporary sources as having the singular power to , from amongst the extended royal family. Nevertheless, at least until the 11th century, royal succession generally followed the &quot;ordinary system of primogeniture&quot;. The historian Chadwick interpreted these facts as proof that the so-called election of the king by the witan merely amounted to formal recognition of the deceased king&#x27;s natural successor. But Liebermann was generally less willing than Chadwick to see the witan&#x27;s significance as buried under the weight of the royal prerogative:

Liebermann&#x27;s more subtle position seems to be vindicated by testimony from abbot Ælfric of Eynsham, the leading homilist of the late tenth century, who wrote:

In addition to having a role in the election of kings, it is often held that the witenagemots had the power to depose an unpopular king. However, there are only two occasions when this probably happened, in 757 and 774 with the depositions of kings Sigeberht of Wessex and Alhred of Northumbria respectively.

The witan&#x27;s powers are illustrated by the following event. In the year 1013 King Æthelred II (Æthelred the Unready) fled the country from Sweyn Forkbeard, who then had the witan proclaim him king. Within a few weeks, however, Sweyn died and Æthelred was called back to England by the witan. According to the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot;, the witan would only receive him back under the condition that he promise to rule better than he had. Æthelred did so, and was reinstated as King of England. His nickname of the &#x27;Unræd&#x27; or &#x27;Unready&#x27; means ill-advised, indicating that contemporaries regarded those who sat in the witan as part responsible for the failure of his reign.

At the end of 1065, King Edward the Confessor fell into a coma without clarifying his preference for the succession. He died on 5 January 1066, according to the Vita Ædwardi Regis, but not before briefly regaining consciousness and commending his widow and the kingdom to Harold&#x27;s &quot;protection&quot;. When the witan convened the next day they selected Harold to succeed as ruler of England.

== Norman Conquest ==

After the Norman Conquest in 1066, William I replaced the witan with the curia regis (Latin for ). In a sign of the witan&#x27;s enduring legacy, the curia regis continued to be dubbed a &quot;witan&quot; by chroniclers until as late as the 12th century. Maddicott writes that the witan (what he terms &quot;royal assemblies&quot;) were &quot;the direct forebears of the councils of post-Conquest England and the parliaments which were the councils&#x27; descendants&quot;.

==Historiography==
The &quot;Saxon myth&quot; claimed that the old Saxon witan was the representative assembly of English landholders until disbanded by the Norman invaders and that it reemerged as the Parliament of England. This idea was held across the Thirteen Colonies in North America in the years prior to the American Revolution (1776–1783). Among the believers were Thomas Jefferson and Jonathan Mayhew. The Whig historians of the 19th century were concerned with explaining the evolution of the English constitution, and they found in the witan a proto-parliament or in the words of Felix Liebermann, &quot;one of the lineal ancestors of the British Parliament&quot;. 

After World War I, historians such as Frank Stenton and Dorothy Whitelock shifted their focus to understanding the Anglo-Saxon period on its own terms. In his 1943 &quot;Anglo-Saxon England&quot;, Stenton chose to use the term &quot;King&#x27;s Council&quot; in place of &quot;witan&quot; and &quot;witenagemot&quot;. This change in terminology signaled an important change in the way Anglo-Saxon political assemblies were perceived. Instead of proto-parliaments, the assemblies were essentially royal institutions. Other historians followed Stenton&#x27;s lead. 

Scholars such as Stenton have noted that the witenagemot was in many ways different from the future institution of the Parliament of England; it had substantially different powers and some major limitations, such as a lack of a fixed procedure, schedule, or meeting place. In his 1995 biography of Alfred the Great, historian David Sturdy argues that the witan did not embody modern notions of a &quot;national institution&quot; or a &quot;democratic&quot; body. He writes, &quot;Victorian notions of a national &#x27;witan&#x27; are crazy dreams without foundation, myths of a &#x27;democratic parliament&#x27; that never was.&quot;

While many modern historians avoid the terms &quot;witan&quot; and &quot;witenagemot&quot;, few would go as far as Geoffrey Hindley, who described &quot;witenagemot&quot; as an &quot;essentially Victorian&quot; coinage. &quot;The Blackwell Encyclopaedia of Anglo-Saxon England&quot; prefers &quot;king&#x27;s council&quot; but adds that it was known in Old English as the witan. Maddicott regarded the word &quot;witan&quot; with suspicion, even though it is used in sources such as the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot;. In his study of the origins of the English parliament, he generally preferred the more neutral word &quot;assembly&quot;: 

Henrietta Leyser commented in 2017 that for decades historians avoided using the word &quot;witan&quot; for assemblies in case they were interpreted as proto-parliaments, and she went on: &quot;Recent historiography, however, has reintroduced the term since it is clear that it was generally accepted that certain kinds of business could only be transacted with a substantial number of the king&#x27;s wise men, in other words, in the company of his &#x27;witan. She does not mention the term &quot;witenagemot&quot;.

==See also==

*Councils of Clovesho
*Elective monarchy
*Kurultai
*Loya Jirga, a similar concept from Afghanistan
*Majlis
*Panchayati Raj
*Oyomesi

==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 1st edition available at the Internet Archive.
*
*
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q497578" start="4" end="9" title="Witan" label="witan"/>
<link wikidata="Q122423514" start="48" end="81" title="Government in Anglo-Saxon England" label="Anglo-Saxon government of England"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="157" end="165" title="British nobility#Early English period" label="noblemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114438" start="177" end="186" title="ealdormen" label="ealdormen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234429" start="188" end="193" title="thegn" label="thegn"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="200" end="206" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q497578" start="257" end="268" title="Witan" label="witenagemot"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="495" end="510" title="Norman Conquest" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q672507" start="581" end="592" title="curia regis" label="curia regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="638" end="659" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q192683" start="867" end="873" title="ad hoc" label="ad hoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="925" end="936" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498357" start="1091" end="1102" title="shire court" label="shire court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236490" start="1104" end="1135" title="Wulfstan II, Archbishop of York" label="Wulfstan II, Archbishop of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="1484" end="1493" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1641" end="1646" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246354" start="1723" end="1737" title="John Maddicott" label="John Maddicott"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="1794" end="1802" title="Norman Conquest" label="Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1827" end="1846" title="Edward the Confessor#Crisis of 1051–52" label="crisis of 1051–1052"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147862" start="1848" end="1863" title="Patrick Wormald" label="Patrick Wormald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253359" start="2022" end="2036" title="Germanic kingship" label="Germanic kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q237945" start="2115" end="2135" title="Anglo-Saxon kingdoms" label="Anglo-Saxon kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632793" start="2158" end="2186" title="end of Roman rule in Britain" label="end of Roman rule in Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184958" start="2457" end="2484" title="Law of Æthelberht" label="law code of King Æthelberht"/>
<link wikidata="Q328818" start="2488" end="2492" title="Kingdom of Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="2594" end="2608" title="church council" label="church council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176418" start="2623" end="2642" title="Council of Hertford" label="Council of Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="2711" end="2733" title="unification of England" label="unification of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670616" start="2866" end="2876" title="Bryce Lyon" label="Bryce Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q903810" start="3084" end="3091" title="magnate" label="magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543944" start="3107" end="3121" title="Anglo-Saxon charters" label="royal charters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361208" start="3437" end="3445" title="ætheling" label="ætheling"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="3459" end="3465" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="3469" end="3474" title="abbot" label="abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114438" start="3479" end="3488" title="ealdormen" label="ealdormen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="3496" end="3500" title="earl" label="earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234429" start="3505" end="3510" title="thegn" label="thegn"/>
<link wikidata="Q599900" start="3585" end="3596" title="List of rulers in Wales" label="Welsh kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141881" start="3695" end="3704" title="Itinerant court" label="itinerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q338466" start="3854" end="3860" title="Anglo-Saxon London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="3865" end="3875" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344070" start="4091" end="4103" title="West Country" label="West Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="4127" end="4137" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788657" start="4265" end="4270" title="Northern England" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053187" start="4985" end="4988" title="Catholic laity" label="lay"/>
<link wikidata="Q301742" start="5190" end="5198" title="Danegeld" label="Danegeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="5286" end="5291" title="Will and testament" label="wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4090568" start="5352" end="5360" title="Bookland (law)" label="bookland"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="5511" end="5520" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876161" start="5583" end="5593" title="Levi Roach" label="Levi Roach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5678" end="5686" title="Anglo-Saxon charters#Diplomas" label="diplomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="6275" end="6288" title="primogeniture" label="primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q271377" start="6723" end="6740" title="Ælfric of Eynsham" label="Ælfric of Eynsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250390" start="6754" end="6762" title="Homily" label="homilist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260782" start="6913" end="6919" title="Deposition (politics)" label="depose"/>
<link wikidata="Q468184" start="7051" end="7070" title="Sigeberht of Wessex" label="Sigeberht of Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q879978" start="7075" end="7096" title="Alhred of Northumbria" label="Alhred of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181896" start="7255" end="7270" title="Sweyn Forkbeard" label="Sweyn Forkbeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="7601" end="7616" title="King of England" label="King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="8250" end="8265" title="Norman Conquest" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="8275" end="8284" title="William the Conqueror" label="William I"/>
<link wikidata="Q672507" start="8313" end="8324" title="curia regis" label="curia regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570091" start="8448" end="8459" title="List of English chronicles" label="chroniclers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="8917" end="8938" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="8970" end="8987" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="9031" end="9050" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="9089" end="9105" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273860" start="9110" end="9125" title="Jonathan Mayhew" label="Jonathan Mayhew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660437" start="9131" end="9146" title="Whig historians" label="Whig historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="9219" end="9239" title="Constitution of the United Kingdom" label="English constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q97734" start="9307" end="9323" title="Felix Liebermann" label="Felix Liebermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308616" start="9432" end="9445" title="Frank Stenton" label="Frank Stenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298683" start="9450" end="9467" title="Dorothy Whitelock" label="Dorothy Whitelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="10257" end="10273" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="10439" end="10448" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q212746" start="11087" end="11108" title="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" label="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132443" start="11240" end="11256" title="Henrietta Leyser" label="Henrietta Leyser"/>
<link wikidata="Q655645" start="11774" end="11794" title="Councils of Clovesho" label="Councils of Clovesho"/>
<link wikidata="Q584683" start="11796" end="11813" title="Elective monarchy" label="Elective monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q136649" start="11815" end="11823" title="Kurultai" label="Kurultai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192317" start="11825" end="11835" title="Loya Jirga" label="Loya Jirga"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="11860" end="11871" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858057" start="11873" end="11879" title="Majlis" label="Majlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20202367" start="11881" end="11895" title="Panchayati Raj" label="Panchayati Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359017" start="11897" end="11904" title="Oyo Mesi" label="Oyomesi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40147" wikidata="Q93190" url="?curid=40147" title="Divorce">
<text>Divorce (also known as dissolution of marriage) is the process of terminating a marriage or marital union. Divorce usually entails the canceling or reorganising of the legal duties and responsibilities of marriage, thus dissolving the bonds of matrimony between a married couple under the rule of law of the particular country or state. It can be said to be a legal dissolution of a marriage by a court or other competent body. It is the legal process of ending a marriage.

Divorce laws vary considerably around the world, but in most countries, divorce is a legal process that requires the sanction of a court or other authority, which may involve issues of distribution of property, child custody, alimony (spousal support), child visitation / access, parenting time, child support, and division of debt. In most countries, monogamy is required by law, so divorce allows each former partner to marry another person.

Divorce is different from annulment, which declares the marriage null and void, with legal separation or &quot;de jure&quot; separation (a legal process by which a married couple may formalize a &quot;de facto&quot; separation while remaining legally married) or with &quot;de facto separation&quot; (a process where the spouses informally stop cohabiting). Reasons for divorce vary, from sexual incompatibility or lack of independence for one or both spouses to a personality clash or infidelity.

The only countries that do not allow divorce are the Philippines and the Vatican City. In the Philippines, divorce for non-Muslim Filipinos is not legal unless one spouse is an undocumented immigrant and satisfies certain conditions. The Vatican City is a theocratic state ruled by the head of the Catholic Church, and does not allow for divorce. Countries that have relatively recently legalized divorce are Italy (1970), Portugal (1975, although from 1910 to 1940 it was possible both for the civil and religious marriage), Brazil (1977), Spain (1981), Argentina (1987), Paraguay (1991), Colombia (1991; from 1976 was allowed only for non-Catholics), Andorra (1995), Ireland (1996), Chile (2004) and Malta (2011).

==Overview==
Grounds for divorce vary widely from country to country. Marriage may be seen as a contract, a status, or a combination of these. Where it is seen as a contract, the refusal or inability of one spouse to perform the obligations stipulated in the contract may constitute a ground for divorce for the other spouse. In contrast, in some countries (such as Sweden, Finland, Australia, New Zealand), divorce is purely no fault. This means it does not matter what the reasons are that a party or parties want to separate. They can separate of their own free will without having to prove someone is at fault for the divorce. Many jurisdictions offer both the option of a &quot;no fault&quot; divorce as well as an &quot;at fault&quot; divorce. This is the case, for example, in many states of the US, France and the Czech Republic.

Though divorce laws vary between jurisdictions, there are two basic approaches to divorce: fault based and no-fault based. However, even in some jurisdictions that do not require a party to claim fault of their partner, a court may still take into account the behavior of the parties when dividing property, debts, evaluating custody, shared care arrangements and support. In some jurisdictions, one spouse may be forced to pay the attorney&#x27;s fees of another spouse.

Laws vary as to the waiting period before a divorce is effective. Also, residency requirements vary. However, issues of division of property are typically determined by the law of the jurisdiction in which the property is located.

In Europe, divorce laws differ from country to country, reflecting differing legal and cultural traditions. In some countries, particularly (but not only) in some former communist countries, divorce can be obtained only on one single general ground of &quot;irretrievable breakdown of the marriage&quot; (or a similar formulation). Yet, what constitutes such a &quot;breakdown&quot; of the marriage is interpreted very differently from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, ranging from very liberal interpretations (e.g. Netherlands) to quite restrictive ones (e.g., in Poland, there must be an &quot;irretrievable and complete disintegration of matrimonial life&quot;, but there are many restrictions to granting a divorce). Separation constitutes a ground of divorce in some European countries (in Germany, e.g., a divorce is granted on the basis of a 1-year separation if both spouses consent, or 3-year separation if only one spouse consents). Note that &quot;separation&quot; does not necessarily mean separate residences – in some jurisdictions, living in the same household but leading a separate life (e.g., eating, sleeping, socializing, etc. separately) is sufficient to constitute &quot;de facto&quot; separation; this is explicitly stated, e.g., in the family laws of Latvia or the Czech Republic.

Divorce laws are not static; they often change reflecting evolving social norms of societies. In the 21st century, many European countries have made changes to their divorce laws, in particular by reducing the length of the necessary periods of separation, e.g., Scotland in 2006 (1 or 2 years from the previous 2 or 5 years); France in 2005 (2 years from the previous 6 years), Switzerland in 2005 (2 years from the previous 4 years), Greece in 2008 (2 years from the previous 4 years). Some countries have completely overhauled their divorce laws, such as Spain in 2005, and Portugal in 2008. A new divorce law also came into force in September 2007 in Belgium, creating a new system that is primarily no-fault. Bulgaria also modified its divorce regulations in 2009. Also in Italy, new laws came into force in 2014 and 2015 with significant changes in Italian law in matter of divorce: apart from shortening of the period of obligatory separation (6 months for consensual separations and 1 year for contested ones from the previous 3 years), are allowed other forms of getting a divorce – as an alternative to court proceedings, i.e. the negotiations with the participation of an advocate or agreement made before the registrar of Public Registry Office. Austria by contrast is a European country where the divorce law still remains conservative.

The liberalization of divorce laws is not without opposition, particularly in the United States. Indeed, in the US, certain conservative and religious organizations are lobbying for laws which restrict divorce. In 2011, in the US, the Coalition for Divorce Reform was established, describing itself as an organization &quot;dedicated to supporting efforts to reduce unnecessary divorce and promote healthy marriages&quot;.

The magisterium of the Roman Catholic Church founds the concept of marriage on natural moral law, elaborated by St. Thomas Aquinas, supplemented by the revealed Divine law. The doctrine of the Doctor Angelicus has been partially shared by the Eastern Orthodox Church in the course of history.

==Law==
===Types===
In some jurisdictions, the courts will seldom apply principles of fault, but might willingly hold a party liable for a breach of a fiduciary duty to his or her spouse. Grounds for divorce differs from jurisdiction to jurisdiction in the worldwide. Some states have no-fault divorce; some states require a declaration of fault on the part of one partner or both; some states allow either method.

In most jurisdictions, a divorce must be certified or ordered by a Judge in a court of law to come into effect. The terms of the divorce are usually determined by the courts, though they may take into account prenuptial agreements or post-nuptial agreements, or ratify terms that the spouses may have agreed to privately, while in other areas, agreements related to the marriage have to be rendered in writing to be enforceable. In the absence of agreement, a contested divorce may be stressful to the spouses.

In some countries, when the spouses agree to divorce and to the terms of the divorce, it can be certified by a non-judiciary administrative entity. The effect of a divorce is that both parties are free to marry again if a filing in an appellate court does not overturn the decision.

====Contested divorce====
Contested divorces mean that one of several issues are required to be heard by a judge at trial level—this is more expensive, and the parties will have to pay for a lawyer&#x27;s time and preparation. In such a divorce the spouses are not able to agree on issues for instance child custody and division of marital assets. In such situations, the litigation process takes longer to conclude. The judge controls the outcome of the case. Less adversarial approaches to divorce settlements have recently emerged, such as mediation and collaborative divorce settlement, which negotiate mutually acceptable resolution to conflicts. This principle in the United States is called &#x27;Alternative Dispute Resolution&#x27; and has gained popularity.

====At-fault divorce====
Before the late 1960s, nearly all countries that permitted divorce required proof by one party that the other party had committed an act incompatible with the marriage. This was termed &quot;grounds&quot; for divorce (popularly called &quot;fault&quot;) and was the only way to terminate a marriage. No-fault divorce is available in Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the United States and other Western countries.

Fault-based divorces can be contested; evaluation of offences may involve allegations of collusion of the parties working together to get the divorce, or condonation by approving the offence, connivance by tricking someone into committing an offence, or provocation by the other party. Contested fault divorces can be expensive, and not usually practical as eventually most divorces are granted. Comparative rectitude is a doctrine used to determine which spouse is more at fault when both spouses are guilty of breaches.

The grounds for a divorce which a party could raise and need to prove included 
* desertion 
* abandonment (typically 1 year)
* cruelty
* habitual drunkenness
* drug addiction
* adultery

The requirement of proving a ground was revised and withdrawn by the terms of &#x27;no-fault&#x27; statutes, which became popular in many Western countries in the late 1960s and early 1970s. In &#x27;no-fault&#x27; jurisdictions divorce can be obtained either on a simple allegation of &#x27;irreconcilable differences,&#x27; &#x27;irretrievable break-down&#x27;, or &#x27;incompatibility&#x27; with respect to the marriage relationship, or on the ground of separation.

====Summary divorce====
A summary or simple divorce, available in some jurisdictions, is used when spouses meet certain eligibility requirements or can agree on key issues beforehand.

Key factors:
* Short duration of marriage (less than five years)
* Absence of children (or, in some jurisdictions, prior allocation of child custody and of child-support direction and amount)
* Absence or minimal value of real property at issue and any associated encumbrances such as mortgages
* Absence of agreed-as-marital property above a given value threshold (around $35,000 not including vehicles)
* Absence, with respect to each spouse, of claims to personal property above a given value threshold, typically the same as that for total marital property, with such claims including claims to exclusive previous ownership of property described by the other spouse as marital

==== No-fault divorce ====
Most Western jurisdictions have a no-fault divorce system, in which a divorce can be granted based only on the assertion by one of the parties that the marriage has broken down irretrievably, without any need for an allegation or proof of fault. The application can be made by either party or by both parties jointly.

In jurisdictions adopting the no-fault principle, some courts may still take fault into account when determining some aspects of the terms of the divorce decree, for example, the division of property and debts and provision of spousal support. Some behaviors that may constitute marital fault, such as violence, cruelty, or substance abuse may also be considered when determining child custody, but child custody judgements are made based on a different fundamental standard: the child&#x27;s or children&#x27;s best interests.

====Uncontested divorce====
A large percentage of divorce cases are &quot;uncontested&quot;, meaning that the parties to the divorce are able to come to an agreement about the division of property, custody children, and support issues instead of having those issues decided by a judge. This is also known as mutual consent divorce or mutual divorce. When the parties can agree and present the court with a fair and equitable agreement, approval of the divorce is typically granted. Where the issues are not complex and the parties are cooperative, a settlement often can be directly negotiated between them. If the two parties cannot come to an agreement, they may ask the court to decide how to split property and deal with the custody of their children. Though this may be necessary, the courts would prefer parties to come to an agreement prior to entering court.

In the United States, many state court systems report that a significant number of divorce cases are filed &quot;pro se&quot;, meaning that the parties to the divorce represent themselves without a lawyer. For example, courts in urban areas of California report that almost 80% of new divorces are filed &quot;pro se&quot;.

====Collaborative divorce====
Collaborative divorce is a method for divorcing couples to come to an agreement on divorce issues. In a collaborative divorce, the parties negotiate an agreed resolution with the assistance of attorneys who are trained in the collaborative divorce process and in mediation and often with the assistance of a neutral financial specialist or divorce coaches. The parties are empowered to make their own decisions based on their own needs and interests, but with complete information and full professional support.

Once the collaborative divorce starts, the lawyers are disqualified from representing the parties in a contested legal proceeding, should the collaborative law process end prematurely. Most attorneys who practise collaborative divorce claim that it can be more cost-effective than other divorce methods, &quot;e.g.&quot;, going to court.

====Electronic divorce====
Portugal, for example, allows two persons to file an electronic request for no-fault collaborative divorce in a non judiciary administrative entity. In specific cases, with no children, real property, alimony, or common address, can be completed within one hour.

====Mediated divorce====
Divorce mediation is an alternative to traditional divorce litigation. In a divorce mediation session, a mediator facilitates the discussion between the two parties by assisting with communication and providing information and suggestions to help resolve differences. At the end of the mediation process, the separating parties have typically developed a tailored divorce agreement that can be submitted to the court. Mediation sessions can include either party&#x27;s attorneys, a neutral attorney, or an attorney-mediator who can inform both parties of their legal rights, but does not provide advice to either, or can be conducted with the assistance of a facilitative or transformative mediator without attorneys present at all. Some mediation companies, such as Wevorce, also pair clients with counselors, financial planners and other professionals to work through common mediation sticking points. Divorce mediators may be attorneys who have experience in divorce cases, or they may be professional mediators who are not attorneys, but who have training specifically in the area of family court matters. Divorce mediation can be significantly less costly, both financially and emotionally, than litigation. The adherence rate to mediated agreements is much higher than that of adherence to court orders.

==Polygamy and divorce==
Polygamy is a significant structural factor governing divorce in countries where this is permitted. Little-to-no analysis has been completed to explicitly explain the link between marital instability and polygyny which leads to divorce. The frequency of divorce rises in polygynous marriages compared to monogamous relationships. Within polygynous unions, differences in conjugal stability are found to occur by wife order. There are 3 main mechanisms through which polygyny affects divorce: economic restraint, sexual satisfaction, and childlessness. Many women escape economic restraint through divorcing their spouses when they are allowed to initiate a divorce.

==Religion and divorce==
In some countries (commonly in Europe and North America), the government defines and administers marriages and divorces. While ceremonies may be performed by religious officials on behalf of the state, a civil marriage and thus, civil divorce (without the involvement of a religion) is also possible. Due to differing standards and procedures, a couple can be legally unmarried, married, or divorced by the state&#x27;s definition, but have a different status as defined by a religious order. Other countries use religious law to administer marriages and divorces, eliminating this distinction. In these cases, religious officials are generally responsible for interpretation and implementation.

Islam allows, yet generally advises against divorce, and it can be initiated by either the husband or the wife.

Christian views on divorce vary: Catholic teaching allows only annulment, while most other denominations discourage it except in the event of adultery. For example, the Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection, in its 2014 Discipline, teaches:
Jewish views of divorce differ, with Reform Judaism considering civil divorces adequate; Conservative and Orthodox Judaism, on the other hand, require that the husband grant his wife a divorce in the form of a &quot;get&quot;.

The Millet System, where each religious group regulates its own marriages and divorces, is still present in varying degrees in some post−Ottoman countries including Iraq, Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, Israel, the Palestinian Authority and Egypt. Several countries use sharia (Islamic law) to administrate marriages and divorces for Muslims. Thus, Marriage in Israel is administered separately by each religious community (Jews, Christians, Muslims, and Druze), and there is no provision for interfaith marriages other than marrying in another country. For Jews, marriage and divorce are administered by Orthodox rabbis. Partners can file for divorce either in rabbinical court or Israeli civil court.

==Gender and divorce==
According to a study published in the American Law and Economics Review, women have filed slightly more than two-thirds of divorce cases in the United States. This trend is mirrored in the UK where a recent study into web search behavior found that 70% of divorce inquiries were from women. These findings also correlate with the Office for National Statistics publication &quot;Divorces in England and Wales 2012&quot; which reported that divorce petitions from women outnumber those from men by 2 to 1.

Regarding divorce settlements, according to the 2004 Grant Thornton survey in the UK, women obtained a better or considerably better settlement than men in 60% of cases. In 30% of cases the assets were split 50–50, and in only 10% of cases did men achieve better settlements (down from 24% the previous year). The report concluded that the percentage of shared residence orders would need to increase in order for more equitable financial divisions to become the norm.

Some jurisdictions give unequal rights to men and women when filing for divorce.

For couples following Conservative or Orthodox Jewish law (which by Israeli civil law includes all Jews in Israel), the husband must grant his wife a divorce through a document called a &quot;get&quot;. Granting the &#x27;get&#x27; obligates him to pay the woman a significant sum of money (10,000-$20,000) as stated on the religious prenuptial contract, which can be in addition to whatever prior settlement he had reached as far as continuous child support and funds he had to pay by court order in the civil divorce. If the man refuses (agreeing on condition he will not have to pay the money is still called refusing), the woman can appeal to a court or the community to pressure the husband. A woman whose husband refuses to grant the get or a woman whose husband is missing without sufficient knowledge that he died, called an agunah, is still married, and therefore cannot remarry. Under Orthodox law, children of an extramarital affair involving a married Jewish woman are considered &quot;mamzerim&quot; and cannot marry non-&quot;mamzerim&quot;.

==Causes==
In the western world as a whole, two thirds of divorces are initiated by women. In the United States, 69% of divorces are initiated by women and this may be due to higher sensitivity to relationship difficulties. 66% of all divorces occur in couples without children. An annual study in the UK by management consultants Grant Thornton, estimates the main proximate causes of divorce based on surveys of matrimonial lawyers. The main causes in 2004 were:
*Adultery – 27%
*Family strains (e.g., from the inlaws) – 18%
*Domestic violence – 17%
*Midlife crisis – 13%
*Addictions, e.g. alcoholism and gambling – 6%
*Workaholism – 6%
*Other factors – 13%

According to this survey, husbands engaged in extramarital affairs in 75% of cases, and wives in 25%. In cases of family strain, wives&#x27; families were the primary source of strain in 78%, compared to 22% of husbands&#x27; families. Emotional and physical abuse were more evenly split, with wives affected in 60% and husbands in 40% of cases. In 70% of workaholism-related divorces it was husbands who were the cause, and in 30%, wives. The 2004 survey found that 93% of divorce cases were petitioned by wives, very few of which were contested. 53% of divorces were marriages that had lasted 10 to 15 years, with 40% ending after 5 to 10 years. The first 5 years are relatively divorce-free, and if a marriage survives more than 20 years it is unlikely to end in divorce.

Social scientists study the causes of divorce in terms of underlying factors that may motivate divorce. One of these factors is the age at which a person gets married; delaying marriage may provide more opportunity or experience in choosing a compatible partner.

Wage, income, and sex ratios are other such underlying factors that have been included in analyses by sociologists and economists. Couples with a high household income are less likely to divorce than poor couples.

Other personal factors, such as attending religious services regularly and having at least one child together, also reduce the risk of divorce.

Other factors include the wedding itself: Spending relatively little money on the wedding, but having a relatively high number of guests in attendance (e.g., 50 or more people) and going on a honeymoon trip, is associated with a lower risk of divorce. High-cost weddings may strain marriages by causing debt stress.

=== Cohabitation effect ===
The elevation of divorce rates among couples who cohabited before marriage is called the &quot;cohabitation effect&quot;. Evidence suggests that although this correlation is partly due to two forms of selection (&quot;a&quot;) that persons whose moral or religious codes permit cohabitation are also more likely to consider divorce permitted by morality or religion and (&quot;b&quot;) that marriage based on low levels of commitment is more common among couples who cohabit than among couples who do not, such that the mean and median levels of commitment at the start of marriage are lower among cohabiting than among non-cohabiting couples), the cohabitation experience itself exerts at least some independent effect on the subsequent marital union.

In 2010, a study by Jay Teachman published in &quot;Journal of Marriage and Family&quot; found that women who have cohabited or had premarital sex with men other than their husbands have an increased risk of divorce and that this effect is strongest for women who have cohabited with multiple men before marriage. To Teachman, the fact that the elevated risk of divorce is only experienced when the premarital partner(s) is someone other than the husband indicates that premarital sex and cohabitation are now a normal part of the courtship process in the United States. This study only considers data on women in the 1995 National Survey of Family Growth in the United States. Divorce is sometimes caused by one of the partners finding the other unattractive.

Recent studies show that the cohabitation effect on divorce varies across different cultures and periods. Another article published in &quot;Journal of Marriage and Family&quot; found that when cohabitation was uncommon in pre-reform China, premarital cohabitation increased the likelihood of subsequent divorce, but this association disappeared when cohabitation became prevalent.

=== Serious medical illnesses ===
Women are six times more likely to be separated or divorced soon after a diagnosis of cancer or multiple sclerosis than men. A review found a small decrease of divorce rate associated with most cancer types, but stated methodological weakness for many published studies which studied the association between divorce and cancer.

==Effects==
Some of the effects associated with divorce include academic, behavioral, and psychological problems. Although this may not always be true, studies suggest that children from divorced families are more likely to exhibit such behavioral issues than non-divorced families.

===Divorce and relationships===
Research done at Northern Illinois University on Family and Child Studies suggests that divorce of couples experiencing high conflict can positively affect families by reducing conflict in the home. There are, however, many instances when the parent-child relationship may suffer due to divorce. Financial support is many times lost when an adult goes through a divorce. The adult may be obligated to obtain additional work to maintain financial stability. This can lead to a negative relationship between the parent and child; the relationship may suffer due to a lack of attention towards the child and minimal parental supervision.

Studies have also shown that parental skills decrease after a divorce occurs; however, this effect is only a temporary change. &quot;Many researchers have shown that a disequilibrium, including diminished parenting skills, occurs in the year following the divorce but that by two years after the divorce re-stabilization has occurred and parenting skills have improved.&quot;

Some couples choose divorce even when one spouse&#x27;s desire to remain married is greater than the other spouse&#x27;s desire to obtain a divorce. In economics, this is known as the Zelder Paradox and is more familiar with marriages that have produced children and less common with childless couples.

Research has also found that recent divorcees report significantly higher hostility levels after the divorce than before, and that this effect applies equally to both male and female divorcees.

In an American Psychological Association study of parents&#x27; relocation after a divorce, researchers found that a move has a long-term effect on children. In the first study conducted amongst 2,000 college students on the effects of parental relocation relating to their children&#x27;s well-being after divorce, researchers found major differences. In divorced families in which one parent moved, the students received less financial support from their parents compared with divorced families in which neither parent moved. These findings also imply other negative outcomes for these students, such as more distress related to the divorce and did not feel a sense of emotional support from their parents. Although the data suggests negative outcomes for these students whose parents relocate after divorce, there is insufficient research that can alone prove the overall well-being of the child A newer study in the &quot;Journal of Family Psychology&quot; found that parents who move more than an hour away from their children after a divorce are much less well off than those parents who stayed in the same location

===Effects on children===
Research has shown that children are greatly affected by the disunion of their parents&#x27; marriage. In most cases these effects are displayed in academic strain, difficulty in regulating mood and emotions, and a tendency to find outlets in harmful substances or activities such as drugs, alcohol, and violence.

====Academic and socioeconomic====
Frequently, children who have experienced a parental divorce have lower academic achievement than children from non-divorced families
A review of family and school factors related to adolescents&#x27; academic performance noted that a child from a divorced family is two times more likely to drop out of high school than a child from a non-divorced family. These children from divorced families may also be less likely to attend college, resulting in the end of their academic career.

Often academic problems are associated with children from single-parent families. Studies have shown that this may be directly related to the economic effect of divorce. A divorce may result in the parent and children moving to an area with a higher poverty rate and a poor education system, because of the financial difficulties of a single parent.

Children of divorced parents also on average achieve lower levels of socioeconomic status, income, and wealth accumulation than children of parents who remain married. These outcomes are associated with lower educational achievement.

Young men or women between the ages of 7 and 16 who had experienced the divorce of their parents were more likely than youths who had not experienced the divorce of their parents to leave home because of friction, to cohabit before marriage, and to parent a child before marriage.

Divorce often leads to worsened academic achievement in children ages 7–12, the most heightened negative effect being reading test scores. These negative effects tend to persist, and even escalate after the divorce or separation occurs.

====Psychological====
Divorce is associated with diminished psychological well-being in children and adult offspring of divorced parents, including greater unhappiness, less satisfaction with life, weaker sense of personal control, anxiety, depression, and greater use of mental health services. A preponderance of evidence indicates that there is a causal effect between divorce and these outcomes.

A study in Sweden led by the Centre for Health Equity Studies (Chess) at Stockholm University/Karolinska Institutet, is published in the &quot;Journal of Epidemiology &amp; Community Health&quot; found that children living with just one parent after divorce suffer from more problems such as headaches, stomach aches, feelings of tension and sadness than those whose parents share custody.

Children of divorced parents are also more likely to experience conflict in their own marriages, and are more likely to experience divorce themselves. They are also more likely to be involved in short-term cohabiting relationships, which often dissolve before marriage. There are many studies that show proof of an intergenerational transmission of divorce, but this does not mean that having divorced parents will absolutely lead a child to divorce. There are two key factors that make this transmission of divorce more likely. First, inherited biological tendencies or genetic conditions may predispose a child to divorce as well as the &quot;model of marriage&quot; presented by the child&#x27;s parents.

According to Nicholas Wall, former President of the Family Division of the English High Court, &quot;People think that post-separation parenting is easy – in fact, it is exceedingly difficult, and as a rule of thumb my experience is that the more intelligent the parent, the more intractable the dispute. There is nothing worse, for most children, than for their parents to denigrate each other. Parents simply do not realize the damage they do to their children by the battles they wage over them. Separating parents rarely behave reasonably, although they always believe that they are doing so, and that the other party is behaving unreasonably.&quot;

Children involved in high-conflict divorce or custody cases can experience varying forms of psychological distress due to conflict between their parents. Legal professionals recognize that alienating behaviors are common in child custody cases, but are cautious about accepting the concept of parental alienation.

Research shows that children can be affected 2–4 years before the separation or divorce even occurs. This can be due to parental conflict and anticipation of a divorce, and decreased parental contact. Many couples believe that by separating, or becoming legally divorced that they are helping their children, and in situations of extreme parental conflict or abuse it most likely will be beneficial.

Exposure to marital conflict and instability, most often has negative consequences for children. Several mechanisms are likely to be responsible. First, observing overt conflict between parents is a direct stressor for children. Observational studies reveal that children react to inter-parental conflict with fear, anger, or the inhibition of normal behavior. Preschool children – who tend to be egocentric – may blame themselves for marital conflict, resulting in feelings of guilt and lowered self-esteem. Conflict between parents also tends to spill over and negatively affect the quality of parents&#x27; interactions with their children. Researchers found that the associations between marital conflict and children&#x27;s externalizing and internalizing problems were largely mediated by parents&#x27; use of harsh punishment and parent–child conflict. Furthermore, modeling verbal or physical aggression, parents &quot;teach&quot; their children that disagreements are resolved through conflict rather than calm discussion. As a result, children may not learn the social skills (such as the ability to negotiate and reach compromises) that are necessary to form mutually rewarding relationships with peers.

Girls and boys deal with divorce differently. For instance, girls who initially show signs of adapting well, later suffer from anxiety in romantic relationships with men. Studies also showed that girls who were separated from their fathers at a younger age tended to be angrier toward the situation as they aged. Anger and sadness were also observed as common feelings in adolescents who had experienced parental divorce.

====Misconduct and substance abuse====

Children of divorced or separated parents exhibit increased behavioral problems and the marital conflict that accompanies parents&#x27; divorce places the child&#x27;s social competence at risk. Children of divorced parents are more likely to search for outlets to cope with their emotions. For many struggling with social understanding and concepts of abuse or a lack of love in the home, drug abuse and general misconduct or violence are some of the indulgences that these children may be involved in.

=== Divorce of elderly couples ===
In the United States of America, since the mid-1990s, the divorce rate has increased to over 50% among baby boomers. More and more seniors are staying single; an analysis of census data conducted at Bowling Green State University predicted that divorce numbers would continue to rise. Baby boomers who remain unmarried are five times more likely to live in poverty than those who are married. They are also three times as likely to receive food stamps, public assistance or disability payments.

Sociologists believe that the rise in the number of older Americans who are not married is a result of factors such as longevity and economics. Women, especially, are becoming more and more financially independent which allows them to feel more secure with being alone, in addition to changing perceptions of being divorced or single. This has resulted in less pressure for baby boomers to marry or stay married.

==Statistics==
===Asia===
==== China ====
China currently holds one of the highest divorce rates in the Asia Pacific region. Compared to 2000, China&#x27;s divorce rates have gone up substantially from a 0.96 crude divorce rate to 3.09 rate in 2020. While China&#x27;s divorce rate has been increasing since 2000, the highest recorded crude divorce rate in the past 20 years was in 2019 with 3.36 divorces. However, since 2019, China&#x27;s recorded divorce rate has gone down.

China has no-fault divorce which was implemented through the New Marriage Law in 1950. This allows individuals to divorce without showing any evidence of wrongdoing. China is one of the only Asian countries which permits no-fault divorce. 

As of January 2021, China introduced a new policy called the &quot;cooling-off rule&quot;.  China, seeing the rise in divorce rates increasing on a yearly basis, the &quot;Marriage and Family Edition of Civil Code of the People&#x27;s Republic of China&quot; secured an article 1077 establishing a mandatory cooling-off period, which has two requirements. First, on the day in which authorities have received the divorce applications, both parties can withdraw the registration within 30 days, and additionally to that, after 30 days are up, couples are required to physically apply for divorce certificate, and if they do not show up, the initial divorce application will be automatically perceived as withdrawn. This novel policy has been extremely controversial, where couples are required to wait for at least 30-days before they can commence a divorce. The 30-day cooling off period is created with the aim of generating more social stability, which avoids couples from making rushed or in-the-heat-of-the-moment emotionally-charged decisions. Family stability has always been culturally rooted in China, influenced by Confucian beliefs where the harmony of family brings the success of everything. A divorce can only be granted when couples have gone through a one-month long delay in order to make a decision.

Since the implementation of the cooling-off rule, China&#x27;s Ministry of Civil Affairs discovered as sharp 72 per cent drop in divorce rates since the last quarter. Given the 30-days of cooling-off time, many couples have changed their minds, supporting the argument that most divorce decisions are made irrationally and emotionally. Although there has been a positive effect to reduce divorce in the country, Chinese citizens are not responding well to the cooling-off policy, which concerns women in marriages experiencing domestic abuse. In fact, from &quot;China Digital Times&quot;, a woman by the name of Kan Xiaofang died of domestic abuse because when she filed for divorce in 2021, she had to wait 30-days for the divorce to be finalized – she was &quot;hacked to death&quot; by her husband. The 30-day rule has angered Chinese feminists, who believes that the policy undermines the concept of freedom, and does not take into consideration of domestic violence, which runs common within Chinese households. The cooling-off policy is still relatively new today, only being less than 2-years old. Therefore, this policy is still one that needs to be examined more deeply to analyze the effect and consequences of delaying the divorce process.

====India====
India has one of the lowest divorce rates in the world with around 1% of marriages ending in divorce, mainly because divorce is still stigmatized and seen as taboo amongst a lot of families in India. A lot of individuals also split without choosing to go through the process of divorce. Even though it was considered as a taboo in 1980s, nowadays people&#x27;s mindset has started to change and taboo against divorce has reduced.

Divorce is governed by various acts in India, depending on the religion of the couple:
* The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
* The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936
* The Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939
* The Special Marriage Act, 1954 
* The Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 
* The Indian Divorce Act, 1869.

==== Indonesia ====
In 2020 there were around 291,000 divorces recorded in Indonesia. These numbers are lower than the previous year – reportedly due to the pandemic and a longer dissolution process. Divorces are settled in religious courts, if they are Muslim, or through &#x27;talaq&#x27; where a married man can pronounce divorce to his wife. There are six grounds of divorce, with an additional two for Muslim marriages, which include:

# One of the spouses has committed adultery, is an alcoholic, is addicted to drugs, is a gambler or has other vices which are difficult to cure
# One of the spouses has deserted the other spouse for two consecutive years – without consent and without legitimate reasons
# One of the spouses has been sentenced to imprisonment for five years or more
# One of the spouses has resorted to cruelty or severe ill-treatment, endangering the life of the other spouse
# One of the spouses has developed a disability or disease, preventing him or her from fulfilling the duties of husband or wife
# The spouses have irreconcilable differences as evidenced by frequent disagreements
# The husband has violated taklik talak (a promise that the husband expressly made and written onto the marriage certificate)
# One party converts from Islam to another faith

==== Iran ====
Iran introduced divorce quotas to break the rise in divorce rates amidst low marriage rates. The law grants the female party easy divorce if there is a certified document showing lack of compatibility. In part because of economic conditions one in every three marriages resulted in divorce by 2021; the high rates are linked to the shifting status of women and empowerment of individuals.

==== Japan ====
In Japan, divorces were on an upward trend from the 1960s until 2002 when they hit a peak of 290,000 divorces. While divorce rates have increased since the 1900s, they have also slightly declined since 2002. In fact, in 2020 there were approximately 193,300 divorces. This is a significant decrease from the prior year, 2019, which recorded 208,489 divorces.

There are several types of divorces in Japan; Divorce by Agreement, Divorce by Conciliation, and Divorce by Judgement.  Divorce by Agreement (rikon), occurs when both parties mutually agree to separate and do not need to go to court. This is the most common type of divorce in Japan. Divorce by Conciliation (chotei rikon) is sought out when individuals are unable to agree on terms or separate. Thus, these cases go to court in hope to come to a mutual agreement for both parties. Lastly, Divorce by Judgement (saiban rikon) occurs when individuals are unable to reach an agreement in court during conciliation. Divorce by judgement is uncommon in Japan.

==== Singapore ====
Singapore has a crude divorce rate of 1.7 divorce per 1,000 residents. Singapore has seen a decrease in divorce rates compared to previous years. In fact, 2020 marks the lowest number of divorces recorded. In 2020, there were 6,700 divorces compared to 2015–2019, which recorded an average number of 7,536 marital dissolutions. Additionally, most divorces were initiated by women.

Singapore requires the applicant to be married for three years before filing for divorce. That being said, if one has suffered exceptional hardship, they are eligible to file for divorce before the three years. Additionally, to get a divorce, there must be proof of an &quot;irretrievable breakdown&quot; of one of the four factors which include adultery, unreasonable behaviour, desertion and separation.

==== South Korea ====
The crude divorce rate in South Korea in 2020 was 2.1. Compared to prior years, the number of divorces recorded depicts that there are less filed divorces each year. Both the number of marriages and divorces decreased from 2019 by 10.7% and 3.9% respectively.

The highest proportion of divorces in 2020 was amongst those who have been married for 20 years or more followed by those who have been married for four years or less. Such findings may suggest that divorce has become more socially accepted in South Korea and the stigma behind separating has lessened.

====Taiwan====
Taiwan&#x27;s divorce rate in 2020 stood at 2.19 divorces per 1,000 residents. This is the lowest recorded divorce rate in the past 10 years. Many divorces in Taiwan are not done in court if there is a mutual agreement. If one of the parties does not consent to the divorce, then the other spouse may file for divorce under a valid reason of bigamy, infidelity, ill treatment or desertion. Before 2020, adultery in Taiwan was considered a crime and punishable by law.

===Europe===
Divorce has increased across Europe in the past decade – the rate varies between European countries. One study estimated that legal reforms accounted for about 20% increase of the divorce rates in Europe between 1960 and 2002. In 2019, Luxembourg had the highest divorce rate per 100 marriages followed by Portugal, Finland, and Spain. Countries in Europe with some of the lowest number of divorces per 100 marriages are Ireland and Malta.

====Serbia====

On average, for every three new marriages in Serbia, one divorce occurs. In 2019, 35,570 marriages were concluded in Serbia, 10,899 marriages were divorced, and the number of divorces per 1,000 inhabitants was 1.6%.

====Sweden====
The divorce proceedings begin with an application for separation of marriage to the district court. The application can be submitted by both parties jointly, if the spouses are in agreement, or individually by any of the parties, who do not have to agree to a divorce. Spouses who agree to a divorce, and do not have children under the age of 16, receive a judgment (decision) of divorce within a few weeks. If there are children under the age of 16 (including step children), the parties must wait 6 months before either, or both, parties may request completion of the divorce, in order to be formally separated in marriage. If the parties have lived apart for at least two years before the application for separation of marriage, the district court may decide on a direct divorce.

Fifty percent of all marriages in Sweden end in a divorce. Marriages that ended in a divorce lasted an average of 11.7 years. The most common age for divorce is between 35 and 49. Couples without mutual children separate or divorce most frequently.

====United Kingdom====

In 2015, the highest divorces rates in the UK were recorded all beside the sea, with Blackpool in the top position. The UK divorce rate is estimated at 42% and in 2019, around 107,599 divorces were reported. The highest number of divorce applications are reportedly made on Divorce Day, which is always the first Monday of the new year.

===North America===
====United States====
The crude divorce rate in 2022 in the United States is 2.3 divorces. This is significantly lower than prior years, such as those in 2001 where 4.1 divorces were recorded. These recent findings suggest a downward trend of the number of people dissolving their marriage. However, divorce rates range from state to state.

The National Center for Health Statistics reports that wives, with children present, filed for divorce in approximately two-thirds of cases from 1975 to 1988 in the U.S. For example, 71.4% of the cases were filed by women in 1975 and 65% were filed by women in 1988. It is estimated that upwards of 95% of divorces in the U.S. are &quot;uncontested&quot;, because the two parties are able to come to an agreement without a hearing (either with or without lawyers/mediators/collaborative counsel) about the property, children, and support issues.

In 2000, the divorce rate reached its peak at 40% but has since slowly declined. In 2001, marriages between people of different faiths were three times more likely to get divorced than those of the same faith. In fact, in a 1993 study, members of two mainline Protestant religions had a 20% chance of being divorced in 5 years; a 33% for a Catholic and Evangelical, and a 40% chance for a Jew and a Christian.

Couples with different ethnicities and races also had distinctive divorce statistics. In 2008, a study by Jenifer L. Bratter and Rosalind B. King on the Education Resources Information Center, found that unions between White males and non-White females as well as between Hispanics and non-Hispanic individuals, have similar or lower risks of divorce than White marriages. Unions between a White male and Black female last longer than White-White pairings or White-Asian pairings. Conversely, a White female with a Black male and White female with an Asian male are more prone to divorce than White-White pairings.

Additionally, as found in 2010, success in marriage has been associated with a higher education and older age. For example, 81% of college graduates who were over 26 years old, who wed in the 1980s, were still married 20 years later. Additionally, 65% of college graduates under 26, who married in the 1980s, were still married 20 years later. Furthermore, 49% of high school graduates under 26 years old, who married in the 1980s, were still married 20 years later. Conversely, 2.9% of adults aged 35–39 and without a college degree got divorced in the year 2009 – compared with 1.6% with a college education.

Another study looking at population differences found that a 1% increase in the unemployment rate correlated with a 1% decrease in the divorce rate. This was found to be presumably true for individuals who were financially challenged when trying to afford the legal proceedings. Nevertheless, another study from 1900 to 2008 found that there was a significant increase in the risk of divorce following a layoff and being unemployed.

===Oceania===

====Australia====
The crude divorce rate in Australia in 2020 was 1.9 divorces per 1,000 residents. This rate has remained somewhat consistent throughout the past few years and is the same as the previous year. However, as divorces are granted after 12 months of separation, splits during COVID may not be reflected in the current divorce rate. The divorce rate has decreased substantially over the past 20 years with 2.6 divorces recorded per 1,000 residents in 2000. In order to apply for divorce, one must be separated for at least 12 months.

==== New Zealand ====

New Zealand&#x27;s divorce rate in 2020 was 7.6 divorces per 1,000 residents. This rate marks a decrease from previous years – such as those in 1983 with a crude divorce rate of 13.3. In fact, this rate has decreased significantly from the previous year, 2019, with a divorce rate of 8.4. Before filing for divorce, the parties must be separated for at least two years. After this time, either party is able to submit an application. If it is a joint application but the parties do not appear in court, a dissolution order can be granted with the divorce taking effect after one month. If the parties appear in court together, the judge can make the dissolution order and the divorce will be effective immediately. If one party applies as a sole application, then the other spouse has the opportunity to defend it within a certain time period.

=== Africa ===

==== South Africa ====
According to Statistics South Africa, the number of divorces increased by 0.3% from 25,260 divorces granted in 2015 to 25,326 granted in 2016. About 44.4% of the 2016 divorces came from marriages that did not reach their tenth wedding anniversary. About 51.1% of divorces in 2016 were filed by women while men filed 34.2% divorce cases.

== Social attitudes ==
Attitudes toward divorce vary substantially across the world. Divorce is considered socially unacceptable by most of the population in certain sub-Saharan African countries such as Ghana, Uganda, Nigeria and Kenya, South Asian countries including India and Pakistan and South-East Asian countries such as the Philippines and Indonesia. The majority of the population considers divorce acceptable in Europe, Latin America and the United States. Divorce is also widely accepted in certain Muslim majority countries such as Jordan, Egypt and Lebanon, at least when men initiate it.

Mauritania is unusual for having a long history of accepting and celebrating divorce. Although exact statistics are not available, Mauritania is believed to have the highest divorce rate by far in the world, and it is not unusual for adults in Mauritania to marry and divorce five to ten times during their lifetimes.

Research has shown that unhappily married couples suffer 3–25 times the risk of developing clinical depression.

==In same-sex married couples==

The legal process of divorce by same-sex couples is generally the same as any other.

Same-sex marriage was introduced in large European countries relatively recently: France in 2013, the UK in 2014, and Germany in 2017. Consequently, there have been relatively few studies of divorce by same-sex couples, and they have produced some conflicting information. In some countries, such as Norway and Sweden, lesbian couples may be more likely to divorce than gay couples or opposite-sex couples. Same-sex couples in rural areas may have a higher divorce rate.

===Rights of spouses to custody of children===
, upon dissolution of a same-sex marriage, legal questions remained in the US as to the rights of spouses to custody of the biological children of their spouses.

Child custody policies include several guidelines that determine with whom the child lives following divorce, how time is divided in joint custody situations, and visitation rights. The most frequently applied custody guideline is the &quot;best interests of the child&quot; standard, which takes into account the parents&#x27; preferences, the child&#x27;s preferences, the interactions between parents and children, children&#x27;s adjustment, and all family members&#x27; mental and physical health.

==History==

===Greco-Roman culture===
Rather than being conceived as a legal procedure, divorce in Classical Athens was largely thought to be a private matter — defined by law, but with no specific legal action required. To divorce his wife, an Athenian man need only to dismiss her by sending her back to her family. It is unknown what would have constituted socially acceptable grounds for divorce, save for the fact that it was required by law for men to divorce adulterous women. The procedure for divorce was considerably more difficult for women. In order to initiate divorce, Athenian women were required to appear in public before the archon to state their case. This procedure was a considerable exception to standard Athenian legal conventions, which barred women from representing themselves in court, as woman-initiated divorce proceedings required a woman to represent herself as a matter of public record.

Divorce was rare in early Roman culture but as their empire grew in power and authority Roman civil law embraced the maxim, &quot;&quot; (&quot;marriages ought to be free&quot;), and either husband or wife could renounce the marriage at will. The Christian emperors Constantine and Theodosius restricted the grounds for divorce to grave cause, but this was relaxed by Justinian in the 6th century.

===Mali Empire===
In post-classical Mali, laws relating to divorced women were documented in the Timbuktu manuscripts.

===Medieval Europe===
After the fall of the Roman Empire, familial life was regulated more by ecclesiastical authority than civil authority. The Catholic and Orthodox Church had, among others, a differing view of divorce.

The Orthodox Church recognized that there are rare occasions when it is better that couples do separate. For the Orthodox, to say that marriage is indissoluble means that it should not be broken, the violation of such a union, perceived as holy, being an offense resulting from either adultery or the prolonged absence of one of the partners. Thus, permitting remarriage is an act of compassion of the Church towards sinful man.

Under the influence of the Catholic Church, the divorce rate had been greatly reduced by the 9th or 10th century, which considered marriage a sacrament instituted by Jesus Christ and indissoluble by mere human action.

Although divorce, as known today, was generally prohibited in Catholic lands after the 10th century, separation of husband and wife and the annulment of marriage were well-known. What is today referred to as &quot;separate maintenance&quot; (or &quot;legal separation&quot;) was termed &quot;divorce a mensa et thoro&quot; (&quot;divorce from bed-and-board&quot;). The husband and wife physically separated and were forbidden to live or cohabit together, but their marital relationship did not fully terminate. Civil courts had no power over marriage or divorce. The grounds for annulment were determined by a Catholic church authority and applied in ecclesiastical courts. Annulment was for canonical causes of impediment existing at the time of the marriage. &quot;For in cases of total divorce, the marriage is declared null, as having been absolutely unlawful ab initio.&quot; The Catholic Church held that the sacrament of marriage produced one person from two, inseparable from each other: &quot;By marriage, the husband and wife are one person in law: that is, the very being of legal existence of the woman is suspended during the marriage or at least incorporated and consolidated into that of the husband: under whose wing, protection and cover, she performs everything.&quot; Since husband and wife became one person upon marriage, recognition of that oneness could be rescinded only on the grounds that the unity never existed to begin with, &quot;i.e.&quot;, that the proclamation of marriage was erroneous and void from the start.

===Secularisation in Europe===

After the Reformation, marriage came to be considered a contract in the newly Protestant regions of Europe, and on that basis, civil authorities gradually asserted their power to decree a &quot;divortium a vinculo matrimonii&quot;, or &quot;divorce from all the bonds of marriage&quot;.

Since no precedents existed defining the circumstances under which marriage could be dissolved, civil courts heavily relied on the previous determinations of the ecclesiastic courts and freely adopted the requirements set down by those courts. As the civil courts assumed the power to dissolve marriages, courts still strictly construed the circumstances under which they would grant a divorce, and considered divorce to be contrary to public policy. Because divorce was considered to be against the public interest, civil courts refused to grant a divorce if evidence revealed any hint of complicity between the husband and wife to divorce, or if they attempted to manufacture grounds for a divorce. Divorce was granted only because one party to the marriage had violated a sacred vow to the &quot;innocent spouse&quot;. If both husband and wife were guilty, &quot;neither would be allowed to escape the bonds of marriage&quot;.

Eventually, the idea that a marriage could be dissolved in cases in which one of the parties violated the sacred vow gradually allowed expansion of the grounds upon which divorce could be granted from those grounds which existed at the time of the marriage to grounds which occurred after the marriage, but which exemplified violation of that vow, such as abandonment, adultery, or &quot;extreme cruelty&quot;. An exception to this trend was the Anglican Church, which maintained the doctrine of marital indissolubility.

During the English Civil War, the Puritans briefly passed a law that divested marriage of all sacrament, leaving it as a secular contract that could be broken. John Milton wrote four divorce tracts in 1643–1645 that argued for the legitimacy of divorce on grounds of spousal incompatibility. His ideas were ahead of their time; arguing for divorce at all, let alone a version of no-fault divorce, was extremely controversial and religious figures sought to ban his tracts. In 1670 a precedent was first set with an Act of Parliament allowing Lord John Manners to divorce his wife, Lady Anne Pierrepont, and until the passage of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1857, divorce could only be obtained through a specific Act of Parliament.
The move towards secularisation and liberalisation was reinforced by the individualistic and secular ideals of the Enlightenment. The Enlightened absolutist, King Frederick II (&quot;the Great&quot;) of Prussia decreed a new divorce law in 1752, in which marriage was declared to be a purely private concern, allowing divorce to be granted on the basis of mutual consent. This new attitude heavily influenced the law in neighbouring Austria under Emperor Joseph II, where it was applied to all non-Catholic Imperial subjects. Divorce was legalised in France after the French Revolution on a similar basis, although the legal order of the ancien regime was reinstated at the Bourbon restoration of 1816. The trend in Europe throughout the 19th century, was one of increased liberalisation; by the mid-19th century, divorce was generally granted by civil courts in the case of adultery.
In Britain, before 1857 wives were regarded as under the economic and legal protection of their husbands, and divorce was almost impossible. It required a very expensive private Act of Parliament costing perhaps £200, of the sort only the richest could possibly afford. It was very difficult to secure divorce on the grounds of adultery, desertion, or cruelty. The first key legislative victory came with the Matrimonial Causes Act 1857, which passed over the strenuous opposition of the highly traditional Church of England. The new law made divorce a civil affair of the courts, rather than a Church matter, with a new civil court in London handling all cases. The process was still quite expensive, at about £40, but now became feasible for the middle class. A woman who obtained a judicial separation took the status of a &quot;feme sole&quot;, with full control of her own civil rights. Additional amendments came in 1878, which allowed for separations handled by local justices of the peace. The Church of England blocked further reforms until the final breakthrough came with the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973.

In Spain, the 1931 Constitution of the Second Spanish Republic for the first time recognised a right to divorce. The first law to regulate divorce was the &quot;Divorce Act of 1932&quot;, which passed the Republican Parliament despite the opposition of the Catholic Church and a coalition of the Agrarian Minority and Minority Basque-Navarre Catholic parties. The dictatorship of General Franco abolished the law. After the restoration of democracy, a new divorce law was passed in 1981, again over the opposition of the Catholic Church and part of the Christian Democrat party, then a part of the ruling Union of Democratic Center. During the first socialist government of Felipe González Márquez, the 1981 law was amended to expedite the process of separation and divorce of marriages, which was again opposed by the Church, which called it &quot;express divorce&quot;.

In Italy, the first divorce law was introduced on 1 December 1970, despite the opposition of the Christian Democrats, and entered into force on 18 December 1970. In the following years, the Christian Democrats, supported also by parties opposed to the law, promoted a recall referendum. In 1974, in a referendum, the majority of the population voted against a repeal of the divorce law. A feature of the 1970 divorce law was the long period of marital separation of five years required. This period was reduced to three in 1987 and to a year in 2015, in the case of judicial separation, and six months in the case of separation by mutual agreement.

Ireland and Malta approved divorce at referendums in 1995 and 2011 respectively.

Divorce rates increased markedly during the 20th century in developed countries, as social attitudes towards family and sex changed dramatically. Divorce has become commonplace in some countries, including the United States, Canada, Australia, Germany, New Zealand, Scandinavia, and the United Kingdom.

===Japan===
In the Edo Period (1603–1868), husbands could divorce their wives by writing letters of divorce. Frequently, their relatives or marriage arrangers kept these letters and tried to restore the marriages. Wives could not divorce their husbands. Some wives were able to gain sanctuary in certain Shinto &quot;divorce temples&quot;. After a wife had spent three years in a temple, her husband was required to divorce her. In 19th century Japan, at least one in eight marriages ended in divorce.

There are four types of divorce in Japan: divorce by agreement in which the divorce is mutual; divorce by mediation, which happens in family court; divorce by decision of family court that takes place when a couple cannot complete a divorce through mediation; and divorce by judgment of a district court.

===India===
On a national level, the Special Marriage Act, passed in 1954, is an inter-religious marriage law permitting Indian nationals to marry and divorce irrespective of their religion or faith. The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 legally permitted divorce to Hindus and other communities who chose to marry under these acts. The Indian Divorce Act 1869 is the law relating to the divorce of person professing the Christian religion. Divorce can be sought by a husband or wife on grounds including adultery, cruelty, desertion for two years, religious conversion, mental abnormality, venereal disease, and leprosy. Divorce is also available based on mutual consent of both the spouses, which can be filed after at least one year of separated living. Mutual consent divorce cannot be appealed, and the law mandates a minimum period of six months (from the time divorce is applied for) for divorce to be granted. Contested divorce is when one of the spouses is not willing to divorce the other; in such a circumstance divorce is granted only on certain grounds according to the Hindu marriage act of 1955. While a Muslim husband can unilaterally bring an end to the marriage by pronouncing talaq, Muslim women must go to court, claiming any of the grounds provided under the Dissolution of Muslim Marriage Act.

In the first major family law reform in the last decade, the Supreme Court of India banned the Islamic practice of &quot;Triple Talaq&quot; (divorce by uttering of the &quot;Talaq&quot; word thrice by the husband). The landmark Supreme Court of India judgment was welcomed by women activists across India.

Official figures of divorce rates are not available, but it has been estimated that 1 in 100 or another figure of 11 in 1,000 marriages in India end in divorce.

Various communities are governed by specific marital legislation, distinct to Hindu Marriage Act, and consequently have their own divorce laws:

* The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936
* The Dissolution of Muslim Marriage act, 1939
* The Foreign Marriage Act, 1969
* The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986

An amendment to the marriage laws to allow divorce based on &quot;irretrievable breakdown of marriage&quot; (as alleged by one of the spouses) is under consideration in India. In June 2010, the Union Cabinet of India approved the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill 2010, which, if cleared by Parliament, would establish &quot;irretrievable breakdown&quot; as a new ground for divorce. Under the proposed amendment, the court before proceeding to the merits of the case must be satisfied by the evidences produced that parties have been living apart for a continuous period of not less than three years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition.

=== Islamic law ===

Divorce in Islam can take a variety of forms, some initiated by the husband and some initiated by the wife. The main traditional legal categories are &quot;talaq&quot; (repudiation), &quot;khulʿ&quot; (mutual divorce/annulment), judicial divorce and oaths. The theory and practice of divorce in the Islamic world have varied according to time and place. Historically, the rules of divorce were governed by sharia, as interpreted by traditional Islamic jurisprudence, and they differed depending on the legal school. Historical practice sometimes diverged from legal theory. In modern times, as personal status (family) laws were codified, they generally remained &quot;within the orbit of Islamic law&quot;, but control over the norms of divorce shifted from traditional jurists to the state.

===Philippines===
Divorce as a means of terminating marriage is illegal for all Filipinos except Filipino Muslims. There is only civil annulment after a lengthy legal separation. The process is costly and long, and there are many legally married couples in extramarital relations, even without a divorce law.

Code of Muslim Personal Laws of the Philippines, known as Presidential Decree (PD) No. 1083, Title II- Marriage and Divorce, Chapter 3-Divorce allows for divorce recognized by the state. There are two sharia courts in the Philippine judicial system that hear these cases.

On 27 July 2010, Gabriela Women&#x27;s Party filed in Congress House Bill No 1799, or the Divorce Bill of the Philippines, as one of many attempts to introduce pro-divorce legislation. Senator Pia Cayetano has filed a separate divorce bill in the Senate. During that time, the Philippines, along with Malta and the Vatican, are the three most conservative countries on the issue of divorce. The bill did not pass any level of legislation because of this.

In 2013, the divorce bill was refiled, and did not pass any level of legislation as well.

In a latest attempt, the divorce bill was refiled again in 2017. On 22 February 2018, the House of Representatives committee on population and family relations approved a bill seeking to legalize divorce, the first time in Philippine history for such a measure to pass the committee level of legislation. The majority of the members of the House of Representatives (lower house of Congress), both majority and minority blocs, are in favor of divorce, however, divorce continues to be a divisive issue in the Senate (upper house of Congress), as stark opposition is present among male senators.

=== Early America ===
In colonial America, marriage was understood to be for the purpose of reproductive and economic success. Divorce was granted if either party was proven to have deceived the other about their financial or reproductive status.

Impotence as grounds for divorce required physical examination of the husband. Women with malformed genitalia would also be examined by a midwife to determine if the malformation was responsible for infertility.

In the antebellum South, courts were reluctant to divorce white couples. Wives were the most likely to ask for divorce, however husbands were more likely to receive one. Successful divorces initiated by husbands were often in response to the wife&#x27;s infidelity with a black man. A landmark court case in 1825 set the precedent of prioritizing the raising of white children over the wife&#x27;s adultery.

In the 1860s, marriage law changed rapidly as the definition of miscegenation was altered to account for more and different racial categories. This sometimes forced the annulment of mixed-race marriages.

== Patterns ==
=== Post-World War II ===
Divorce rates increase during times of hardship, war, and major events. Divorce rates increased after World War II because people were quick to marry each other before they went to war. When soldiers returned, they found out that they did not have much in common with their spouses, so they divorced.

=== Celebrity culture ===
In 2024, an increasing number of &quot;A-listers celebrities&quot; were found to engaging in a trend of discreet &quot;silent divorces&quot; as opposed to high-profile public divorces in the media in past years.

== See also ==

* Breakup
* Community property
* Divorce law around the world
* Divorce of same-sex couples – legal aspects, divorce rates
* Divorce party
* Dysfunctional family
* Fear of commitment
* Grey divorce
* Husband selling
* Implications of divorce
* List of most expensive divorces
* List of people who remarried the same spouse
* Januário Lourenço, inventor of electronic divorce
* New York divorce coercion gang
* Primary physical custody
* Relationship counseling
* Relationship education
* Wife selling
* Wife selling (English custom)
== References ==
==Further reading==

*Alford, William P., &quot;Have You Eaten, Have You Divorced? Debating the Meaning of Freedom in Marriage in China&quot;, in &quot;Realms of Freedom in Modern China&quot; (William C. Kirby ed., Stanford University Press, 2004).
*Berlin, G. (2004). &quot;The Effects of Marriage and Divorce on Families and Children&quot; .
*Davies, P. T. &amp; Cummings E. M. (1994). &quot;Marital Conflict and Child Adjustment: An Emotional Security Hypothesis&quot;. &quot;American Psychological Association Psychological Bulletin&quot;, 116, 387–411.
*Foulkes-Jamison, L. (2001). &quot;The Effects of Divorce on Children&quot;.
*Hughes R. (2009). The Effects of Divorce on Children 
*
*Strong, B., DeVault C., &amp; Cohen T. F. (2011). &quot;The Marriage and Family Experience: Intimate Relationships in a Changing Society&quot;. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth Cengage Learning.
*Thomas, S. G. (28 October 2011). The Good Divorce . &quot;The New York Times&quot;
* Zartler U., Heinz-Martin, V., Arránz Becker, O. (Edts.) (2015): &quot;Family Dynamics after Separation. A Life Course Perspective on Post-Divorce Families&quot;. Special Issue ZfF, Volume 10, Opladen/Toronto: Barbara Budrich. .


==External links==


* Marriage and divorce statistics, Eurostat – Statistics Explained</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="0" end="7" title="Divorce" label="Divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="23" end="46" title="Divorce" label="dissolution of marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="80" end="88" title="marriage" label="marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="235" end="253" title="Marriage" label="bonds of matrimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284674" start="488" end="505" title="Divorce law by country" label="vary considerably"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776190" start="560" end="573" title="legal process" label="legal process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190495" start="660" end="684" title="distribution of property" label="distribution of property"/>
<link wikidata="Q638532" start="686" end="699" title="child custody" label="child custody"/>
<link wikidata="Q368305" start="701" end="708" title="alimony" label="alimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q123171259" start="728" end="753" title="child visitation / access" label="child visitation / access"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136802" start="755" end="769" title="parenting time" label="parenting time"/>
<link wikidata="Q954957" start="771" end="784" title="child support" label="child support"/>
<link wikidata="Q184211" start="827" end="835" title="monogamy" label="monogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q701040" start="946" end="955" title="annulment" label="annulment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142948" start="1005" end="1021" title="legal separation" label="legal separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="1031" end="1038" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="1121" end="1129" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561011" start="1136" end="1146" title="marital separation" label="separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170655" start="1385" end="1402" title="personality clash" label="personality clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914621" start="1406" end="1416" title="infidelity" label="infidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="1472" end="1483" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="1492" end="1504" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q856681" start="1596" end="1618" title="undocumented immigrant" label="undocumented immigrant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1734" end="1764" title="Christian views on divorce#Roman Catholic Church" label="and does not allow for divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1828" end="1833" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="1842" end="1850" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1945" end="1951" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1960" end="1965" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="1974" end="1983" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="1992" end="2000" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="2009" end="2017" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q228" start="2072" end="2079" title="Andorra" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="2088" end="2095" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="2104" end="2109" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="2121" end="2126" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="2232" end="2240" title="contract" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628882" start="2244" end="2250" title="personal status" label="status"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611015" start="2421" end="2439" title="ground for divorce" label="ground for divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042775" start="2562" end="2570" title="no-fault divorce" label="no fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611018" start="2925" end="2941" title="Grounds for divorce (United States)" label="states of the US"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2943" end="2949" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="2958" end="2972" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="3008" end="3020" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="4194" end="4205" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="4243" end="4249" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="4473" end="4480" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973933" start="5247" end="5255" title="Divorce in Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5311" end="5317" title="Divorce law by country#France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="5363" end="5374" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5420" end="5426" title="Divorce law by country#Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="5542" end="5547" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5561" end="5577" title="Divorce law by country#Portugal" label="Portugal in 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052529" start="5581" end="5596" title="divorce in Belgium" label="new divorce law"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="5639" end="5646" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5698" end="5706" title="Divorce law by country#Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5762" end="5767" title="Divorce law by country#Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="6242" end="6249" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485951" start="6763" end="6774" title="magisterium" label="magisterium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6838" end="6855" title="Natural law#Christianity" label="natural moral law"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="6875" end="6889" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559849" start="6920" end="6930" title="Divine law" label="Divine law"/>
<link wikidata="Q192499" start="6952" end="6968" title="Doctor of the Church" label="Doctor Angelicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="7002" end="7025" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042775" start="7338" end="7354" title="no-fault divorce" label="no-fault divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010906" start="8757" end="8775" title="divorce settlement" label="divorce settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q701521" start="9561" end="9570" title="collusion" label="collusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686453" start="9626" end="9637" title="condonation" label="condonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161966" start="9664" end="9674" title="connivance" label="connivance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566104" start="9726" end="9737" title="provocation (legal)" label="provocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042775" start="11582" end="11598" title="no-fault divorce" label="no-fault divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13271" end="13284" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308934" start="13291" end="13302" title="state court (United States)" label="state court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246798" start="13377" end="13383" title="pro se" label="pro se"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039596" start="13619" end="13640" title="Collaborative divorce" label="Collaborative divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="13812" end="13821" title="Lawyer" label="attorneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039596" start="14274" end="14291" title="collaborative law" label="collaborative law"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="14498" end="14506" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q82753" start="14551" end="14561" title="Computer file" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042775" start="14574" end="14582" title="no-fault divorce" label="no-fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039596" start="14583" end="14604" title="collaborative divorce" label="collaborative divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="14614" end="14623" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754526" start="14624" end="14638" title="Administration (government)" label="administrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778211" start="14639" end="14645" title="Legal entity" label="entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569" start="14674" end="14682" title="children" label="children"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494269" start="14684" end="14697" title="real property" label="real property"/>
<link wikidata="Q368305" start="14699" end="14706" title="alimony" label="alimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170585" start="16123" end="16131" title="Polygamy" label="Polygamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205572" start="17019" end="17033" title="civil marriage" label="civil marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432247" start="17512" end="17524" title="Divorce in Islam" label="Islam allows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432247" start="17569" end="17622" title="Divorce in Islam" label="it can be initiated by either the husband or the wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110398" start="17625" end="17651" title="Christian views on divorce" label="Christian views on divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367940" start="17658" end="17675" title="Catholic teaching" label="Catholic teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299585" start="17688" end="17697" title="Annulment (Catholic Church)" label="annulment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984055" start="17794" end="17833" title="Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection" label="Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4095768" start="17868" end="17891" title="Jewish views on marriage" label="Jewish views of divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="17905" end="17919" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q205644" start="17957" end="17969" title="Conservative Judaism" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="17974" end="17990" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447794" start="18084" end="18087" title="Get (divorce document)" label="get"/>
<link wikidata="Q845763" start="18096" end="18113" title="Millet (Ottoman Empire)" label="The Millet System"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="18358" end="18364" title="sharia" label="sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902898" start="18437" end="18455" title="Marriage in Israel" label="Marriage in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q831124" start="18750" end="18766" title="rabbinical court" label="rabbinical court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489556" start="19675" end="19691" title="shared residency in English law" label="shared residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902898" start="19941" end="19958" title="Marriage in Israel" label="Israeli civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447794" start="20065" end="20068" title="get (divorce document)" label="get"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917605" start="20706" end="20712" title="agunah" label="agunah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438846" start="20871" end="20877" title="mamzer" label="mamzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115410" start="21261" end="21275" title="Grant Thornton" label="Grant Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630714" start="21296" end="21311" title="proximate cause" label="proximate cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="21396" end="21404" title="Adultery" label="Adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="21458" end="21475" title="Domestic violence" label="Domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332059" start="21483" end="21497" title="Midlife crisis" label="Midlife crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029" start="21505" end="21514" title="Addiction" label="Addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="21522" end="21532" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748309" start="21537" end="21545" title="Problem gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q629149" start="21552" end="21563" title="Workaholic" label="Workaholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591167" start="22782" end="22798" title="household income" label="household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q49836" start="23017" end="23024" title="wedding" label="wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q220161" start="23183" end="23192" title="honeymoon" label="honeymoon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23294" end="23305" title="debt stress" label="debt stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q49800" start="23385" end="23394" title="Cohabitation" label="cohabited"/>
<link wikidata="Q310486" start="23490" end="23546" title="Correlation does not imply causation" label="this correlation is partly due to two forms of selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6295487" start="24142" end="24172" title="Journal of Marriage and Family" label="Journal of Marriage and Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415055" start="24837" end="24849" title="unattractive" label="unattractive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6295487" start="24993" end="25023" title="Journal of Marriage and Family" label="Journal of Marriage and Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="25355" end="25361" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="25365" end="25383" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q185698" start="25488" end="25502" title="Methodology" label="methodological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191344" start="25931" end="25959" title="Northern Illinois University" label="Northern Illinois University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068714" start="27111" end="27125" title="Zelder Paradox" label="Zelder Paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="27432" end="27466" title="American Psychological Association" label="American Psychological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204559" start="29469" end="29482" title="single-parent" label="single-parent"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="30929" end="30935" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026388" start="32031" end="32044" title="Nicholas Wall (judge)" label="Nicholas Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241322" start="32053" end="32085" title="President of the Family Division" label="President of the Family Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="32093" end="32111" title="High Court of Justice" label="English High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949144" start="32966" end="32985" title="parental alienation" label="parental alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q797819" start="35711" end="35722" title="baby boomer" label="baby boomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q895457" start="35807" end="35837" title="Bowling Green State University" label="Bowling Green State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766344" start="40343" end="40371" title="The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955" label="The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609713" start="40421" end="40462" title="Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939" label="Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812734" start="40469" end="40495" title="Special Marriage Act, 1954" label="Special Marriage Act, 1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q117149386" start="40503" end="40529" title="Foreign Marriage Act, 1969" label="Foreign Marriage Act, 1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q10405681" start="45958" end="45972" title="District courts of Sweden" label="district court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47316" end="47334" title="Divorce demography#Crude divorce rate" label="crude divorce rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336854" start="47636" end="47673" title="National Center for Health Statistics" label="National Center for Health Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48696" end="48714" title="Jenifer L. Bratter" label="Jenifer L. Bratter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915193" start="48743" end="48781" title="Education Resources Information Center" label="Education Resources Information Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="49898" end="49915" title="unemployment rate" label="unemployment rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="52662" end="52672" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q560604" start="54136" end="54163" title="best interests of the child" label="best interests of the child"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="54499" end="54515" title="Classical Athens" label="Classical Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="55374" end="55380" title="Roman Empire" label="empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55409" end="55424" title="Roman law#civil law" label="Roman civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="55587" end="55598" title="Constantine I" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q251278" start="55603" end="55613" title="Theodosius" label="Theodosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="55689" end="55698" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234117" start="55741" end="55755" title="post-classical" label="post-classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q184536" start="55756" end="55760" title="Mali Empire" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2209578" start="55817" end="55837" title="Timbuktu manuscripts" label="Timbuktu manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="56635" end="56644" title="sacrament" label="sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="56659" end="56671" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q701040" start="56852" end="56861" title="annulment" label="annulment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142948" start="56926" end="56946" title="separate maintenance" label="separate maintenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142948" start="56963" end="56979" title="legal separation" label="legal separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49800" start="57149" end="57156" title="cohabit" label="cohabit"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="57223" end="57235" title="Civil courts" label="Civil courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640717" start="57363" end="57384" title="ecclesiastical courts" label="ecclesiastical courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="57404" end="57413" title="Canon law" label="canonical"/>
<link wikidata="Q46310" start="58241" end="58255" title="Ab initio" label="from the start"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="58300" end="58311" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="58346" end="58354" title="contract" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124640" start="58417" end="58434" title="civil authorities" label="civil authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q665141" start="58587" end="58597" title="precedents" label="precedents"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58740" end="58752" title="ecclesiastic" label="ecclesiastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q294199" start="59014" end="59027" title="public policy (law)" label="public policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144504" start="59360" end="59363" title="vow" label="vow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59865" end="59876" title="Grounds for divorce (United States)#Abandonment or desertion" label="abandonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="59878" end="59886" title="adultery" label="adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="59955" end="59970" title="Anglican Church" label="Anglican Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="60042" end="60059" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="60065" end="60073" title="Puritans" label="Puritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="60191" end="60202" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744220" start="60209" end="60228" title="Milton&amp;#x27;s divorce tracts" label="four divorce tracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042775" start="60410" end="60426" title="no-fault divorce" label="no-fault divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="60546" end="60563" title="Act of Parliament" label="Act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q338020" start="60578" end="60590" title="John Manners, 1st Duke of Rutland" label="John Manners"/>
<link wikidata="Q56743159" start="60612" end="60632" title="Anne Manners, Lady Roos" label="Lady Anne Pierrepont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787812" start="60663" end="60690" title="Matrimonial Causes Act 1857" label="Matrimonial Causes Act 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="60876" end="60889" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q219934" start="60895" end="60917" title="Enlightened absolutism" label="Enlightened absolutist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="60924" end="60936" title="Frederick II of Prussia" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="60964" end="60971" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="61194" end="61201" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q76555" start="61216" end="61225" title="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Joseph II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="61329" end="61346" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q234081" start="61399" end="61412" title="ancien regime" label="ancien regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q207162" start="61435" end="61454" title="Bourbon Restoration in France" label="Bourbon restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="61636" end="61644" title="adultery" label="adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787812" start="62055" end="62082" title="Matrimonial Causes Act 1857" label="Matrimonial Causes Act 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787818" start="62733" end="62760" title="Matrimonial Causes Act 1973" label="Matrimonial Causes Act 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="62766" end="62771" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="62802" end="62825" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Second Spanish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q156799" start="63437" end="63460" title="Felipe González Márquez" label="Felipe González Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="63639" end="63644" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185221" start="63733" end="63752" title="Christian Democrats" label="Christian Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="64286" end="64293" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="64298" end="64303" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="64578" end="64591" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="64593" end="64599" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="64601" end="64610" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="64612" end="64619" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="64621" end="64632" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="64634" end="64645" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="64655" end="64669" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="64976" end="64982" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812734" start="65518" end="65538" title="Special Marriage Act, 1954" label="Special Marriage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766344" start="65685" end="65703" title="Hindu Marriage Act" label="Hindu Marriage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609713" start="66752" end="66786" title="Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939" label="Dissolution of Muslim Marriage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456503" start="68435" end="68446" title="repudiation (marriage)" label="repudiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="68672" end="68678" title="sharia" label="sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q484181" start="68698" end="68731" title="Fiqh" label="traditional Islamic jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q209928" start="68768" end="68780" title="Madhhab" label="legal school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674071" start="69157" end="69172" title="Filipino Muslim" label="Filipino Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="69571" end="69577" title="sharia" label="sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512790" start="69660" end="69687" title="GABRIELA" label="Gabriela Women&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q678545" start="69697" end="69705" title="House of Representatives of the Philippines" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q442998" start="69836" end="69848" title="Pia Cayetano" label="Pia Cayetano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418426" start="69890" end="69896" title="Senate of the Philippines" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="71033" end="71042" title="Impotence" label="Impotence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201622" start="71253" end="71269" title="antebellum South" label="antebellum South"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090033" start="71719" end="71732" title="miscegenation" label="miscegenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14324792" start="71837" end="71857" title="Interracial marriage" label="mixed-race marriages"/>
<link wikidata="Q100926628" start="72460" end="72467" title="Breakup" label="Breakup"/>
<link wikidata="Q355736" start="72470" end="72488" title="Community property" label="Community property"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284674" start="72491" end="72519" title="Divorce law around the world" label="Divorce law around the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284677" start="72522" end="72549" title="Divorce of same-sex couples" label="Divorce of same-sex couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816957" start="72583" end="72596" title="Divorce party" label="Divorce party"/>
<link wikidata="Q906343" start="72599" end="72619" title="Dysfunctional family" label="Dysfunctional family"/>
<link wikidata="Q650459" start="72622" end="72640" title="Fear of commitment" label="Fear of commitment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608275" start="72643" end="72655" title="Grey divorce" label="Grey divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5948980" start="72658" end="72673" title="Husband selling" label="Husband selling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007237" start="72676" end="72699" title="Implications of divorce" label="Implications of divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629075" start="72702" end="72733" title="List of most expensive divorces" label="List of most expensive divorces"/>
<link wikidata="Q20638657" start="72736" end="72780" title="List of people who remarried the same spouse" label="List of people who remarried the same spouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156177" start="72783" end="72800" title="Januário Lourenço" label="Januário Lourenço"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72814" end="72832" title="#Electronic divorce" label="electronic divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147225" start="72835" end="72865" title="New York divorce coercion gang" label="New York divorce coercion gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243156" start="72868" end="72892" title="Primary physical custody" label="Primary physical custody"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423426" start="72895" end="72918" title="Relationship counseling" label="Relationship counseling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310752" start="72921" end="72943" title="Relationship education" label="Relationship education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999477" start="72946" end="72958" title="Wife selling" label="Wife selling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994709" start="72961" end="72990" title="Wife selling (English custom)" label="Wife selling (English custom)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016433" start="73030" end="73048" title="William P. Alford" label="Alford, William P."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40148" wikidata="Q159597" url="?curid=40148" title="Harold Godwinson">
<text>Harold Godwinson ( – 14 October 1066), also called Harold II, was the last crowned Anglo-Saxon English king. Harold reigned from 6 January 1066 until his death at the Battle of Hastings on 14 October 1066, the decisive battle of the Norman Conquest. Harold&#x27;s death marked the end of Anglo-Saxon rule over England. He was succeeded by William the Conqueror.

Harold Godwinson was a member of a prominent Anglo-Saxon family with ties to Cnut the Great. He became a powerful earl after the death of his father, Godwin, Earl of Wessex. After his brother-in-law, King Edward the Confessor, died without an heir on 5 January 1066, the &quot;Witenagemot&quot; convened and chose Harold to succeed him; he was probably the first English monarch to be crowned in Westminster Abbey. In late September, he successfully repelled an invasion by rival claimant Harald Hardrada of Norway in York before marching his army back south to meet William at Hastings two weeks later.

== Family background ==
Harold was a son of Godwin (–1053), the powerful Earl of Wessex, and of Gytha Thorkelsdóttir, whose brother Ulf the Earl was married to Estrid Svendsdatter (c. 1015/1016), the daughter of King Sweyn Forkbeard (died 1014) and sister of King Cnut the Great of England and Denmark. Ulf and Estrid&#x27;s son would become King Sweyn II of Denmark in 1047. Godwin was the son of Wulfnoth, probably a &quot;thegn&quot; and a native of Sussex. Godwin began his political career by supporting King Edmund Ironside (reigned April to November 1016), but switched to supporting King Cnut by 1018, when Cnut named him Earl of Wessex. 

Godwin remained an earl throughout the remainder of Cnut&#x27;s reign, one of only two earls to survive to the end of that reign. On Cnut&#x27;s death in 1035, Godwin originally supported Harthacnut instead of Cnut&#x27;s initial successor Harold Harefoot, but managed to switch sides in 1037 – although not without becoming involved in the 1036 murder of Alfred Aetheling, half-brother of Harthacnut and younger brother of the later King Edward the Confessor. 

When Harold Harefoot died in 1040, Harthacnut ascended the English throne and Godwin&#x27;s power was imperiled by his earlier involvement in Alfred&#x27;s murder, but an oath and large gift secured the new king&#x27;s favour for Godwin. Harthacnut&#x27;s death in 1042 probably involved Godwin in a role as kingmaker, helping to secure the English throne for Edward the Confessor. In 1045, Godwin reached the height of his power when the new king married Godwin&#x27;s daughter Edith.

Godwin and Gytha had several children – six sons: Sweyn, Harold, Tostig, Gyrth, Leofwine and Wulfnoth (in that order); and three daughters: Edith of Wessex (originally named Gytha but renamed Ealdgyth (or Edith) when she married King Edward the Confessor), Gunhild and Ælfgifu. The birthdates of the children are unknown. Harold was aged about 25 in 1045, which makes his birth year around 1020.

The manor of Bosham on the South coast of England had been acquired, originally from the Archbishop of Canterbury as the family seat by Earl Godwin, and was inherited by Harold. The Bayeux Tapestry has two representations of Harold&#x27;s family residence. The manor of Bosham is just one of four places, in England, named on the tapestry.

== Powerful nobleman ==
Edith married Edward on 23 January 1045 and, around that time, Harold became Earl of East Anglia. Harold is called &quot;earl&quot; when he appears as a witness in a will that may date to 1044; but, by 1045, Harold regularly appears as an earl in documents. One reason for his appointment to East Anglia may have been a need to defend against the threat from King Magnus the Good of Norway. It is possible that Harold led some of the ships from his earldom that were sent to Sandwich in 1045 against Magnus. Sweyn, Harold&#x27;s elder brother, had been named an earl in 1043. It was also around the time that Harold was named an earl that he began a relationship with Edith the Fair, who appears to have been the heiress to lands in Cambridgeshire, Suffolk and Essex, lands in Harold&#x27;s new earldom. The relationship was a form of marriage that was not blessed or sanctioned by the Church, known as &quot;More danico&quot;, or &quot;in the Danish manner&quot;, and was accepted by most laypeople in England at the time. Any children of such a union were considered legitimate. Harold probably entered the relationship in part to secure support in his new earldom.

Harold&#x27;s elder brother Sweyn was exiled in 1047 after abducting the abbess of Leominster. Sweyn&#x27;s lands were divided between Harold and a cousin, Beorn. In 1049, Harold was in command of a ship or ships that were sent with a fleet to aid Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor against Baldwin V, Count of Flanders, who was in revolt against Henry. During this campaign, Sweyn returned to England and attempted to secure a pardon from the king, but Harold and Beorn refused to return any of their lands, and Sweyn, after leaving the royal court, took Beorn hostage and later killed him.

In 1051, Edward appointed an enemy of the Godwins as Archbishop of Canterbury and soon afterwards drove them into exile, but they raised an army which forced the king to restore them to their positions a year later. Earl Godwin died in 1053, and Harold succeeded him as Earl of Wessex, which made him the most powerful lay figure in England after the king.

In 1055, Harold drove back the Welsh, who had burned Hereford. Harold also became Earl of Hereford in 1058, and replaced his late father as the focus of opposition to growing Norman influence in England under the restored monarchy (1042–66) of Edward the Confessor, who had spent more than 25 years in exile in Normandy. He led a series of successful campaigns (1062–63) against Gruffydd ap Llywelyn of Gwynedd, king of Wales. This conflict ended with Gruffydd&#x27;s defeat and death in 1063.

=== Harold in northern France ===
In 1064, Harold was apparently shipwrecked at Ponthieu. There is much speculation about this voyage. The earliest post-conquest Norman chroniclers state that King Edward had previously sent Robert of Jumièges, the archbishop of Canterbury, to appoint as his heir Edward&#x27;s maternal kinsman, Duke William II of Normandy, and that at this later date, Harold was sent to swear fealty. Scholars disagree as to the reliability of this story. William, at least, seems to have believed he had been offered the succession, but some acts of Edward are inconsistent with his having made such a promise, such as his efforts to return his nephew Edward the Exile, son of King Edmund Ironside, from Hungary in 1057. 

Later Norman chroniclers suggest alternative explanations for Harold&#x27;s journey: that he was seeking the release of members of his family who had been held hostage since Godwin&#x27;s exile in 1051, or even that he had simply been travelling along the English coast on a hunting and fishing expedition and had been driven across the English Channel by an unexpected storm. There is general agreement that he left from Bosham, and was blown off course, landing at Ponthieu. He was captured by Count Guy I of Ponthieu, and was then taken as a hostage to the count&#x27;s castle at Beaurain, up the River Canche from its mouth at what is now Le Touquet. William arrived soon afterward and ordered Guy to turn Harold over to him.

Harold then apparently accompanied William to battle against William&#x27;s enemy, Conan II, Duke of Brittany. While crossing into Brittany past the fortified abbey of Mont Saint-Michel, Harold is recorded as rescuing two of William&#x27;s soldiers from quicksand. They pursued Conan from Dol-de-Bretagne to Rennes, and finally to Dinan, where he surrendered the fortress&#x27;s keys at the point of a lance. William presented Harold with weapons and arms, knighting him. The Bayeux Tapestry, and other Norman sources, then state that Harold swore an oath on sacred relics to William to support his claim to the English throne. After Edward&#x27;s death, the Normans were quick to claim that in accepting the crown of England, Harold had broken this alleged oath.

The chronicler Orderic Vitalis wrote of Harold that he &quot;was distinguished by his great size and strength of body, his polished manners, his firmness of mind and command of words, by a ready wit and a variety of excellent qualities. But what availed so many valuable gifts, when good faith, the foundation of all virtues, was wanting?&quot;

Due to a doubling of taxation by Tostig in 1065 that threatened to plunge England into civil war, Harold supported Northumbrian rebels against his brother, and replaced him with Morcar. This led to Harold&#x27;s marriage alliance with the northern earls but fatally split his own family, driving Tostig into alliance with King Harald Hardrada (&quot;Hard Ruler&quot;) of Norway.

== Reign ==
At the end of 1065, King Edward the Confessor fell into a coma without clarifying his preference for the succession. He died on 5 January 1066, according to the &quot;Vita Ædwardi Regis&quot;, but not before briefly regaining consciousness and commending his widow and the kingdom to Harold&#x27;s &quot;protection&quot;. The intent of this charge remains ambiguous, as is the Bayeux Tapestry, which simply depicts Edward pointing at a man thought to represent Harold. When the Witan convened the next day they selected Harold to succeed, and his coronation followed on 6 January, most likely held in Westminster Abbey, though limited but persuasive evidence from the time survives to confirm this, in the form of its depiction in the Bayeux Tapestry (shown above left). Although later Norman sources point to the suddenness of this coronation, the reason may have been that all the nobles of the land were present at Westminster for the feast of Epiphany, and not because of any usurpation of the throne on Harold&#x27;s part.

In early January 1066, upon hearing of Harold&#x27;s coronation, William began plans to invade England, building approximately 700 warships and transports at Dives-sur-Mer on the Normandy coast. Initially, William struggled to gain support for his cause; however, after claiming that Harold had broken an oath sworn on sacred relics, Pope Alexander II formally declared William the rightful heir of the throne of England and nobles flocked to his cause. In preparation of the invasion, Harold assembled his troops on the Isle of Wight, but the invasion fleet remained in port for almost seven months, perhaps due to unfavourable winds. On 8 September, with provisions running out, Harold disbanded his army and returned to London. On the same day, the invasion force of Harald Hardrada, accompanied by Tostig, landed at the mouth of the Tyne.

The invading forces of Hardrada and Tostig defeated the English earls Edwin of Mercia and Morcar of Northumbria at the Battle of Fulford near York on 20 September 1066. Harold led his army north on a forced march from London, reached Yorkshire in four days, and caught Hardrada by surprise. On 25 September, in the Battle of Stamford Bridge, Harold defeated Hardrada and Tostig, who were both killed.

According to Snorri Sturluson, in a story described by Edward Freeman as &quot;plainly mythical&quot;, before the battle a single man rode up alone to Harald Hardrada and Tostig. He gave no name, but spoke to Tostig, offering the return of his earldom if he would turn against Hardrada. Tostig asked what his brother Harold would be willing to give Hardrada for his trouble. The rider replied &quot;Seven feet of English ground, as he is taller than other men.&quot; Then he rode back to the Saxon host. Hardrada was impressed by the rider&#x27;s boldness, and asked Tostig who he was. Tostig replied that the rider was Harold Godwinson himself.

== Battle of Hastings ==

On 12 September 1066, William&#x27;s fleet sailed from Normandy. Several ships sank in storms, which forced the fleet to take shelter at Saint-Valery-sur-Somme and to wait for the wind to change. On 27 September, the Norman fleet set sail for England, arriving the following day at Pevensey on the coast of East Sussex. Harold&#x27;s army marched to intercept William, who had landed perhaps 7,000 men in Sussex, southern England. Harold established his army in hastily built earthworks near Hastings. The two armies clashed at the Battle of Hastings, at Senlac Hill (near the present town of Battle) close by Hastings on 14 October, where after nine hours of hard fighting, Harold was killed and his forces defeated. His brothers Gyrth and Leofwine were also killed in the battle.

== Death ==
The widely held belief that Harold died by an arrow to the eye is a subject of much scholarly debate. A Norman account of the battle, &quot;Carmen de Hastingae Proelio&quot; (&quot;Song of the Battle of Hastings&quot;), said to have been written shortly after the battle by Guy, Bishop of Amiens, says that Harold was lanced and his body dismembered by four knights, probably including Duke William. Twelfth-century Anglo-Norman histories, such as William of Malmesbury&#x27;s &quot;Gesta Regum Anglorum&quot; and Henry of Huntingdon&#x27;s &quot;Historia Anglorum&quot;, recount that Harold died by an arrow wound to his head. An earlier source, Amatus of Montecassino&#x27;s &quot;L&#x27;Ystoire de li Normant&quot; (&quot;History of the Normans&quot;), written only twenty years after the battle of Hastings, contains a report of Harold being shot in the eye with an arrow, but this may be an early fourteenth-century addition. The sources for how Harold met his death are contradictory, thus modern historians have not been able to produce a definitive story without finding something that will compromise any hypothesis.

In the panel of the Bayeux Tapestry with the inscription &quot;Hic Harold Rex Interfectus Est&quot; (&quot;Here King Harold is killed&quot;) a figure standing below the inscription is currently depicted gripping an arrow that has struck his eye. This, however, may have been a late 18th or early 19th century modification to the Tapestry. Some historians have questioned whether this man is intended to be Harold or if the panel shows two instances of Harold in sequence of his death the figure standing to the left of the central figure commonly thought to be Harold, and then lying to the right almost supine being mutilated beneath a horse&#x27;s hooves. Etchings made of the Tapestry in the 1730s show the standing figure with differing objects. Benoît&#x27;s 1729 sketch shows only a dotted line indicating stitch marks which is longer than the currently shown arrow and without any indication of fletching, whereas all other arrows in the Tapestry are fletched. Bernard de Montfaucon&#x27;s 1730 engraving has a solid line resembling a spear being held overhand matching the manner of the standing figure currently depicted with an arrow to the eye; while stitch marks for where such a spear may have been removed can be seen in the Tapestry. In 1816, Charles Stothard was commissioned by the Society of Antiquaries of London to make a copy of the Bayeux Tapestry. He included in his reproduction previously damaged or missing parts of the work with his own hypothesised depictions. This is when the arrow first appears. It has been proposed that the supine figure once had an arrow added by over-enthusiastic nineteenth-century restorers that was later unstitched. Many believe the figure with an arrow in his eye to be Harold as the name &quot;Harold&quot; is above him. This has been disputed by examining other examples from the Tapestry where the visual centre of a scene, not the location of the inscription, identifies named figures. A further suggestion is that both accounts are accurate, and that Harold suffered first the eye wound, then the mutilation, and the Tapestry is depicting both in sequence.

== Burial and legacy ==
The account of the contemporary chronicler William of Poitiers states that the body of Harold was given to William Malet for burial:


Another source states that Harold&#x27;s widow, Edith the Fair, was called to identify the body, which she did by some private mark known only to her. Harold&#x27;s strong association with Bosham, his birthplace, and the discovery in 1954 of an Anglo-Saxon coffin in the church there, has led some to suggest it as the place of King Harold&#x27;s burial. A request to exhume a grave in Bosham Church was refused by the Diocese of Chichester in December 2003, the Chancellor having ruled that the chances of establishing the identity of the body as Harold&#x27;s were too slim to justify disturbing a burial place. The exhumation in 1954 had revealed the remains of a man in a coffin. &quot;[It] was made of Horsham stone, magnificently finished, and contained the thigh and pelvic bones of a powerfully built man of about 5ft 6in in height, aged over 60 years and with traces of arthritis.&quot; It was suggested that the contents of the coffin had been opened at a much earlier date and vandalised, as the skull was missing and the remaining bones damaged in a way that was inconsistent with decomposition &quot;post mortem&quot;. The description of the remains is not unlike the fate of the king, recorded in the &quot;Carmen de Hastingae Proeliormen&quot;, that says Harold was buried by the sea. The location of the grave, at Bosham Church, is also consistent with William of Poitiers&#x27; description as it is only a small distance from Chichester Harbour and in sight of the English Channel.

There were legends of Harold&#x27;s body being given a proper funeral years later in Waltham Abbey Church in Essex, which he had refounded in 1060. Other stories suggested that Harold had not died at Hastings, but instead fled England or that he later ended his life as a hermit at Chester or Canterbury.

Harold&#x27;s son Ulf, along with Morcar and two others, were released from prison by King William as he lay dying in 1087. Ulf threw his lot in with Robert Curthose, who knighted him, and then disappeared from history. Two of Harold&#x27;s other sons, Godwine and Edmund, invaded England in 1068 and 1069 with the aid of Diarmait mac Máel na mBó (High King of Ireland) but were defeated at the Battle of Northam in Devon in 1069. In 1068, Diarmait presented another Irish king with Harold&#x27;s battle standard.

== Marriages and children ==
Harold was married to Edith the Fair for approximately twenty years and had at least five children with her.

According to Orderic Vitalis, Harold was at some time betrothed to Adeliza, a daughter of William the Conqueror; if so, the betrothal never led to marriage.

In about January 1066, Harold married Ealdgyth, daughter of Earl Ælfgar, and widow of the Welsh prince Gruffydd ap Llywelyn. After her husband&#x27;s death, at the Battle of Hastings, the pregnant Ealdgyth had been collected, from London, by her brothers, the Northern earls, Edwin of Mercia and Morcar of Northumbria, and taken to Chester for safety. It is not known what happened to her thereafter.

Some historians have suggested that Harold and Ealdgyth&#x27;s union was childless, others ascribe two children to Ealdgyth, named Harold and Wulf/Ulf. Because of the chronology it is likely that the boys would have been twins and born after the demise of their father. Another possibility is that Ulf was the son of Edith the Fair.

There is a tradition that Edith the Fair took the broken body of her husband Harold Godwinson to the Church at Waltham Holy Cross to be buried. What happened to her after 1066, is not known. Also, after their defeat at the Battle of Northam the fate of the sons is unclear although some later sources suggest they took refuge at the Danish court with their grandmother, aunt and sister.



==References==
=== Notes ===
===Citations===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 


== Further reading ==
* 
== External links ==
* Harold II at the official website of the British monarchy
* BBC Historic Figures: Harold II (Godwineson) (c. 1020–1066)
* Society of Antiquaries</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159597" start="0" end="16" title="Harold Godwinson" label="Harold Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q159597" start="51" end="60" title="Harold Godwinson" label="Harold II"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="83" end="94" title="Anglo-Saxon" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82850" start="95" end="107" title="English king" label="English king"/>
<link wikidata="Q83224" start="167" end="185" title="Battle of Hastings" label="Battle of Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="233" end="248" title="Norman Conquest" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="288" end="317" title="History of Anglo-Saxon England" label="Anglo-Saxon rule over England"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="339" end="360" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089021" start="396" end="426" title="House of Godwin" label="a prominent Anglo-Saxon family"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="440" end="454" title="Cnut the Great" label="Cnut the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q318142" start="513" end="535" title="Godwin, Earl of Wessex" label="Godwin, Earl of Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="568" end="588" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q497578" start="640" end="651" title="Witenagemot" label="Witenagemot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="759" end="776" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q203647" start="852" end="867" title="Harald Hardrada" label="Harald Hardrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="881" end="885" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q318142" start="1012" end="1018" title="Godwin, Earl of Wessex" label="Godwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q581195" start="1041" end="1055" title="Earl of Wessex" label="Earl of Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634369" start="1064" end="1084" title="Gytha Thorkelsdóttir" label="Gytha Thorkelsdóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710670" start="1100" end="1112" title="Ulf the Earl" label="Ulf the Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981947" start="1128" end="1147" title="Estrid Svendsdatter" label="Estrid Svendsdatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q181896" start="1185" end="1200" title="Sweyn Forkbeard" label="Sweyn Forkbeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="1232" end="1246" title="Cnut the Great" label="Cnut the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q246812" start="1315" end="1334" title="Sweyn II of Denmark" label="Sweyn II of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q720822" start="1366" end="1374" title="Wulfnoth Cild" label="Wulfnoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234429" start="1393" end="1398" title="thegn" label="thegn"/>
<link wikidata="Q188684" start="1482" end="1497" title="Edmund Ironside" label="Edmund Ironside"/>
<link wikidata="Q190091" start="1804" end="1814" title="Harthacnut" label="Harthacnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q188627" start="1856" end="1871" title="Harold Harefoot" label="Harold Harefoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q35618" start="1972" end="1988" title="Alfred Aetheling" label="Alfred Aetheling"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="2055" end="2075" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409583" start="2387" end="2396" title="kingmaker" label="kingmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089021" start="2587" end="2603" title="House of Godwin" label="several children"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406700" start="2616" end="2621" title="Sweyn Godwinson" label="Sweyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q345420" start="2631" end="2637" title="Tostig Godwinson" label="Tostig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249857" start="2639" end="2644" title="Gyrth Godwinson" label="Gyrth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249624" start="2646" end="2654" title="Leofwine Godwinson" label="Leofwine"/>
<link wikidata="Q321741" start="2659" end="2667" title="Wulfnoth Godwinson" label="Wulfnoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q259564" start="2706" end="2721" title="Edith of Wessex" label="Edith of Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990993" start="3405" end="3424" title="Earl of East Anglia" label="Earl of East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q310999" start="3692" end="3707" title="Magnus the Good" label="Magnus the Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q26163" start="3803" end="3811" title="Sandwich, Kent" label="Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q515160" start="3996" end="4010" title="Edith the Fair" label="Edith the Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q23112" start="4061" end="4075" title="Cambridgeshire" label="Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="4077" end="4084" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="4089" end="4094" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311180" start="4237" end="4248" title="More danico" label="More danico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524445" start="4580" end="4590" title="Leominster Abbey" label="Leominster"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357561" start="4653" end="4658" title="Beorn Estrithson" label="Beorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q153023" start="4745" end="4774" title="Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q333384" start="4783" end="4811" title="Baldwin V, Count of Flanders" label="Baldwin V, Count of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="5138" end="5162" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q204720" start="5496" end="5504" title="Hereford" label="Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277307" start="5525" end="5541" title="Earl of Hereford" label="Earl of Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="5618" end="5624" title="Normandy" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="5754" end="5762" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q727897" start="5822" end="5842" title="Gruffydd ap Llywelyn" label="Gruffydd ap Llywelyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q816814" start="5846" end="5853" title="Kingdom of Gwynedd" label="Gwynedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="5863" end="5868" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q60930" start="6018" end="6026" title="Ponthieu" label="Ponthieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q431066" start="6162" end="6180" title="Robert of Jumièges" label="Robert of Jumièges"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="6272" end="6294" title="William II of Normandy" label="William II of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813294" start="6350" end="6356" title="fealty" label="fealty"/>
<link wikidata="Q117647" start="6610" end="6626" title="Edward the Exile" label="Edward the Exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q188684" start="6640" end="6655" title="Edmund Ironside" label="Edmund Ironside"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="7018" end="7033" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143046" start="7103" end="7109" title="Bosham" label="Bosham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187399" start="7183" end="7200" title="Guy I of Ponthieu" label="Guy I of Ponthieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q37719" start="7264" end="7272" title="Beaurainville" label="Beaurain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032916" start="7281" end="7293" title="Canche" label="River Canche"/>
<link wikidata="Q323164" start="7324" end="7334" title="Le Touquet" label="Le Touquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q527950" start="7495" end="7521" title="Conan II, Duke of Brittany" label="Conan II, Duke of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="7543" end="7551" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q20892" start="7580" end="7597" title="Mont Saint-Michel" label="Mont Saint-Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q224090" start="7666" end="7675" title="quicksand" label="quicksand"/>
<link wikidata="Q318432" start="7701" end="7716" title="Dol-de-Bretagne" label="Dol-de-Bretagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q647" start="7720" end="7726" title="Rennes" label="Rennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q201311" start="7743" end="7748" title="Dinan" label="Dinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003053" start="7814" end="7819" title="lance" label="lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q187483" start="7888" end="7903" title="Bayeux Tapestry" label="Bayeux Tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q356298" start="8192" end="8207" title="Orderic Vitalis" label="Orderic Vitalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347677" start="8638" end="8657" title="Northumbrian Revolt of 1065" label="Northumbrian rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q971752" start="8701" end="8707" title="Morcar, Earl of Northumbria" label="Morcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q203647" start="8850" end="8865" title="Harald Hardrada" label="Harald Hardrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q205521" start="9082" end="9100" title="Vita Ædwardi Regis" label="Vita Ædwardi Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q497578" start="9393" end="9398" title="Witan" label="Witan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="9516" end="9533" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q132001" start="9862" end="9870" title="Epiphany (holiday)" label="Epiphany"/>
<link wikidata="Q536728" start="10102" end="10115" title="Dives-sur-Mer" label="Dives-sur-Mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q171112" start="10278" end="10295" title="Pope Alexander II" label="Pope Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="10465" end="10478" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="10781" end="10785" title="River Tyne" label="Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249648" start="10858" end="10873" title="Edwin, Earl of Mercia" label="Edwin of Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q971752" start="10878" end="10899" title="Morcar" label="Morcar of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113659" start="10907" end="10924" title="Battle of Fulford" label="Battle of Fulford"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="10930" end="10934" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q203225" start="11103" end="11128" title="Battle of Stamford Bridge" label="Battle of Stamford Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="11203" end="11219" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292269" start="11245" end="11259" title="Edward Augustus Freeman" label="Edward Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q473842" start="12000" end="12022" title="Saint-Valery-sur-Somme" label="Saint-Valery-sur-Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q734453" start="12145" end="12153" title="Pevensey" label="Pevensey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="12268" end="12274" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q11880367" start="12339" end="12349" title="earthworks (engineering)" label="earthworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q29245" start="12355" end="12363" title="Hastings" label="Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359492" start="12418" end="12429" title="Senlac Hill" label="Senlac Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q737593" start="12456" end="12462" title="Battle, East Sussex" label="Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043736" start="12798" end="12825" title="Carmen de Hastingae Proelio" label="Carmen de Hastingae Proelio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122230" start="12932" end="12935" title="Guy (Bishop of Amiens)" label="Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q345524" start="13106" end="13127" title="William of Malmesbury" label="William of Malmesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q385456" start="13305" end="13327" title="Amatus of Montecassino" label="Amatus of Montecassino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063531" start="15043" end="15059" title="Charles Stothard" label="Charles Stothard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417893" start="15084" end="15116" title="Society of Antiquaries of London" label="Society of Antiquaries of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394175" start="15972" end="15991" title="William of Poitiers" label="William of Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120070" start="16036" end="16049" title="William Malet (companion of William the Conqueror)" label="William Malet"/>
<link wikidata="Q515160" start="16112" end="16126" title="Edith the Fair" label="Edith the Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143046" start="16253" end="16259" title="Bosham" label="Bosham"/>
<link wikidata="Q17529018" start="16450" end="16463" title="Holy Trinity Church, Bosham" label="Bosham Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q511342" start="16483" end="16504" title="Diocese of Chichester" label="Diocese of Chichester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070767" start="16527" end="16537" title="Chancellor (ecclesiastical)" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096001" start="17507" end="17525" title="Chichester Harbour" label="Chichester Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="17546" end="17561" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603291" start="17649" end="17669" title="Waltham Abbey Church" label="Waltham Abbey Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="17673" end="17678" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q220994" start="18020" end="18035" title="Robert Curthose" label="Robert Curthose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026351" start="18192" end="18216" title="Diarmait mac Máel na mBó" label="Diarmait mac Máel na mBó"/>
<link wikidata="Q889997" start="18218" end="18238" title="High King of Ireland" label="High King of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q105616523" start="18265" end="18282" title="Battle of Northam" label="Battle of Northam"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="18286" end="18291" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q356298" start="18537" end="18552" title="Orderic Vitalis" label="Orderic Vitalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q157512" start="18578" end="18587" title="betrothed" label="betrothed"/>
<link wikidata="Q45465" start="18591" end="18598" title="Adeliza" label="Adeliza"/>
<link wikidata="Q462856" start="18720" end="18753" title="Ealdgyth, daughter of Earl Ælfgar" label="Ealdgyth, daughter of Earl Ælfgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q727897" start="18785" end="18805" title="Gruffydd ap Llywelyn" label="Gruffydd ap Llywelyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249648" start="18958" end="18973" title="Edwin, Earl of Mercia" label="Edwin of Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q971752" start="18978" end="18999" title="Morcar" label="Morcar of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q56732455" start="19215" end="19221" title="Harold, son of Harold Godwinson" label="Harold"/>
<link wikidata="Q56734044" start="19226" end="19234" title="Ulf, son of Harold Godwinson" label="Wulf/Ulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462706" start="19529" end="19547" title="Waltham Holy Cross" label="Waltham Holy Cross"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40149" wikidata="Q318142" url="?curid=40149" title="Godwin, Earl of Wessex">
<text>Godwin of Wessex (; died 15 April 1053) was an Anglo-Saxon nobleman who became one of the most powerful earls in England under the Danish king Cnut the Great (King of England from 1016 to 1035) and his successors. Cnut made Godwin the first Earl of Wessex (). Godwin was the father of King Harold II () and of Edith of Wessex, who in 1045 married King Edward the Confessor ().

==Rise to power==
Godwin&#x27;s father was probably Wulfnoth Cild, who was a thegn of Sussex. His origin is unknown but &#x27;Child&#x27; (also written Cild) is cognate with &#x27;the Younger&#x27; or &#x27;Junior&#x27; and is today associated with some form of inheritance. In 1009 Wulfnoth was accused of unknown crimes at a muster of Æthelred the Unready&#x27;s fleet and fled with twenty ships; the ships sent to pursue him were destroyed in a storm. Godwin was probably an adherent of Æthelred&#x27;s eldest son, Æthelstan, who left him an estate when he died in 1014. This estate in Compton, Sussex, had once belonged to Godwin&#x27;s father. 

After Cnut seized the throne in 1016, Godwin&#x27;s rise was rapid. By 1018 he was an earl, probably of eastern Wessex, and then by around 1020 of all Wessex. Between 1019 and 1023 he accompanied Cnut on an expedition to Denmark, where he distinguished himself, and shortly afterwards married Gytha, the sister of the Danish earl, Ulf, who was married to Cnut&#x27;s sister, Estrid.

==Reigns of Cnut&#x27;s sons==
Cnut died in 1035 and England was disputed between Harold Harefoot, Cnut&#x27;s son with Ælfgifu of Northampton, and Harthacnut, his son by Emma of Normandy. Godwin supported Harthacnut, crowned king of Denmark, and as the latter was beset with a Norwegian invasion of Denmark, it was agreed that Harold should act as English regent for these two half-brothers. In 1036 Alfred Ætheling, younger son of Emma of Normandy and Æthelred the Unready, attempted an invasion of England, but he was intercepted by Godwin, who handed him to Harold Harefoot. Alfred was blinded and died soon afterwards. Godwin&#x27;s responsibility for the crime was disputed, but whatever the truth it left a stain which affected his future. In 1037, with Harthacnut still in war-stricken Denmark, Harold was recognised as king, almost certainly with Godwin&#x27;s support.

In 1040, Harold Harefoot died and Godwin backed the successful accession of Harthacnut to the throne of England. Following Harthacnut&#x27;s death in 1042 Godwin supported the claim of Æthelred&#x27;s last surviving son Edward the Confessor to the throne. Edward, who was crowned the following year, had spent most of the previous thirty years in Normandy. His reign restored to the throne of England the &quot;native&quot; royal house of Wessex, a branch now in blood intertwined with the Danish-Norman dynasty of Emma of Normandy.

==Later conflicts, decline, and death==
Soon after Edward became king, he extended Godwin&#x27;s jurisdiction to include Kent. Then in January 1045, Godwin secured the marriage of his daughter Edith (Eadgyth) to the king.

As Edward drew advisors, nobles and priests from his – and his mother&#x27;s – Normano-French circle to develop his own power base, Godwin led opposition to the influx of the nascent European Norman dominion. After a violent clash between people of Dover and the visiting Eustace II, Count of Boulogne, Godwin was ordered to punish the people of Dover (as he and Leofric, Earl of Mercia had done in Worcester, in that earldom). This time, however, Godwin refused, choosing to champion his own countrymen against a visiting foreign power and defying his own king. Edward saw this as a test of power, negotiating the backing of Siward, Earl of Northumbria and Leofric, Earl of Mercia, to attaint and exile Godwin. Godwin and his sons were exiled from England in September 1051. He along with his wife Gytha and sons Sweyn, Tostig and Gyrth sought refuge in Flanders; sons Leofwine and Harold fled to Dublin, where they gained the shelter and help of Diarmait mac Máel na mBó, King of Leinster. They all returned to England the next year with armed forces, gaining the support of the navy, burghers, and peasants, so compelling Edward to restore the earldom. This set a precedent: followed by a rival earl before 1066; then by Godwin&#x27;s own son, Tostig, in 1066.

The year after his restoration to earldom, on 15 April, Godwin died suddenly, days after collapsing at a royal banquet at Winchester. Contemporary accounts indicating that he just had a sudden illness, possibly a stroke. According to the Abingdon version of the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot;, under the year 1053: &quot;On Easter Monday, as he was sitting with the king at a meal he suddenly sank towards the footstool bereft of speech, and deprived of all his strength. Then he was carried to the king&#x27;s private room and they thought it was about to pass off. But it was not so. On the contrary, he continued like this without speech or strength right on to the Thursday, and then departed this life.&quot; But according to one colourful account by the 12th-century writer Aelred of Rievaulx, which appears to be no more than Norman propaganda, Godwin tried to disclaim responsibility for Alfred Ætheling&#x27;s death with the words &quot;May this crust which I hold in my hand pass through my throat and leave me unharmed to show that I was guiltless of treason towards you, and that I was innocent of your brother&#x27;s death!&quot;. The work says he then swallowed the crust, but it stuck in his throat and killed him. 

His son Harold (Godwinson) succeeded him as Earl of Wessex, that is, overlord of roughly the southernmost third of England. On the deaths of Earl Siward of Northumbria (1055) and later Ælfgar, Earl of Mercia (1062), the children of Godwin were poised to take near-total overlordship of England, under the king. Tostig was helped into the earldom of Northumbria, approximating to England&#x27;s northern third. The Mercian earl for the central third of England was then sidelined, especially after Harold and Tostig broke the Welsh-Mercian alliance in 1063. Harold later succeeded Edward the Confessor and became King of England in his own right in 1066. At this point, both Harold&#x27;s remaining brothers in England were among his nominally loyal earls, Wessex vested in the King directly, and he had married the sister of Earl E(a)dwin(e) of Mercia and of Morcar, Earl of Northumbria (who had replaced Tostig). Thus this &quot;House of Godwin&quot; looked set to found a multi-generational royal dynasty, but instead Harold was overthrown and killed in the Norman Conquest.

==Family==
===Children===
* Sweyn Godwinson, Earl of Herefordshire (c. 1020 – 29 September 1052)
* Harold II of England (c. 1022 – 14 October 1066)
* Edith of Wessex, (c. 1025 – 18 December 1075), queen consort of Edward the Confessor
* Tostig Godwinson, Earl of Northumbria (c. 1026 – 25 September 1066)
* Gyrth Godwinson, Earl of East Anglia (c. 1032 – 14 October 1066)
* Leofwine Godwinson, Earl of Kent (c. 1035 – 14 October 1066)
* Wulfnoth Godwinson (c. 1040 – died after 1087)
* Alfgar, possibly a monk in Rheims
* Edgiva
* Elgiva (died c. 1066)
* Gunhilda, a nun (died 24 August 1087)

===Family tree===




==See also==
*Ancestry of the Godwins
*House of Wessex family tree
*Cnut the Great&#x27;s family tree

==Citations==
==Sources==
*
*Mason, Emma. &quot;The House of Godwine: The History of Dynasty&quot;. Hambledon Press, 2003.
*Stenton, F.M. &quot;Anglo-Saxon England (Oxford History of England)&quot;, 2001.
*Thorne, J.O. and Collocott, T.C. &quot;Chambers Biographical Dictionary&quot;, Revised Edition. (Edinburgh: Chambers, 1984) 
*Walker, Ian. &quot;Harold: The Last Anglo-Saxon King&quot;, 1997.
*Weir, Alison (1996) &quot;Britain&#x27;s Royal Families: The Complete Genealogy&quot;. London: Random House. 

==Further reading==

==External links==
*Regia Anglorum Kingmakers – the story of the House of Godwin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q318142" start="0" end="16" title="Godwin, Earl of Wessex" label="Godwin of Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="47" end="58" title="Anglo-Saxon" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="104" end="108" title="earl" label="earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="113" end="120" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="131" end="137" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="143" end="157" title="Cnut the Great" label="Cnut the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q581195" start="241" end="255" title="Earl of Wessex" label="Earl of Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q159597" start="290" end="299" title="Harold Godwinson" label="Harold II"/>
<link wikidata="Q259564" start="310" end="325" title="Edith of Wessex" label="Edith of Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="352" end="372" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q720822" start="430" end="443" title="Wulfnoth Cild" label="Wulfnoth Cild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234429" start="455" end="460" title="thegn" label="thegn"/>
<link wikidata="Q676184" start="464" end="470" title="Kingdom of Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q183499" start="715" end="735" title="Æthelred the Unready" label="Æthelred the Unready"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261974" start="896" end="905" title="Æthelstan Ætheling" label="Æthelstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083029" start="967" end="974" title="Compton, West Sussex" label="Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634369" start="1322" end="1327" title="Gytha Thorkelsdóttir" label="Gytha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710670" start="1360" end="1363" title="Ulf the Earl" label="Ulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981947" start="1404" end="1410" title="Estrid Svendsdatter" label="Estrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188627" start="1495" end="1510" title="Harold Harefoot" label="Harold Harefoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276812" start="1533" end="1555" title="Ælfgifu of Northampton" label="Ælfgifu of Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q190091" start="1561" end="1571" title="Harthacnut" label="Harthacnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q40061" start="1584" end="1600" title="Emma of Normandy" label="Emma of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35618" start="1814" end="1829" title="Alfred Ætheling" label="Alfred Ætheling"/>
<link wikidata="Q40061" start="1846" end="1862" title="Emma of Normandy" label="Emma of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="2513" end="2533" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="2640" end="2648" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40061" start="2808" end="2824" title="Emma of Normandy" label="Emma of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q259564" start="3020" end="3025" title="Edith of Wessex" label="Edith"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="3242" end="3248" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q179224" start="3299" end="3304" title="Dover, England" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q451790" start="3322" end="3332" title="Eustace II" label="Eustace II"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894615" start="3334" end="3351" title="Count of Boulogne" label="Count of Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q638973" start="3413" end="3436" title="Leofric, Earl of Mercia" label="Leofric, Earl of Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646181" start="3449" end="3458" title="Worcester, England" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q68366" start="3676" end="3703" title="Siward, Earl of Northumbria" label="Siward, Earl of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818067" start="3736" end="3743" title="attainder" label="attaint"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="3905" end="3913" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="3948" end="3954" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026351" start="3998" end="4022" title="Diarmait mac Máel na mBó" label="Diarmait mac Máel na mBó"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277530" start="4024" end="4040" title="List of kings of Leinster" label="King of Leinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="4437" end="4447" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="4528" end="4534" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q212746" start="4583" end="4604" title="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" label="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q380845" start="5098" end="5116" title="Aelred of Rievaulx" label="Aelred of Rievaulx"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="5151" end="5157" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q971752" start="6409" end="6436" title="Morcar, Earl of Northumbria" label="Morcar, Earl of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089021" start="6480" end="6495" title="House of Godwin" label="House of Godwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="6610" end="6625" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406700" start="6656" end="6671" title="Sweyn Godwinson" label="Sweyn Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q159597" start="6727" end="6747" title="Harold Godwinson" label="Harold II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q259564" start="6778" end="6793" title="Edith of Wessex" label="Edith of Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="6842" end="6862" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q345420" start="6865" end="6881" title="Tostig Godwinson" label="Tostig Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250180" start="6883" end="6902" title="Earl of Northumbria" label="Earl of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249857" start="6935" end="6950" title="Gyrth Godwinson" label="Gyrth Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990993" start="6952" end="6971" title="Earl of East Anglia" label="Earl of East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249624" start="7002" end="7020" title="Leofwine Godwinson" label="Leofwine Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277321" start="7022" end="7034" title="Earl of Kent" label="Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q321741" start="7065" end="7083" title="Wulfnoth Godwinson" label="Wulfnoth Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="7141" end="7147" title="Rheims" label="Rheims"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752586" start="7258" end="7281" title="Ancestry of the Godwins" label="Ancestry of the Godwins"/>
<link wikidata="Q773397" start="7283" end="7310" title="House of Wessex family tree" label="House of Wessex family tree"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7312" end="7345" title=":Template:Cnut the Great family tree" label="Cnut the Great&amp;#x27;s family tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788781" start="7746" end="7758" title="Alison Weir" label="Weir, Alison"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40151" wikidata="Q928959" url="?curid=40151" title="Alappuzha district">
<text>Alappuzha district (), is one of the 14 districts in the Indian state of Kerala. It was formed as Alleppey district on 17 August 1957, the name of the district being changed to &quot;Alappuzha&quot; in 1990. Alappuzha is the smallest district of Kerala. Alleppey town, the district headquarters, was renamed Alappuzha in 2012.

A town with canals, backwaters, beaches, and lagoons, Alappuzha was described by George Curzon, the British Governor-General of India in the beginning of the 20th century CE, as the &quot;Venice of the Eastern world.&quot; The district is best known for its picturesque Kerala Backwaters, by which it is well connected to other parts of Kerala, including the tourist destination of Kumarakom, the district being a well known tourist destination in India. It is also known for its coir factories, as most of Kerala&#x27;s coir industries are situated in and around the Alappuzha town.

The Vembanad lake, which lies below the sea level, is the longest lake in the Indian peninsula, and the district of Alappuzha lies between this lake and the Arabian Sea. Kuttanad region of the Alappuzha district, which lies below the sea level, is the point of least elevation in the entire India. Kuttanad, also known as &quot;The Rice Bowl of Kerala&quot;, has the lowest altitude in India, and is also one of the few places in the world where cultivation takes place below sea level.

The district was home to the Communist-led Punnapra-Vayalar uprising against the Divan of the British Princely state of Travancore in the 1940s.

== Etymology ==

Carved out of the erstwhile Kollam and Kottayam districts, most of the modern-day Alappuzha district was part of the Quilon district of the Travancore Kingdom, with a small portion in the northern Alappuzha were part of the Kottayam district of the Travancore Kingdom until 1957. when the modern Alappuzha district was formed. Alappuzha district was formed on 17 August 1957 and consisted initially of seven taluks, namely Cherthala, Ambalappuzha, Kuttanad, Chengannur, Karthikappally and Mavelikkara.

The name Ᾱlappuzha is a toponym. ‘Ᾱlayam’ means ‘home’ and ‘puzha’, according to Dr. Herman Gundert&#x27;s dictionary, means ‘watercourse’ or ‘river’. The name refers to the network of waterways and backwaters in Alappuzha and its surrounding areas. The district is bounded on the north by Kochi and Kanayannur taluks of Ernakulam district, on the east by Vaikom, Kottayam and Changanassery taluks of Kottayam district and Thiruvalla, Kozhencherry and Adoor taluks of Pathanamthitta district, on the South by Kunnathur and Karunagappally taluks of Kollam district and on the west by Laccadive Sea.

Present-day Alappuzha district comprises six taluks, namely Cherthala, Ambalappuzha, Kuttanad, Karthikappally, Chengannur and Mavelikkara. The area of the district is . Its headquarters is located at Alappuzha.

==History==
The present-day town of Alappuzha owes its existence to Raja Kesavadas during the second half of the 18th century CE. However the district of Alappuzha had an important position in the classical Malayalam literature. Kuttanad, the rice bowl of Kerala, was well known from the early Sangam period itself.

===Classical antiquity===

History records that the region which now constitutes the modern-day district of Alappuzha had trade relations with the ancient Greece, the ancient Rome, the ancient Levant, the ancient Arabian peninsula, and the Ancient Egypt during the Sangam period in the early centuries of the Common Era.

The ancient port town of &quot;Barace&quot; which is recorded as an important centre of the Indian Ocean trade in the ancient Greco-Roman travelogues such as the &quot;Periplus of the Erythraean Sea&quot; (written around 50 CE) is often identified with the modern-day coastal town of Purakkad on the mouth of the Pamba River in the Alappuzha district. This river is also the third-longest river in Kerala only after to the Periyar river and the Bharathappuzha river.

Early members of the Chera dynasty had their home in Kuttanad and were sometimes known as the &quot;Kuttuvans&quot;. However the regions south of the Pamba River was ruled by the Ay kingdom during the ancient period. Pamba is mentioned as &quot;Baris&quot; in the ancient Greco-Roman travelogues. There are archaeological evidences of the early period of this district, including ancient fossils, stone inscriptions and monuments, in the archeological sites like the excavation sites, the caves, the temples, etc. The literary works of the Sangam period also help to take a look into the ancient period of the district.

Alappuzha district was once a prominent centre of Buddhism in South India prior to the arrival of Nambudiri Brahmins into the region. Sri Mulavasam was then a prominent Buddhist pilgrimage centre in the Indian peninsula. Numerous remnants of once flourished Buddhism have been found from the taluks of Ambalappuzha and Mavelikara.

===Medieval history===
The regions included in the district had a prominent position in the medieval Malayalam literary works such as &quot;Unnuneeli Sandesam&quot;. One among the famous literary works of this period was the &quot;Ascharya Choodamani&quot;, a Sanskrit drama written by Sakthibhadra who was a scholar from Chengannur.

The feudal monarch of Chempakasseri was at its zenith during the reign of Pooradam Thirunal Devanarayanan, a great scholar and a poet who was also the author of the literary work &quot;Vedantha Ratnamala&quot;. It is said that Ambalappuzha Sri Krishna Temple, at Ambalappuzha, was constructed and the idol of Lord Krishna installed during that time. Chempakassery was ruled by Brahmin monarchs during the medieval period.

It is believed that Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri, Kumaran Namboothiri, and Neelakanta Deekshithar were eminent scholars who patronized his court.

===Feudal principalities during the medieval period===
The southern regions of the modern-day Alappuzha district once formed part of the erstwhile &quot;kingdom of Odanad&quot; (also known as the &quot;kingdom of Kayamkulam&quot; or known by the name &quot;Onattukara&quot;), which was later invaded by the Travancorean forces in the year 1746. It was a branch of the ancient Ay kingdom. It was also known as the &quot;Chirava Swaroopam&quot;, where the word &quot;Chirava&quot; derives from the combination of two Malayalam words, &quot;Cheru&quot; and &quot;Aayi&quot;, which means &quot;a smaller branch of the Ay kingdom&quot;. It included some parts of the modern-day Taluks of Chengannur, Mavelikara, Karthikappally, and Karunagappally.

The northernmost region of the district, which curresponds to the present-day Taluk of Cherthala, was ruled by the &quot;Kingdom of Karappuram&quot; prior to the 1762 treaty that was signed between the kingdom of Travancore and the Kingdom of Cochin. Karappuram was a tributary of the Kingdom of Cochin until 1762 when it was handed over to the kingdom of Travancore. The headquarters of the &quot;Madathingal branch&quot; of the Cochin Royal family was situated at Madathinkara in Karappuram.

South of Karappuram lied the &quot;Chempakassery kingdom&quot; which was also known by the name the &quot;Kingdom of Purakkad&quot; prior to the Travancorean conquest of 1746. The kingdom of Chempakassery included the modern-day Taluks of Ambalappuzha and Kuttanad. The monarch of Chempakassery was known by the title &quot;Chempakassery Deva Narayanan&quot;. Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri and Kunchan Nambiar, who originally hailed from the South Malabar region, were court poets of the Chempakassery kingdom at times.

Karthikappally was a small feudal kingdom that lied between the feudal kingdoms of Odanad and Chempakassery until the Travancorean invasion of the mid-18th century CE, which curresponds to the modern-day Taluk of Karthikappally. The southernmost portion of the district had been once part of the erstwhile feudal kingdom of Karunagappally, which had been subordinate to the &quot;Chirava Swaroopam&quot; (Kayamkulam) at times.

===Progress and Social Reformation during the Travancore era (1746–1947)===
In the 17th century the Portuguese power declined on the Malabar Coast and the Dutch Malabar gained a predominant position in the principalities of this district. The church located at Kokkamangalam or Kokkothamangalam is believed to be one of the seven churches founded by St. Thomas the Apostle, one of the twelve disciples of Jesus Christ according to the oral traditions. The picturesque CSI Christ Church in Alappuzha town was built in 1816 by the first CMS (Church Missionary Society) missionary to India, Rev. Thomas Norton. It was the first Anglican Church to be established in the erstwhile state of Travancore.

It was during the mid-18th century CE that the Maharaja Marthanda Varma, popularly known as the ‘Architect of the Modern Travancore’, interfered in the political affairs of the smaller feudal principalities who ruled parts of the district. Marthandavarma Maharaja had a remarkable role in the internal progress of the district. The Krishnapuram Palace, which is now a protected monument of the State Archaeology Department, was constructed during his administrative period. He was known as the &quot;Architect of the Modern Alleppey&quot; and played a key role in making Alappuzha a premier port town of Travancore.

During the reign of Balaramavarma Maharaja, Velu Thampi Dalava took keen interest in the development of the town and the port. He brought whole area of the Pathiramanal island into coconut cultivation and it&#x27;s larger tracts into paddy cultivation. The role of Velu Thampi Dalava in the development of Alappuzha is worth mentioning. In the 19th century the district attained progress in all spheres.

Kayamkulam Kochunni was a heroic outlaw from Kayamkulam who lived during the 19th century CE. The 19th century social reformer Arattupuzha Velayudha Panicker hails from the modern-day district of Alappuzha.

The first modern factory for the manufacture of Coir mats and mattings was also established in 1859 at Alappuzha. The Alappuzha Town Improvement Committee was set up in 1894. During the Travancorean administration, Cherthala taluk was included in the Northern division (Kottayam division) while rest of the Taluks which together constitute the modern-day district of Alappuzha was placed under the Central division (Kollam division) of the British Princely state of Travancore.

This district played a prominent role in the freedom struggle of Travancore. The campaign for the eradication of Untouchability was organized much earlier in this district by T.K. Madhavan, a journalist and in 1925 the approach roads to the temples, especially to the Ambalappuzha Sree Krishna Swamy Temple, were thrown open to the Hindus of all castes. The district also witnessed the &#x27;Nivarthana&#x27; movement which was started as a protest against the constitutional repression in 1932. The first political strike in Kerala was held at Alappuzha in 1938. The district was home to the Communist-led Punnapra-Vayalar uprising against the Divan of the British Princely state of Travancore in the 1940s.

==Geography==

Alappuzha is on a peninsular landmass between the Arabian Sea and the Vembanad lake. Major rivers are the Manimala, the Pamba, and the Achankovil; their branches and tributaries flow through Alappuzha and empty into the Vembanad lake. The most important lake is Vembanad.

==Forest and wildlife==

Alappuzha was the only district in Kerala without public forest land. But that changed in 2013, when of land at Veeyapuram was declared as reserved forest by the Forest and Wildlife Department.

Pathiramanal island on the Vembanad lake of Alappuzha district is famous for rare migrating birds.

==Administration==

Alappuzha city is the administrative headquarters of the Alappuzha district. The district is divided into two revenue divisions-Alappuzha and Chengannur.

===Municipal towns===

There are 6 municipal towns in the district. They are:
===Legislative representation===

There are two Lok Sabha constituencies in Alappuzha: Alappuzha and Mavelikara.

There are nine Kerala Legislative Assembly seats in Alappuzha district.
===Taluks===

The district is divided into two revenue divisions which together incorporate six Taluks within them.

*Taluks in the Alappuzha Revenue Division are:
*Taluks in the Chengannur Revenue Division are:
===Revenue villages===
Alappuzha district is divided into 93 revenue villages for the ease and decentralisation of its revenue administration. They are further incorporated into 6 taluks as eludicated below.

====Cherthala Taluk====
* Arookutty
* Aroor
* Arthunkal
* Cherthala North
* Cherthala South
* Ezhupunna
* Kadakkarappally
* Kanjikuzhy
* Kodamthuruth
* Kokkothamangalam
* Kuthiyathode
* Mararikulam North
* Pallippuram
* Panavally
* Pattanakkad
* Perumbalam
* Thanneermukkom North
* Thanneermukkom South
* Thuravoor South
* Thaikkattussery
* Vayalar East
====Ambalappuzha Taluk====
* Alappuzha West
* Ambalappuzha
* Ambalappuzha North
* Aryad South
* Thumpoly
* Kalavoor
* Karumady
* Komalapuram
* Mannancherry
* Mullakkal
* Paravur-Alappuzha
* Pathirappally
* Pazhaveedu
* Punnapra
* Purakkad
====Kuttanad Taluk====
* Champakulam
* Edathua
* Kainakary North
* Kainakary South
* Kavalam
* Kunnumma
* Muttar
* Nedumudi
* Neelamperoor
* Pulinkunnoo
* Ramankary
* Thakazhy
* Thalavady
* Veliyanad
====Karthikappally Taluk====
* Arattupuzha
* Cheppad
* Cheruthana
* Chingoli
* Haripad
* Kandalloor
* Karthikappally
* Karuvatta
* Kayamkulam
* Keerikkad
* Krishnapuram
* Kumarapuram
* Muthukulam
* Pallippad
* Pathiyoor
* Puthuppally
* Thrikkunnapuzha
* Veeyapuram
====Mavelikara Taluk====
* Bharanikkavu
* Chennithala
* Chunakkara
* Kannamangalam
* Kattanam
* Mavelikara
* Nooranad
* Palamel
* Perungala
* Thamarakkulam
* Thazhakkara
* Thekkekara
* Thriperumthura
* Vallikunnam
* Vettiyar
====Chengannur Taluk====
* Ala
* Chengannur
* Cheriyanad
* Ennakkad
* Kurattissery
* Mannar
* Mulakuzha
* Pandanad
* Puliyoor
* Thiruvanvandoor
* Venmony
===List of district collectors===
List of Collectors of Alappuzha District according to length of tenure in descending order. The longest serving District Collector of Alappuzha was K. Balakrishna Kurup and the shortest serving District Collector was Sriram Venkitaraman.

K. Balakrishna Kurup served for 1146 days from 2 June 1980 to 23 July 1983, but from July 26, 2022, to August 2, 2022, Sriram Venkitaraman served for only 7 days from 26 July 2022 to 2 August 2022.
==Demographics==


According to the 2011 census, Alappuzha district has a population of 2,127,789, roughly equal to the nation of Namibia or the US state of New Mexico. This gives it a ranking of 216th in India (out of a total of 640). The district has a population density of . Its population growth rate over the decade 2001–2011 was 0.88%. Alappuzha has a sex ratio of 1100 females for every 1000 males, and a literacy rate of 95.72%. 53.96% of the population lives in urban areas. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes make up 9.46% and 0.31% of the population respectively.

Malayalam is the predominant language, spoken by 99.00% of the population. There is a small minority of Konkani speakers in urban areas.

It has the highest population density among all districts of the state. It is 29.46% urbanized, and is the smallest district in Kerala.

===Religion===


In the 2011 Indian Census, the Hindu population is 68.64%, Christian (Orthodox, Marthoma, Pentecostal and Latin Catholic are majority) 20.45, and Muslim 10.55.
==Major Towns==
*Cherthala taluk: Aroor, Thuravoor, Cherthala, Arookutty, Ezhupunna, Kanjikuzhy, Arthunkal , Vayalar
*Ambalapuzha taluk: Alappuzha, Ambalapuzha, Kalavoor, Purakkad, Aryad, Thumpoly, Pathirappally, Punnapra
*Kuttanad taluk: Champakulam, Edathua, Kainakary,Thakazhy, Thalavady, Nedumudi, Mankombu, Kavalam, Muttar
*Karthikappally taluk: Kayamkulam, Haripad, Cheppad, Chingoli, Karthikappally, Muthukulam, Pathiyoor, Pallippad, Krishnapuram, Arattupuzha
*Mavelikkara taluk: Mavelikara, Chennithala, Chettikulangara, Bharanikavu, Charumood, Nooranad, Mavelikkara Thekkekara, Edappon, Thazhakara
*Chengannur taluk: Chengannur, Budhanoor, Pandanad, Puliyoor, Venmoney, Cheriyanad, Mulakuzha, Mannar

==Transport==

===Road===
====National Highways====
National Highway 66 (India) is one of the longest national highways in India. It connects Panvel to Kanyakumari passes through the city and allow to connect other major cities like Mumbai, Goa, Udupi, Mangalore, Kannur, Kozhikode, Guruvayur, Ernakulam, Kollam, and Trivandrum. The construction of the Alappuzha Bypass, to route the national highway around city centers between Kommady and Kalarkode, is completed; and the highway was opened on 28 January 2021. Alappuzha is also well connected by road. There is a plan to upgrade State Highway 11 (Kerala) to national highway status which helps to connect Alappuzha to Kodaikanal as part of promoting coastal-hill tourism project.

====State Highways====

There are eight state highways in Alappuzha district and three of them originates from Alappuzha town. State Highway 11 (Kerala) is a state Highway that starts in Kalarcode, Alappuzha and ends in Perunna, Changanassery. The road is popularly known as AC road (Alappuzha Changanassery) road and it has 24.2 km length. It&#x27;s an important busy road which connects Alappuzha city with Kottayam district.
State Highway 40 (Kerala) is an interstate state highway in Alappuzha district which connects with Alappuzha town to Madurai, Tamil Nadu. It&#x27;s the only interstate state highway in Alappuzha district. State Highway 66 (Kerala) is a state highway which originates from Alappuzha town and terminates at Thoppumpady, Ernakulam. 

Main Central Road is the arterial State Highway in the Travancore region of Kerala state. It is designated as SH 1 by the Kerala Public Works Department. It passes through Chengannur town of Alappuzha district and helps it to connect with other parts of Kerala. State Highway 5 (Kerala) is another State Highway that starts in Kayamkulam and ends at Pulimukku junction. The highway is 42.5 km long. State Highway 6 (Kerala) starts in Kayamkulam and ends in Thiruvalla. This highway has 30.8 km length. State Highway 10 (Kerala) is a State Highway that starts in Mavelikkara and ends in Kozhencherry. The highway is 28.7 km long. State Highway 12 (Kerala) that starts in Ambalappuzha and ends in Thiruvalla and has 27.2 km length.

====Vehicle registration====
Following are the vehicle registrations in Alappuzha District:
* KL-04: Alappuzha RTO (&quot;Ambalappuzha Taluk&quot;)
* KL-29: Kayamkulam SRTO (&quot;Karthikappally Taluk&quot;)
* KL-30: Chengannur SRTO (&quot;Chengannur Taluk&quot;)
* KL-31: Mavelikkara SRTO (&quot;Mavelikkara Taluk&quot;) 
* KL-32: Cherthala SRTO (&quot;Cherthala Taluk&quot;)
* KL-66: Kuttanad SRTO (&quot;Kuttanad Taluk&quot;)
*SRTO (HARIPPAD)KL 88

Old structure:-
Following are the old registration numbers in Alappuzha District:-
* KLA
* KLY
* KRA
* KRY

===Water===
Because of the abundance of waterways, boats and ferries are integral to the transportation system in Alappuzha. National Waterway 3 also passes through the area. There is an SWTD boat jetty in the city that lies opposite to the KSRTC bus stand. It is served by boat services to towns like Kottayam, Kollam and Changanassery besides to other small towns and jetties.

===Rail===

Alappuzha district has two railway lines. Ernakulam–Kayamkulam coastal railway line primarily links with Haripad railway station, Alappuzha railway station, Cherthala railway station and Kayamkulam Junction railway station, Whereas Ernakulam-Kottayam-Kayamkulam line connects the eastern region of district and that is Chengannur railway station and Mavelikara railway station.

===Air===

The city is accessible by air, rail, road and water. Cochin International Airport, which is to the North, is the closest airport. Thiruvananthapuram International Airport, to the South, is the other airport that links the district with other countries. International tourists use this facility to reach Alappuzha. The other nearest airports are at Kozhikode () and Coimbatore (). A helipad in the city is reserved for government uses.

==Culture==

&quot;Snake boat races&quot; are the most significant traditional event in Alleppey. These regattas are usually held between August and October, and involve long thin boats powered by up to 120 oarsmen. One such snake boat race is the Nehru Trophy Boat Race.

Chemmeen was filmed in two villages in Alappuzha. In the opening credits, a written statement in Malayalam thanks the people of both villages.

===Tourism===

The name Alappuzha is derived from &quot;Aal&quot; (Sea)+ &quot;puzha&quot; (River-mouth) (&quot;The joining place of a river and the sea&quot;) (Malayalam). Alappuzha is one of the most important tourist centres in the state, with a large network of inland canals, earning it the sobriquet &quot;Venice of the East&quot;. These large networks of canals are Alleppey&#x27;s lifeline. Alappuzha was one of the busiest centers of trade in the past, with one of the best-known ports along the Malabar coast. Even today it retains its charm as the center for the Coir carpet industry and prawn farming.

Alappuzha, the ideal headquarters for backwater tourism, as well as for visits to the church-filled town of Kottayam and the town of Aranmula, which are known for their historic annual Aranmula Snake Boat Race. Chengannur, in Alappuzha, is the nearest railway station to Sabarimala. 

The Krishnapuram Palace is in Kayamkulam. 

The Buddha idol and Saradha Mandiram are the main attractions of Mavelikkara. The Buddha statue is in a seated posture, resembling Padmasana. A feature common to the idols is that hair has not been engraved on the head. Studies by the archaeology department have not been able to explain the absence of hair, which is common to Buddha statues of the Gandhara and Mathura traditions. The head has markings resembling headgear. Although the department has made a pagoda-like structure for the statue, no information on the idol is available to tourists who visit the area. Local people in the area light lamps before the idol. The idol at Mavelikara is high and is perhaps the biggest. The engravings on the head resemble a helmet of Greek statues. The mark of a sacred thread is visible on the body. Another feature is the marking of a shawl on one shoulder. Here the archaeological department has put up a sign specifying the age of the statue. Saradha Mandiram was the residence of Kerala Panini.

Alappuzha is also known for its snake-boat races held on the second Saturday of August, every year. This competition; the Nehru boat race takes its name from India&#x27;s first prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru, which was inaugurated in 1952. It is excitement all around as snake-boats, each manned by over a hundred oarsmen, cut through the waters like wind. 

The Revi Karunakaran Memorial Museum features displays of art and artifacts. Revi Karunakaran was the architect of a modernized Coir industry that still employs more than 500,000 people in the state of Kerala. The objects displayed at the Museum were collected by his family over three generations and feature unique artistic pieces from all parts of the world.

Alappuzha, the district headquarters, is a town with picturesque canals, backwaters and lagoons, was described as the &quot;Venice of the East&quot; by Lord Curzon.

===Festivals===
Chettikulangara Bharani is the most important festival in Alappuzha district. The festival is one among the important temple festivals of Kerala. A Chettikulagara Bhagavathi Temple, a temple dedicated to the Goddess Bhagavathi is about four kilometers from Mavelikkara and six kilometers from kayamkulam. The festival occurs on the Bharani asterism in February/March. The main rituals of the festival are the &#x27;Kuthiyottam&#x27; and &#x27;Kettukazcha&#x27;. The &#x27;Kuthiyottam&#x27; features a procession of young boys who have observed rigorous ritual penance. Traditional drums, music and glittering ornamental parasols accompany this procession of boys who dance in a trance.

The St. Andrew&#x27;s Basilica, Arthunkal &amp; St. Thomas Church, Thumpoly in Alappuzha District is noted for the annual feast, popularly known as Arthunkal Perunnal, Thumpoly Perunnal (perunnal means feast). The feast is held in December &amp; January every year.

&#x27;Chirappu Mahotsavam&#x27; is an important occasion at Mullakkal Rajarajeswari Temple in December. Christmas comes in between the festival and Alappuzha town is a really happening place at the time. The streets are full of wandering markets and entertainment ventures like circuses and exhibitions. The streets are crowded throughout the month and there is a &#x27;Shiveli&#x27; or the magnificent display of nine Tuskers accompanied by the &#x27;Chenda&#x27; and the &#x27;Panchavadyam&#x27; music.

Padanilam Sivarathri is another important religious event in Alappuzha district. This festival is held every year in the Padanilam Parabrahma Temple. The temple is situated in the small town of Padanilam. Padanilam is situated &#x27;about 16 km from Mavelikkara town. 

A grand annual festival is celebrated at the unique Nagaraja Temple (Mannarasala Temple ,Vettikodu Nagaraja Temple) in October/November. Another festival celebrated by the temple is a one-day Thaipooyan Kavadi. The Chandanakudam is celebrated at the Kidangam-Parampu Temple during December every year. Kottamkulangara Temple in Alappuzha has two festive seasons in February and March, because of the two deities with separate flag masts in the same compound wall.

The Kandamangalam Rajarajeshwari Temple is located in Kadakkarappally, Cherthala 1 km west of Thankey junction on NH 47. The annual festival comes in March–April. Chikkara, offering of children to the mother goddess during the festival, is the major attraction. The Chamanju Valathu of children starts on the 2nd day of the festival and lasts until the 8th day. Procession named Thalappoli start on the flag-hoisting day itself. The holy bath (Aarattu) of the goddess is held in a pool within the temple compound on the 10th day of festival. Elephant processions, fireworks, stage shows, etc. are major events that attract thousands of devotees and others.

The churches here celebrate grand annual feasts. The &#x27;Arthunkal Perunnal&#x27; feast is celebrated at the Arthunkal Church. Also, the big major Christian feast are the feast&#x27;s at Edathwa(Edathua) Church and Thumpoli Church Alappuzha, Pallipuram church cherthala. The regatta forms part of many festivals here in many places. The annual Vallam Kali (Nehru Trophy Boat Race) is held in the backwaters in the month of September associated with the Onam festival. The main attraction is the Chundan Vallam (Snake Boat) race, in which a number of contestants are in the running for the Prime Minister&#x27;s trophy. Another celebration in Alappuzha is the &quot;Beach Festival&quot;, held from 30 December to 2 January. The annual festival conducted in Champakulam &quot;Valiya Palli&quot; is another big festival.

==Education==
===Medical colleges===

* Government T D Medical College, Alappuzha
====Paramedical Colleges====
* KVM Institute of Paramedical Science, Cherthala.
====Nursing Colleges====
* Government College of Nursing,Vandanam.
*KVM College of Nursing,Cherthala.
====Arts and Science colleges====
====Engineering colleges====
===Schools===
== Notable people ==

==Photo gallery==
==Towns and villages==

* Cherthala North
* Kurattikkadu
* Mazhukeer
* Padanilam
* Pathiyankara
* Poomala Chaal
* Vettakkal
* Punnapra

==See also==
* Administration of Alappuzha district
* Kottayam district
* Chengannur

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==

* Official website of Alappuzha District
* Alappuzha Hotels &amp; Resorts
* Shappil House – Ancient Family in Mavelikara</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q928959" start="0" end="18" title="Alappuzha district" label="Alappuzha district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748378" start="40" end="49" title="Districts of Kerala" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="57" end="69" title="States and union territories of India" label="Indian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="73" end="79" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q928959" start="98" end="115" title="Alappuzha district" label="Alleppey district"/>
<link wikidata="Q585026" start="308" end="317" title="Alappuzha" label="Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="340" end="345" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q666519" start="348" end="358" title="Kerala Backwaters" label="backwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q384565" start="360" end="367" title="Alappuzha Beach" label="beaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="373" end="379" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q585026" start="382" end="391" title="Alappuzha" label="Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q271878" start="409" end="422" title="George Curzon, 1st Marquess Curzon of Kedleston" label="George Curzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="428" end="435" title="British Raj" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="436" end="461" title="Governor-General of India" label="Governor-General of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="516" end="522" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149081" start="530" end="543" title="Eastern world" label="Eastern world"/>
<link wikidata="Q666519" start="598" end="615" title="Kerala Backwaters" label="Kerala Backwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="665" end="671" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521576" start="710" end="719" title="Kumarakom" label="Kumarakom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22247194" start="808" end="812" title="Alleppy Coir" label="coir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641899" start="917" end="930" title="Vembanad lake" label="Vembanad lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="991" end="1007" title="Indian peninsula" label="Indian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="1070" end="1081" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435109" start="1083" end="1091" title="Kuttanad" label="Kuttanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633778" start="1180" end="1189" title="elevation" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1204" end="1209" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435109" start="1211" end="1219" title="Kuttanad" label="Kuttanad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1280" end="1304" title="List of extreme points of India#Altitudes" label="lowest altitude in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q837159" start="1430" end="1439" title="Communist Party of India" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260462" start="1444" end="1469" title="Punnapra-Vayalar uprising" label="Punnapra-Vayalar uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q830104" start="1482" end="1487" title="Divan" label="Divan"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="1495" end="1502" title="British Raj" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336152" start="1503" end="1517" title="Princely state" label="Princely state"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="1521" end="1531" title="Travancore" label="Travancore"/>
<link wikidata="Q321475" start="1592" end="1598" title="Kollam" label="Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q659887" start="1603" end="1611" title="Kottayam" label="Kottayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q585026" start="1646" end="1655" title="Alappuzha" label="Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q321475" start="1681" end="1687" title="Kollam" label="Quilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="1704" end="1722" title="Travancore" label="Travancore Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q659887" start="1788" end="1796" title="Kottayam" label="Kottayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="1813" end="1831" title="Travancore" label="Travancore Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q817477" start="1972" end="1977" title="taluk" label="taluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q888665" start="1987" end="1996" title="Cherthala" label="Cherthala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740987" start="1998" end="2010" title="Ambalappuzha" label="Ambalappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435109" start="2012" end="2020" title="Kuttanad" label="Kuttanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q888384" start="2022" end="2032" title="Chengannur" label="Chengannur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373541" start="2034" end="2048" title="Karthikappally" label="Karthikappally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283384" start="2053" end="2064" title="Mavelikkara" label="Mavelikkara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="2357" end="2362" title="Kochi" label="Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025408" start="2388" end="2397" title="Ernakulam" label="Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477208" start="2423" end="2429" title="Vaikom" label="Vaikom"/>
<link wikidata="Q889300" start="2444" end="2457" title="Changanassery" label="Changanassery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435231" start="2502" end="2514" title="Kozhencherry" label="Kozhencherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q490941" start="2519" end="2524" title="Adoor" label="Adoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025266" start="2535" end="2549" title="Pathanamthitta" label="Pathanamthitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444925" start="2576" end="2585" title="Kunnathur (Kerala)" label="Kunnathur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373673" start="2590" end="2604" title="Karunagappally" label="Karunagappally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356124" start="2615" end="2630" title="Kollam district" label="Kollam district"/>
<link wikidata="Q585026" start="2914" end="2923" title="Alappuzha" label="Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q13114355" start="2946" end="2960" title="Raja Kesavadas" label="Raja Kesavadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595905" start="3085" end="3105" title="Malayalam literature" label="Malayalam literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435109" start="3107" end="3115" title="Kuttanad" label="Kuttanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959201" start="3121" end="3130" title="breadbasket" label="rice bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219940" start="3172" end="3185" title="Sangam period" label="Sangam period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748378" start="3291" end="3299" title="List of districts of Kerala" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q585026" start="3303" end="3312" title="Alappuzha" label="Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="3350" end="3356" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="3370" end="3374" title="Ancient Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="3388" end="3394" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="3408" end="3425" title="Arabian peninsula" label="Arabian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="3435" end="3448" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219940" start="3460" end="3473" title="Sangam period" label="Sangam period"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="3504" end="3514" title="Common Era" label="Common Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021159" start="3609" end="3627" title="Indian Ocean trade" label="Indian Ocean trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="3643" end="3666" title="Greco-Roman world" label="Greco-Roman travelogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q664162" start="3685" end="3715" title="Periplus of the Erythraean Sea" label="Periplus of the Erythraean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260807" start="3801" end="3809" title="Purakkad" label="Purakkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641922" start="3830" end="3841" title="Pamba River" label="Pamba River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="3915" end="3921" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634049" start="3940" end="3953" title="Periyar river" label="Periyar river"/>
<link wikidata="Q854841" start="3962" end="3976" title="Bharathappuzha" label="Bharathappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q877155" start="4006" end="4019" title="Chera dynasty" label="Chera dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641922" start="4135" end="4146" title="Pamba River" label="Pamba River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446126" start="4164" end="4174" title="Ay kingdom" label="Ay kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219940" start="4525" end="4538" title="Sangam period" label="Sangam period"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="4656" end="4664" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="4668" end="4679" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355420" start="4704" end="4713" title="Nambudiri" label="Nambudiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="4714" end="4721" title="Brahmin" label="Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586163" start="4740" end="4753" title="Sri Mulavasam" label="Sri Mulavasam"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="4809" end="4825" title="Indian peninsula" label="Indian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="4864" end="4872" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q67115065" start="4898" end="4904" title="List of taluks of Kerala" label="taluks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740987" start="4908" end="4920" title="Ambalappuzha" label="Ambalappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283384" start="4925" end="4935" title="Mavelikara" label="Mavelikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="5039" end="5048" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897191" start="5078" end="5096" title="Unnuneeli Sandesam" label="Unnuneeli Sandesam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="5198" end="5206" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595874" start="5224" end="5236" title="Sakthibhadran" label="Sakthibhadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q888384" start="5260" end="5270" title="Chengannur" label="Chengannur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595345" start="5500" end="5531" title="Ambalappuzha Sri Krishna Temple" label="Ambalappuzha Sri Krishna Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740987" start="5536" end="5548" title="Ambalappuzha" label="Ambalappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q42891" start="5582" end="5594" title="Lord Krishna" label="Lord Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="5650" end="5657" title="Brahmin" label="Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046090" start="5716" end="5746" title="Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri" label="Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091720" start="6009" end="6015" title="Odanad" label="Odanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q672672" start="6058" end="6068" title="Kayamkulam" label="Kayamkulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="6152" end="6171" title="Travancore" label="Travancorean forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446126" start="6221" end="6231" title="Ay kingdom" label="Ay kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="6360" end="6369" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446126" start="6459" end="6469" title="Ay kingdom" label="Ay kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q67115065" start="6518" end="6524" title="List of taluks of Kerala" label="Taluks"/>
<link wikidata="Q888384" start="6528" end="6538" title="Chengannur" label="Chengannur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283384" start="6540" end="6550" title="Mavelikara" label="Mavelikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373541" start="6552" end="6566" title="Karthikappally" label="Karthikappally"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373673" start="6572" end="6586" title="Karunagappally" label="Karunagappally"/>
<link wikidata="Q888665" start="6676" end="6685" title="Cherthala" label="Cherthala"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="6802" end="6812" title="Travancore" label="Travancore"/>
<link wikidata="Q150056" start="6821" end="6838" title="Kingdom of Cochin" label="Kingdom of Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150056" start="6874" end="6891" title="Kingdom of Cochin" label="Kingdom of Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="6945" end="6955" title="Travancore" label="Travancore"/>
<link wikidata="Q150056" start="7019" end="7038" title="Cochin Royal family" label="Cochin Royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260807" start="7201" end="7209" title="Purakkad" label="Purakkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="7229" end="7250" title="Travancore" label="Travancorean conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740987" start="7323" end="7335" title="Ambalappuzha" label="Ambalappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435109" start="7340" end="7348" title="Kuttanad" label="Kuttanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046090" start="7444" end="7474" title="Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri" label="Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551989" start="7479" end="7494" title="Kunchan Nambiar" label="Kunchan Nambiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q97738243" start="7527" end="7540" title="South Malabar" label="South Malabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373541" start="7606" end="7620" title="Karthikappally" label="Karthikappally"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="7633" end="7647" title="Feudalism" label="feudal kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091720" start="7689" end="7695" title="Odanad" label="Odanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373673" start="7930" end="7944" title="Karunagappalli" label="Karunagappally"/>
<link wikidata="Q672672" start="8011" end="8021" title="Kayamkulam" label="Kayamkulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="8134" end="8150" title="Portuguese India" label="Portuguese power"/>
<link wikidata="Q473181" start="8167" end="8180" title="Malabar Coast" label="Malabar Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317339" start="8189" end="8202" title="Dutch Malabar" label="Dutch Malabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426657" start="8295" end="8308" title="Kokkamangalam" label="Kokkamangalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q43669" start="8388" end="8406" title="Thomas the Apostle" label="Thomas the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="8439" end="8451" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089816" start="8502" end="8505" title="Church of South India" label="CSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089760" start="8574" end="8599" title="Church Missionary Society" label="Church Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="8659" end="8667" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970" start="8668" end="8674" title="Church (building)" label="Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="8719" end="8729" title="Travancore" label="Travancore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596305" start="8788" end="8803" title="Marthanda Varma" label="Marthanda Varma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596305" start="8972" end="8995" title="Marthanda Varma" label="Marthandavarma Maharaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437601" start="9064" end="9083" title="Krishnapuram Palace" label="Krishnapuram Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q585026" start="9303" end="9312" title="Alappuzha" label="Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="9336" end="9346" title="Travancore" label="Travancore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531060" start="9393" end="9411" title="Velu Thampi Dalawa" label="Velu Thampi Dalava"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144785" start="9505" end="9524" title="Pathiramanal" label="Pathiramanal island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380437" start="9754" end="9773" title="Kayamkulam Kochunni" label="Kayamkulam Kochunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q672672" start="9799" end="9809" title="Kayamkulam" label="Kayamkulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q29025715" start="9865" end="9880" title="Kerala reformation movement" label="social reformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784451" start="9881" end="9911" title="Arattupuzha Velayudha Panicker" label="Arattupuzha Velayudha Panicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029620" start="10010" end="10014" title="Coir" label="Coir"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="10148" end="10175" title="Travancore" label="Travancorean administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q888665" start="10177" end="10186" title="Cherthala" label="Cherthala"/>
<link wikidata="Q19899031" start="10213" end="10230" title="Northern Division (Travancore)" label="Northern division"/>
<link wikidata="Q659887" start="10232" end="10240" title="Kottayam" label="Kottayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061929" start="10360" end="10376" title="Central Division (Travancore)" label="Central division"/>
<link wikidata="Q321475" start="10378" end="10384" title="Kollam" label="Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="10402" end="10409" title="British Raj" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336152" start="10410" end="10424" title="Princely state" label="Princely state"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="10428" end="10438" title="Travancore" label="Travancore"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="10506" end="10516" title="Travancore" label="Travancore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216180" start="10554" end="10568" title="Untouchability" label="Untouchability"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529983" start="10616" end="10629" title="T.K. Madhavan" label="T.K. Madhavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595345" start="10709" end="10747" title="Ambalappuzha Sree Krishna Swamy Temple" label="Ambalappuzha Sree Krishna Swamy Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="10773" end="10779" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674601" start="10947" end="10973" title="Political activism in Kerala" label="political strike in Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q837159" start="11034" end="11043" title="Communist Party of India" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260462" start="11048" end="11073" title="Punnapra-Vayalar uprising" label="Punnapra-Vayalar uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q830104" start="11086" end="11091" title="Divan" label="Divan"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="11099" end="11106" title="British Raj" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336152" start="11107" end="11121" title="Princely state" label="Princely state"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="11125" end="11135" title="Travancore" label="Travancore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522960" start="11272" end="11280" title="Manimala River" label="Manimala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641922" start="11286" end="11291" title="Pamba River" label="Pamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521707" start="11301" end="11311" title="Achankovil" label="Achankovil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641899" start="11428" end="11436" title="Vembanad" label="Vembanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918236" start="11576" end="11586" title="Veeyapuram" label="Veeyapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144785" start="11659" end="11671" title="Pathiramanal" label="Pathiramanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q585026" start="11779" end="11788" title="Alappuzha" label="Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q230003" start="12060" end="12069" title="Lok Sabha" label="Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595510" start="12099" end="12108" title="Alappuzha (Lok Sabha constituency)" label="Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595483" start="12113" end="12123" title="Mavelikara (Lok Sabha constituency)" label="Mavelikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462542" start="12141" end="12168" title="Kerala Legislative Assembly" label="Kerala Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q67115065" start="12294" end="12300" title="List of taluks of Kerala" label="Taluks"/>
<link wikidata="Q67115065" start="12590" end="12596" title="List of taluks of Kerala" label="taluks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449457" start="12645" end="12654" title="Arookutty" label="Arookutty"/>
<link wikidata="Q588767" start="12657" end="12662" title="Aroor" label="Aroor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089595" start="12665" end="12674" title="Arthunkal" label="Arthunkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q888665" start="12677" end="12686" title="Cherthala" label="Cherthala"/>
<link wikidata="Q888665" start="12695" end="12704" title="Cherthala" label="Cherthala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423287" start="12713" end="12722" title="Ezhupunna" label="Ezhupunna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6344979" start="12725" end="12740" title="Kadakkarappally" label="Kadakkarappally"/>
<link wikidata="Q108795244" start="12743" end="12753" title="Kanjikuzhi (Alappuzha)" label="Kanjikuzhy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425201" start="12756" end="12768" title="Kodamthuruth" label="Kodamthuruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232940" start="12771" end="12787" title="Kokkothamangalam" label="Kokkothamangalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448434" start="12790" end="12802" title="Kuthiathode" label="Kuthiyathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530118" start="12805" end="12816" title="Mararikulam" label="Mararikulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q13113157" start="12825" end="12836" title="Pallippuram, Alappuzha" label="Pallippuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130125" start="12839" end="12848" title="Panavally" label="Panavally"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148312" start="12851" end="12862" title="Pattanakkad" label="Pattanakkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171054" start="12865" end="12875" title="Perumbalam" label="Perumbalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710607" start="12878" end="12892" title="Thanneermukkom" label="Thanneermukkom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710607" start="12901" end="12915" title="Thanneermukkom" label="Thanneermukkom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071007" start="12924" end="12933" title="Thuravoor, Cherthala" label="Thuravoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709211" start="12942" end="12957" title="Thaikkattussery" label="Thaikkattussery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529962" start="12960" end="12967" title="Vayalar" label="Vayalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q585026" start="13002" end="13011" title="Alappuzha" label="Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740987" start="13019" end="13031" title="Ambalappuzha" label="Ambalappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740987" start="13034" end="13046" title="Ambalappuzha" label="Ambalappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802627" start="13055" end="13060" title="Aryad" label="Aryad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798865" start="13069" end="13077" title="Thumpoly" label="Thumpoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530107" start="13080" end="13088" title="Kalavoor" label="Kalavoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373630" start="13091" end="13099" title="Karumady" label="Karumady"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243908" start="13102" end="13113" title="Komalapuram" label="Komalapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750744" start="13116" end="13128" title="Mannancherry" label="Mannancherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934118" start="13131" end="13140" title="Mullakkal" label="Mullakkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136285" start="13143" end="13150" title="Paravur, Alappuzha" label="Paravur"/>
<link wikidata="Q585026" start="13151" end="13160" title="Alappuzha" label="Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144786" start="13163" end="13176" title="Pathirappally" label="Pathirappally"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156989" start="13179" end="13189" title="Pazhaveedu" label="Pazhaveedu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260459" start="13192" end="13200" title="Punnapra" label="Punnapra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260807" start="13203" end="13211" title="Purakkad" label="Purakkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069924" start="13237" end="13248" title="Champakulam" label="Champakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q116177757" start="13251" end="13258" title="Edathua" label="Edathua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6348080" start="13261" end="13270" title="Kainakary" label="Kainakary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6348080" start="13279" end="13288" title="Kainakary" label="Kainakary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379045" start="13297" end="13304" title="Kavalam" label="Kavalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444946" start="13307" end="13315" title="Kunnumma" label="Kunnumma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944086" start="13318" end="13324" title="Muttar" label="Muttar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13112970" start="13327" end="13335" title="Nedumudi" label="Nedumudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13112943" start="13338" end="13350" title="Neelamperoor" label="Neelamperoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259345" start="13353" end="13364" title="Pulinkunnoo" label="Pulinkunnoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288970" start="13367" end="13376" title="Ramankary" label="Ramankary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709356" start="13379" end="13387" title="Thakazhy" label="Thakazhy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709582" start="13390" end="13399" title="Thalavady" label="Thalavady"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784452" start="13443" end="13454" title="Aratupuzha" label="Arattupuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091726" start="13457" end="13464" title="Cheppad" label="Cheppad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092630" start="13467" end="13477" title="Cheruthana" label="Cheruthana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101033" start="13480" end="13488" title="Chingoli" label="Chingoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q500806" start="13491" end="13498" title="Haripad" label="Haripad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6361265" start="13501" end="13511" title="Kandalloor" label="Kandalloor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373541" start="13514" end="13528" title="Karthikappally" label="Karthikappally"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373747" start="13531" end="13540" title="Karuvatta" label="Karuvatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q672672" start="13543" end="13553" title="Kayamkulam" label="Kayamkulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383300" start="13556" end="13565" title="Keerikkad" label="Keerikkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061047" start="13568" end="13580" title="Krishnapuram, Alappuzha district" label="Krishnapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q110442532" start="13583" end="13594" title="Kumarapuram, Alappuzha" label="Kumarapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q13114146" start="13597" end="13607" title="Muthukulam" label="Muthukulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127901" start="13610" end="13619" title="Pallippad" label="Pallippad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265662" start="13622" end="13631" title="Pathiyoor" label="Pathiyoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262265" start="13634" end="13645" title="Puthuppally, Alappuzha" label="Puthuppally"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798165" start="13648" end="13663" title="Thrikkunnapuzha" label="Thrikkunnapuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918236" start="13666" end="13676" title="Veeyapuram" label="Veeyapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901086" start="13704" end="13716" title="Bharanikkavu" label="Bharanikkavu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091513" start="13719" end="13730" title="Chennithala" label="Chennithala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116215" start="13733" end="13743" title="Chunakkara" label="Chunakkara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6363945" start="13746" end="13759" title="Kannamangalam (Alappuzha)" label="Kannamangalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378302" start="13762" end="13770" title="Kattanam" label="Kattanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283384" start="13773" end="13783" title="Mavelikara" label="Mavelikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049906" start="13786" end="13794" title="Nooranad" label="Nooranad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126661" start="13797" end="13804" title="Palamel" label="Palamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171095" start="13807" end="13816" title="Perungala" label="Perungala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709801" start="13819" end="13832" title="Thamarakkulam" label="Thamarakkulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711582" start="13835" end="13846" title="Thazhakkara" label="Thazhakkara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7780979" start="13849" end="13859" title="Thekkekara, Kerala" label="Thekkekara"/>
<link wikidata="Q13112020" start="13862" end="13876" title="Thriperumthura" label="Thriperumthura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912420" start="13879" end="13890" title="Vallikunnam" label="Vallikunnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923827" start="13893" end="13901" title="Vettiyar" label="Vettiyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705084" start="13929" end="13932" title="Ala, Alappuzha" label="Ala"/>
<link wikidata="Q888384" start="13935" end="13945" title="Chengannur" label="Chengannur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091994" start="13948" end="13958" title="Cheriyanad" label="Cheriyanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530131" start="13961" end="13969" title="Ennakkad" label="Ennakkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445662" start="13972" end="13984" title="Kurattissery" label="Kurattissery"/>
<link wikidata="Q13564556" start="13987" end="13993" title="Mannar, Alappuzha" label="Mannar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15260201" start="13996" end="14005" title="Mulakuzha" label="Mulakuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130486" start="14008" end="14016" title="Pandanad" label="Pandanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q13113371" start="14019" end="14027" title="Puliyoor" label="Puliyoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785521" start="14030" end="14045" title="Thiruvanvandoor" label="Thiruvanvandoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12989426" start="14048" end="14055" title="Venmony" label="Venmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q66309785" start="14307" end="14326" title="Sriram Venkitaraman" label="Sriram Venkitaraman"/>
<link wikidata="Q66309785" start="14448" end="14467" title="Sriram Venkitaraman" label="Sriram Venkitaraman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861882" start="14563" end="14574" title="2011 census of India" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q996189" start="14601" end="14611" title="Demographics of India" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="14657" end="14664" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="14684" end="14694" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726398" start="14757" end="14760" title="Districts of India" label="640"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433379" start="14810" end="14832" title="Family planning in India" label="population growth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861780" start="14886" end="14895" title="human sex ratio" label="sex ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q639712" start="14904" end="14911" title="Women in India" label="females"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345045" start="14940" end="14953" title="Literacy in India" label="literacy rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="15107" end="15116" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q34239" start="15211" end="15218" title="Konkani language" label="Konkani"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="15264" end="15282" title="Population Density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="15373" end="15379" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="15430" end="15435" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="15458" end="15467" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="15545" end="15551" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q588767" start="15593" end="15598" title="Aroor" label="Aroor"/>
<link wikidata="Q888665" start="15611" end="15620" title="Cherthala" label="Cherthala"/>
<link wikidata="Q585026" start="15696" end="15705" title="Alappuzha" label="Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069924" start="15798" end="15809" title="Champakulam" label="Champakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q672672" start="15910" end="15920" title="Kayamkulam" label="Kayamkulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q500806" start="15922" end="15929" title="Haripad" label="Haripad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283384" start="16046" end="16056" title="Mavelikara" label="Mavelikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q13113371" start="16218" end="16226" title="Puliyoor" label="Puliyoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520609" start="16321" end="16348" title="National Highway 66 (India)" label="National Highway 66 (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q297511" start="16411" end="16417" title="Panvel" label="Panvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q222267" start="16421" end="16432" title="Kanyakumari" label="Kanyakumari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="16502" end="16508" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="16510" end="16513" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q584295" start="16515" end="16520" title="Udupi" label="Udupi"/>
<link wikidata="Q127041" start="16522" end="16531" title="Mangalore" label="Mangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789666" start="16533" end="16539" title="Kannur" label="Kannur"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="16541" end="16550" title="Kozhikode" label="Kozhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q720084" start="16552" end="16561" title="Guruvayur" label="Guruvayur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025408" start="16563" end="16572" title="Ernakulam" label="Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q321475" start="16574" end="16580" title="Kollam" label="Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q167715" start="16586" end="16596" title="Trivandrum" label="Trivandrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356734" start="16622" end="16638" title="Alappuzha Bypass" label="Alappuzha Bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350703" start="16710" end="16719" title="Kalarkode" label="Kalarkode"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603242" start="16851" end="16876" title="State Highway 11 (Kerala)" label="State Highway 11 (Kerala)"/>
<link wikidata="Q253851" start="16940" end="16950" title="Kodaikanal" label="Kodaikanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603242" start="17130" end="17155" title="State Highway 11 (Kerala)" label="State Highway 11 (Kerala)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350703" start="17190" end="17199" title="Kalarcode" label="Kalarcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171106" start="17223" end="17230" title="Perunna" label="Perunna"/>
<link wikidata="Q889300" start="17232" end="17245" title="Changanassery" label="Changanassery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353354" start="17412" end="17429" title="Kottayam district" label="Kottayam district"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603299" start="17431" end="17456" title="State Highway 40 (Kerala)" label="State Highway 40 (Kerala)"/>
<link wikidata="Q228405" start="17548" end="17555" title="Madurai" label="Madurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="17557" end="17567" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603339" start="17636" end="17661" title="State Highway 66 (Kerala)" label="State Highway 66 (Kerala)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796022" start="17736" end="17747" title="Thoppumpady" label="Thoppumpady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025408" start="17749" end="17758" title="Ernakulam" label="Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735950" start="17762" end="17779" title="Main Central Road" label="Main Central Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q888384" start="17934" end="17944" title="Chengannur" label="Chengannur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="18016" end="18022" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603326" start="18024" end="18048" title="State Highway 5 (Kerala)" label="State Highway 5 (Kerala)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603347" start="18161" end="18185" title="State Highway 6 (Kerala)" label="State Highway 6 (Kerala)"/>
<link wikidata="Q672672" start="18196" end="18206" title="Kayamkulam" label="Kayamkulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336443" start="18219" end="18229" title="Thiruvalla" label="Thiruvalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603239" start="18264" end="18289" title="State Highway 10 (Kerala)" label="State Highway 10 (Kerala)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13114988" start="18391" end="18416" title="State Highway 12 (Kerala)" label="State Highway 12 (Kerala)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740987" start="18432" end="18444" title="Ambalappuzha" label="Ambalappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336443" start="18457" end="18467" title="Thiruvalla" label="Thiruvalla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18587" end="18589" title="List of RTO districts in India#KL.E2.80.94Kerala" label="KL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18643" end="18645" title="List of RTO districts in India#KL.E2.80.94Kerala" label="KL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18703" end="18705" title="List of RTO districts in India#KL.E2.80.94Kerala" label="KL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18759" end="18761" title="List of RTO districts in India#KL.E2.80.94Kerala" label="KL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18818" end="18820" title="List of RTO districts in India#KL.E2.80.94Kerala" label="KL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18872" end="18874" title="List of RTO districts in India#KL.E2.80.94Kerala" label="KL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529970" start="19178" end="19197" title="National Waterway 3" label="National Waterway 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q679587" start="19294" end="19299" title="Kerala State Road Transport Corporation" label="KSRTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q659887" start="19355" end="19363" title="Kottayam" label="Kottayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q321475" start="19365" end="19371" title="Kollam" label="Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q889300" start="19376" end="19389" title="Changanassery" label="Changanassery"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198920" start="19487" end="19528" title="Ernakulam–Kayamkulam coastal railway line" label="Ernakulam–Kayamkulam coastal railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717437" start="19550" end="19573" title="Haripad railway station" label="Haripad railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q12414346" start="19575" end="19600" title="Alappuzha railway station" label="Alappuzha railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717360" start="19602" end="19627" title="Cherthala railway station" label="Cherthala railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q16660254" start="19632" end="19667" title="Kayamkulam Junction railway station" label="Kayamkulam Junction railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025408" start="19677" end="19686" title="Ernakulam" label="Ernakulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q659887" start="19687" end="19695" title="Kottayam" label="Kottayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q672672" start="19696" end="19706" title="Kayamkulam" label="Kayamkulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q15209398" start="19764" end="19790" title="Chengannur railway station" label="Chengannur railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718057" start="19795" end="19821" title="Mavelikara railway station" label="Mavelikara railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q592172" start="19888" end="19916" title="Cochin International Airport" label="Cochin International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466205" start="19965" end="20005" title="Thiruvananthapuram International Airport" label="Thiruvananthapuram International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="20183" end="20192" title="Kozhikode" label="Kozhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q9885" start="20200" end="20210" title="Coimbatore" label="Coimbatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987913" start="20290" end="20306" title="Snake boat races" label="Snake boat races"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344830" start="20375" end="20382" title="regatta" label="regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987913" start="20519" end="20541" title="Nehru Trophy Boat Race" label="Nehru Trophy Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595616" start="20544" end="20552" title="Chemmeen" label="Chemmeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="20641" end="20650" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q165" start="20755" end="20758" title="Sea" label="Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="20780" end="20785" title="River" label="River"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="20849" end="20858" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577332" start="20984" end="20993" title="sobriquet" label="sobriquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q473181" start="21193" end="21206" title="Malabar Coast" label="Malabar coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029620" start="21262" end="21266" title="Coir" label="Coir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058410" start="21287" end="21292" title="prawn" label="prawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q659887" start="21411" end="21419" title="Kottayam" label="Kottayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784130" start="21436" end="21444" title="Aranmula" label="Aranmula"/>
<link wikidata="Q888384" start="21514" end="21524" title="Chengannur" label="Chengannur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520207" start="21574" end="21584" title="Sabarimala" label="Sabarimala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437601" start="21592" end="21611" title="Krishnapuram Palace" label="Krishnapuram Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q672672" start="21618" end="21628" title="Kayamkulam" label="Kayamkulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="21636" end="21642" title="Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283384" start="21697" end="21708" title="Mavelikkara" label="Mavelikkara"/>
<link wikidata="Q474197" start="21763" end="21772" title="Lotus position" label="Padmasana"/>
<link wikidata="Q199451" start="22093" end="22099" title="pagoda" label="pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354532" start="22467" end="22472" title="shawl" label="shawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595875" start="22615" end="22628" title="A. R. Raja Raja Varma" label="Kerala Panini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="22823" end="22839" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q41750342" start="23068" end="23084" title="Revi Karunakaran" label="Revi Karunakaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029620" start="23119" end="23123" title="Coir" label="Coir"/>
<link wikidata="Q585026" start="23354" end="23363" title="Alappuzha" label="Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="23419" end="23424" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q666519" start="23427" end="23437" title="Kerala Backwaters" label="backwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="23442" end="23448" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q271878" start="23506" end="23517" title="Lord Curzon" label="Lord Curzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939506" start="23752" end="23762" title="Bhagavathi" label="Bhagavathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283384" start="23793" end="23804" title="Mavelikkara" label="Mavelikkara"/>
<link wikidata="Q672672" start="23829" end="23839" title="kayamkulam" label="kayamkulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9262" start="23876" end="23884" title="Asterism (astronomy)" label="asterism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13110190" start="24227" end="24264" title="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s Basilica, Arthunkal" label="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s Basilica, Arthunkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q108913326" start="24271" end="24298" title="St. Thomas Church, Thumpoly" label="St. Thomas Church, Thumpoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059040" start="24550" end="24580" title="Mullakkal Temple" label="Mullakkal Rajarajeswari Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929708" start="24996" end="25005" title="Padanilam" label="Padanilam"/>
<link wikidata="Q848070" start="25006" end="25016" title="Sivarathri" label="Sivarathri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123242" start="25117" end="25144" title="Padanilam Parabrahma Temple" label="Padanilam Parabrahma Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929708" start="25190" end="25199" title="Padanilam" label="Padanilam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283384" start="25246" end="25257" title="Mavelikkara" label="Mavelikkara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530933" start="25335" end="25353" title="Mannarasala Temple" label="Mannarasala Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521345" start="25469" end="25475" title="Kavadi" label="Kavadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16137074" start="26110" end="26120" title="Thalappoli" label="Thalappoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="26273" end="26281" title="Elephant" label="Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="26295" end="26304" title="fireworks" label="fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344830" start="26666" end="26673" title="regatta" label="regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533693" start="26735" end="26746" title="Vallam Kali" label="Vallam Kali"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987913" start="26748" end="26770" title="Nehru Trophy Boat Race" label="Nehru Trophy Boat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q666519" start="26787" end="26797" title="Kerala backwaters" label="backwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969250" start="26844" end="26848" title="Onam" label="Onam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534474" start="26886" end="26900" title="Chundan Vallam" label="Chundan Vallam"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053883" start="27250" end="27291" title="Government T D Medical College, Alappuzha" label="Government T D Medical College, Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092579" start="27617" end="27632" title="Cherthala North" label="Cherthala North"/>
<link wikidata="Q15240819" start="27635" end="27647" title="Kurattikkadu" label="Kurattikkadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798521" start="27650" end="27659" title="Mazhukeer" label="Mazhukeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929708" start="27662" end="27671" title="Padanilam" label="Padanilam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144791" start="27674" end="27686" title="Pathiyankara" label="Pathiyankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228668" start="27689" end="27702" title="Poomala Chaal" label="Poomala Chaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207086" start="27705" end="27714" title="Vettakkal" label="Vettakkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260459" start="27717" end="27725" title="Punnapra" label="Punnapra"/>
<link wikidata="Q28182974" start="27742" end="27778" title="Administration of Alappuzha district" label="Administration of Alappuzha district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353354" start="27781" end="27798" title="Kottayam district" label="Kottayam district"/>
<link wikidata="Q888384" start="27801" end="27811" title="Chengannur" label="Chengannur"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="40156" wikidata="Q1075460" url="?curid=40156" title="Khlysts">
<text>The Khlysts or Khlysty (, &quot;whips&quot;) were an underground Spiritual Christian sect which emerged in Russia in the 17th century.

The sect is traditionally said to have been founded in 1645 by Danilo Filippovich, although there is no written evidence to support this claim. The beliefs and practices of its members included ecstatic rituals, worship of charismatic leaders, and a rejection of the priesthood and holy books. They believed in direct communication with the Holy Spirit and practiced the ritual of (&quot;rejoicing&quot;), which was characterized by dancing, speaking in tongues, and prophesying.

Throughout their history, the Khlysts were pursued by accusations of sexual immorality and faced persecution from other religious groups and from the government. In the 18th century, doctrinal changes led to schisms, and by the 1970s, only a few isolated groups remained. The Khlysts had a significant influence on other Russian sectarian movements, such as the Skoptsy, Dukhobors and Molokans. Russian mystic Grigori Rasputin was associated with the Khlysts in popular rumor, but the consensus among historians is that he was not a member of the sect.

==Name==
The members of the sect referred to themselves by various names, including &quot;God&#x27;s People&quot; (&quot;liudi bozh&#x27;i&quot;), &quot;followers of Christ&#x27;s faith&quot; (&quot;Khristovovery&quot;), or simply &quot;Christs&quot; (&quot;Khristy&quot;). The appellation &quot;Khlysty&quot; is a derogatory term applied by critics of the sect. The origin of the term is disputed. It is probably a corruption of the group&#x27;s aforementioned self-designation of &quot;Khristy&quot;, but may also allude to the sect&#x27;s practice of ritual self-flagellation; the Russian word &quot;khlyst&quot; means a &quot;whip&quot; or &quot;thin rod&quot;.

It is also possible that the word is related to the Greek word &quot;khiliaste&quot; (meaning &quot;chiliast&quot; or &quot;millennialist&quot;).

==Origins==
According to its own oral tradition, the sect was founded in 1645 by Danilo Filippov (or Daniil Filippovich), a peasant of Kostroma and a runaway soldier. He was said to have become a &quot;living god&quot; after the Lord of Hosts descended upon him on Gorodino Hill, Vladimir Oblast. He delivered twelve commandments to his disciples, which forbade (among other things) sexual intercourse, drinking and swearing. He later named as his successor Ivan Suslov, a peasant of Murom. Suslov, transformed by Filippov into a &quot;new Christ&quot;, acquired a following of twelve apostles, along with a woman who was given the title of &quot;Mother of God&quot;. The tradition relates that Suslov was crucified twice by the Russian authorities, but rose from the dead each time.

There is no written evidence to support this story, or to confirm the existence of Filippov. The first historical references to the Khlysty are found in the writings of the Old Believers, a Christian community which resisted the 17th-century reforms of the Russian State Church. The Old Believers condemned the Khlysty as heretics, and warnings about them can be found in letters dating from around the 1670s. The Orthodox Church also attacked the Khlysty; Dimitry of Rostov wrote against them in &quot;An Investigation of the Schismatic Faith&quot; (c. 1709).

Suslov died around 1716, at which time Prokofii Lupkin became the new &quot;Christ&quot;. The oral tradition claims that Lupkin was the son of Filippov, but this is unlikely to be true.

Lupkin was a trader, and made use of his frequent journeys to places such as Uglich and Venev to organise secret assemblies for his followers. He encouraged his followers to worship in the manner of the Old Believers, such as by making the sign of the cross with two fingers instead of three, but he also instructed them to attend the State Church and take communion. Many Khlysty, including Lupkin&#x27;s wife and son, even took monastic vows. Lupkin also made large donations to the Church, which helped to protect the sect from persecution.

==Beliefs and practices==

The Khlysty renounced priesthood, holy books and veneration of the saints (excluding the Theotokos). They believed in the possibility of direct communication with the Holy Spirit and of its embodiment in living people. Each of their leaders was a &quot;living god&quot;, and each congregation (or &quot;ark&quot;) had its own &quot;Christ&quot; and &quot;Mother of God&quot;, appointed by the overall leader of the sect. Furthermore, they believed that the Holy Spirit could descend upon any one of them during the state of ecstasy which they attained during the ritual of &quot;radenie&quot; (&quot;rejoicing&quot;).

This ritual, which formed the focus of their worship, took place on holy feast days. The congregation would gather during the evening at a prearranged location, such as a member&#x27;s house. They would remove their outer clothing, and enter the sacred space dressed only in an undershirt. After a period of singing or chanting the Jesus Prayer (&quot;Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy on me, a sinner&quot;), some of the worshippers would feel the Holy Spirit come upon them, and would begin dancing wildly, prophesying in unintelligible language. This would continue for half an hour or more, until the dancers collapsed with exhaustion. Finally, they would share a sacramental meal of nuts, bread, pastry and kvass.

The Khlysty practiced an extreme asceticism, in order to prepare themselves for the reception of the Holy Spirit into their bodies. They abstained from alcohol, and often fasted for days or weeks at a time. Although marriage was permitted for practical purposes, &quot;because the help of a wife was indispensable for a peasant&quot;, it was a sin to engage in sexual intercourse, even with one&#x27;s own wife. Connected with this mortification of the flesh was the practice of self-flagellation which often accompanied the &quot;radenie&quot; rite.

Russian author Edvard Radzinsky has described a &quot;radenie&quot; ritual which he witnessed on the island of Chechen in 1964:

Radzinsky says that they referred to the whirling dance as &quot;spiritual beer&quot;, on account of its intoxicating effect. He reports that after the dance had continued for some time, the worshippers fell to the floor: &quot;And that was the end of it. But apparently only because I was present.&quot; Radzinsky claims that in some arks, the Khlysts would at this point engage in &quot;group sinning&quot; – a frenzied sexual orgy, which they believed would purify them from the lusts of the flesh. Similarly, C. L. Sulzberger, in his book &quot;The Fall of Eagles&quot;, writes that the Khlysty&#x27;s &quot;foremost idea was that salvation could be attained only by total repentance and that this became far more achievable for one who had truly transgressed. &#x27;Sin in order that you may obtain forgiveness,&#x27; was the practical side of the Khlysty.&quot;

Other scholars have dismissed these rumours. Frederick Cornwallis Conybeare, referencing a study by Karl Konrad Grass, writes:

Historian Joseph T. Fuhrmann claims that &quot;splinter groups practiced &#x27;holy intercourse,&#x27; but most khlysty were devout pentecostalists who condemned such behaviour.&quot;

==Persecution==
Accusations of sexual immorality pursued the sect from its earliest days, and provoked numerous government investigations.

In 1717, Lupkin and twenty other Khlysty were arrested in Uglich. They were held for five months, during which time they were interrogated and beaten. While some of his followers remained in custody, Lupkin managed to negotiate his own release, with the help of a 300-ruble bribe. Despite officially repenting, he continued to lead the movement until his death in 1732.

From 1733 to 1739, a specially-formed government commission arrested hundreds of suspected Khlyst members, charging them with participation in sexual orgies and ritual infanticide. These accusations were repeatedly denied, but the commission nevertheless convicted over three hundred people. They handed out sentences of hard labour, beatings, and mutilation of the nostrils and the tongue, and sent many of the prisoners into exile in Siberia or Orenburg.

However, the Khlysty were undeterred, and continued practising. Some of those who had been sent into exile began to spread the movement through Siberia. In 1745, therefore, a new commission was formed, this time using &quot;far crueler methods of interrogation&quot;. This commission, although eliciting false confessions of sexual deviation and cannibalistic communion, and sending another 200 people into exile, likewise failed to stamp out the movement.

==Later history==
Around 1750, some doctrinal changes took place within the sect, and they became known as the Postniki (&quot;Fasters&quot;). The leaders of the sect were now seen as &quot;personifications of Christ&quot;, rather than only playing host to his spirit. It was no longer considered possible for ordinary members to receive the Holy Spirit during &quot;radenie&quot;, although the ritual still held a central position in their worship.

In 1840, a new splinter sect broke away from the Postniki. Calling themselves Israelites, they shortly afterwards split again into Old Israel and New Israel. The beliefs of the latter group departed considerably from the traditional teachings of the Khlysts, and the sect still exists today in Uruguay.

These schisms weakened the movement, and their numbers began to decline. By the start of the twentieth century, estimates of the Khlysty&#x27;s numbers ranged at around one hundred thousand. Prior to the outbreak of World War I, there were reported to be around 20,000 New Israelites, 15,000 Old Israelites and 3,000 Postniki in Russia. By the 1970s, there were only &quot;a few isolated groups&quot; remaining.

==Influence==
The Khlysty are said to have been &quot;the root of all Russian sectarianism&quot;, having spawned sects such as the Skoptsy, the Dukhobors and the Molokans.

===Connection to Rasputin===
Grigori Rasputin was twice investigated (in 1903 and 1907) by the Tobolsk Theological Consistory, under charges of spreading Khlyst doctrine. Both investigations were closed without any evidence being found against him, but popular rumour continued to link Rasputin to the sect.

C. L. Sulzberger, in 1977, claimed that Rasputin &quot;adopted the philosophy (if not proven membership)&quot; of the Khlysts.

In &quot;The Man Behind the Myth&quot;, co-authored by Rasputin&#x27;s daughter Maria, it is claimed that Rasputin attended several Khlyst gatherings in the years before his arrival in St. Petersberg, but ultimately became disillusioned with the sect. The factual accuracy of this book has been called into question, and according to Brian Moynahan, Maria&#x27;s story is the only evidence that Rasputin had any Khlyst connections. The consensus of modern historians is that Rasputin was never a member of the sect.

==See also==
* Frankism
* Kartanolaisuus, Finnish cult with influences from Khlysts and Skoptsys
* &quot;The Silver Dove&quot;, Andrei Bely&#x27;s first novel (1909), is based on the Khlysts

==References==
Footnotes
Sources
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==
* Emeliantseva, E. &quot;Situational Religiosity: Everyday Strategies of the Moscow Christ-Faith Believers and of the St Petersburg Mystics Attracted by This Faith in the First Half of the Nineteenth Century,&quot; in Thomas Bremer (ed), &quot;Religion and the Conceptual Boundary in Central and Eastern Europe: Encounters of Faiths&quot; (Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan, 2008) (Studies in Central and Eastern Europe), 98-120.
* Panchenko, Aleksandr. &quot;Strange faith&quot; and the blood libel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1075460" start="4" end="11" title="Khlysts" label="Khlysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075460" start="15" end="22" title="Khlysts" label="Khlysty"/>
<link wikidata="Q948515" start="65" end="84" title="Spiritual Christianity" label="Spiritual Christian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="199" end="217" title="Danilo Filippovich" label="Danilo Filippovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="477" end="488" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q61070" start="578" end="597" title="speaking in tongues" label="speaking in tongues"/>
<link wikidata="Q214267" start="603" end="614" title="prophesying" label="prophesying"/>
<link wikidata="Q549628" start="979" end="986" title="Skoptsy" label="Skoptsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144579" start="988" end="997" title="Dukhobors" label="Dukhobors"/>
<link wikidata="Q303985" start="1002" end="1010" title="Molokans" label="Molokans"/>
<link wikidata="Q43989" start="1027" end="1043" title="Grigori Rasputin" label="Grigori Rasputin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630491" start="1732" end="1749" title="self-flagellation" label="self-flagellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567687" start="1962" end="1975" title="millennialist" label="millennialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592" start="2120" end="2128" title="Kostroma" label="Kostroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q821090" start="2214" end="2227" title="Lord of Hosts" label="Lord of Hosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702" start="2265" end="2280" title="Vladimir Oblast" label="Vladimir Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q162677" start="2469" end="2474" title="Murom" label="Murom"/>
<link wikidata="Q208542" start="2632" end="2645" title="Theotokos" label="Mother of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q223710" start="2943" end="2956" title="Old Believers" label="Old Believers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16884908" start="2999" end="3019" title="Nikonites" label="17th-century reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="3184" end="3199" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q980251" start="3227" end="3244" title="Dimitry of Rostov" label="Dimitry of Rostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q196786" start="3596" end="3602" title="Uglich" label="Uglich"/>
<link wikidata="Q132974" start="3607" end="3612" title="Venev" label="Venev"/>
<link wikidata="Q623692" start="3759" end="3776" title="sign of the cross" label="sign of the cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q208542" start="4180" end="4189" title="Theotokos" label="Theotokos"/>
<link wikidata="Q37302" start="4258" end="4269" title="Holy Spirit" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="4548" end="4559" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q647582" start="5042" end="5054" title="Jesus Prayer" label="Jesus Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q61070" start="5242" end="5265" title="Speaking in tongues" label="unintelligible language"/>
<link wikidata="Q173773" start="5430" end="5435" title="kvass" label="kvass"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="5471" end="5481" title="asceticism" label="asceticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358616" start="5870" end="5896" title="mortification of the flesh" label="mortification of the flesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630491" start="5917" end="5934" title="self-flagellation" label="self-flagellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q283859" start="6005" end="6021" title="Edvard Radzinsky" label="Edvard Radzinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201118" start="6632" end="6648" title="C. L. Sulzberger" label="C. L. Sulzberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497581" start="7033" end="7063" title="Frederick Cornwallis Conybeare" label="Frederick Cornwallis Conybeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="7248" end="7263" title="Pentecostalism" label="pentecostalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q196786" start="7499" end="7505" title="Uglich" label="Uglich"/>
<link wikidata="Q916412" start="7980" end="7991" title="infanticide" label="infanticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="8248" end="8255" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337" start="8259" end="8267" title="Orenburg" label="Orenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106222" start="8839" end="8847" title="Postniki" label="Postniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q117074" start="9325" end="9335" title="New Israel" label="New Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="9473" end="9480" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9699" end="9710" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q549628" start="10027" end="10034" title="Skoptsy" label="Skoptsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144579" start="10040" end="10049" title="Dukhobors" label="Dukhobors"/>
<link wikidata="Q303985" start="10058" end="10066" title="Molokans" label="Molokans"/>
<link wikidata="Q43989" start="10098" end="10114" title="Grigori Rasputin" label="Grigori Rasputin"/>
<link wikidata="Q439787" start="10586" end="10591" title="Maria Rasputin" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964822" start="10840" end="10854" title="Brian Moynahan" label="Brian Moynahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491116" start="11038" end="11046" title="Frankism" label="Frankism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373501" start="11049" end="11063" title="Kartanoism" label="Kartanolaisuus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219521" start="11128" end="11143" title="The Silver Dove" label="The Silver Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q212632" start="11151" end="11162" title="Andrei Bely" label="Andrei Bely"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076074" start="11638" end="11656" title="Palgrave Macmillan" label="Palgrave Macmillan"/>
</links>
</doc>
